Branding for non-proﬁts: explaining new donor
decision-making in the charity sector

Gary Gregory and Liem Ngo
School of Marketing, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, and
Ryan Miller
Anglicare Australia, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this study develops and validates a model of new donor decision-making in the charity sector. Drawing upon dual process
theory, the model
incorporates brand salience and brand attitude as antecedents of brand choice intention, moderated by donor decision
involvement.
Design/methodology/approach – Study 1 generates measures using interviews with marketing, media and research managers, and new donors
from two international aid and relief organizations. Study 2 uses an experimental design to ﬁrst test scenarios of disaster relief, and then validate
and conﬁrm a new donor decision model using large-scale consumer panels for the international aid and relief sector in Australia.
Findings – The results replicated across four leading international aid-related charities reveal that brand salience is positively related to brand
choice intention through the mediating effect of brand attitude. Furthermore, the effect of brand salience on brand choice intention is signiﬁcantly
stronger when donor decision involvement is low. Conversely, the effect of brand attitude on brand choice intention is stronger for higher levels of
donor decision involvement.
Practical implications – Managers should understand the importance of brand salience/attitudes and the implications for the communication
strategy. Managers should also strive to understand the level of decision involvement and the relative inﬂuence of brand attitude/salience on brand
choice intention.
Originality/value – This study advances the literature on charitable giving by proposing and testing a moderated mediation model of donor choice
when selecting a charity for donation. Findings provide new insights into the extent to which brand salience, brand attitude and donor decision-
making inﬂuence how new donors choose between charities for donation.

Keywords Brand salience, Brand attitude, Non-proﬁt, Charities, Donor decision involvement, Brand evaluation, Brand choice,
Cause-related marketing, Donor acquisition, Not-for-proﬁt marketing

Paper type Research paper

1. Introduction
Growth in the non-proﬁt sector looks very optimistic, with
some predicting a potential rise in worldwide charitable giving
of approximately $233bn by 2030 (Charities Aid Foundation,
2012a). In 2017 alone, Americans gave in excess of $410bn-
$1.6m registered non-proﬁts (GivingUSA, 2018), a number
that had escalated by 25 per cent since 2011 (Blackwood et al.,
2012). As the non-proﬁt sector expands so does the number of
organizations vying for attention, supporting the contention
that charities face severe competition for potential donors’
time, effort and money (Faulkner and Romaniuk, 2019;
Michaelidou et al., 2015a; Michaelidou et al., 2019; Wymer
and Casidy, 2019). Research suggests that for charities to
differentiate themselves from others, they must focus on key
elements of their brand (Mort et al., 2007; Chapleo, 2013;
and
Michaelidou et al., 2015b). Creating

awareness

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/1061-0421.htm

prominence using various brand elements such as logos,
slogans and messaging is widely thought of as effective in
bringing the brand to mind, providing it with an advantage over
other brands in a purchase-related situation (Sääksjärvi et al.,
2015). These elements are valuable for creating and
maintaining a strong identity. They create awareness and
symbolism and may, therefore, positively inﬂuence attitudes
toward a brand (Keller, 2003).

Brand strength is a leading indicator of marketing outcomes
speciﬁc to non-proﬁt organizations and particularly in relation
to peer brands (Wymer et al., 2016). It is, therefore, surprising
that although much research attention has been directed to why
people donate to charity (Bendapudi et al., 1996; Webb et al.,
2000; Lee and Shrum, 2012; Boenigk and Helmig, 2013;
Konrath and Handy, 2018), little has been paid to brand choice
and how people decide who they give to (Bennett and Sargeant,
2005; Michel and Rieunier, 2012). This dichotomy is evident
in the most prominent models of giving behavior within the
mainstream, sector-speciﬁc and interdisciplinary literature

Journal of Product & Brand Management
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/JPBM-09-2018-2011]

Received 9 September 2018
Revised 11 February 2019
20 June 2019
29 September 2019
4 October 2019
Accepted 5 October 2019

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

(Bendapudi et al., 1996; Sargeant, 1999; Sargeant and
Woodliffe, 2007a), where the factors involved in the choice
between charities for donation in unsolicited giving situations
remain relatively unclear. Where choice does receive some
exposure within contextual literature, it is commonly paired
with the belief that differentiation is central to a charity being
selected by a potential donor. In such cases, brand personality
is regularly proposed as a strategy for differentiation between
charities (Venable et al., 2005; Voeth and Herbst, 2008),
facilitating choice through the projection of organizational
values (de Chernatony and Riley, 1998). Unfortunately, few
personality traits are shown to be genuinely distinctive between
organizations within a cause type, with many shared across
organizations just by virtue of being known to be a charity
(Sargeant et al., 2008). More recently, researchers suggest
brand choice in the charity sector may be more about how well-
known a brand is or how “typical” it is in its sector (Michel and
Rieunier, 2012). The role of “the non-proﬁt brand, through its
identiﬁcation system (e.g. via a name, logo, design, jingle, etc.)
is becoming an important element in differentiating charitable
organizations” (Michel
and Rieunier, 2012, p. 701).
Consequently, both practical and theoretical need exist for a
deeper understanding of how donors choose between brands in
the charity sector.

This empirical paper contributes to the limited body of
research in this area by proposing and testing a model of donor
choice when selecting a charity for donation. Drawing upon
dual process theory (Gawronski and Bodenhausen, 2006), we
bring together charity brand attitudes with relative charity
brand salience as factors inﬂuencing the intention to donate a
speciﬁc organization in relation to others. Speciﬁcally, we argue
that brand salience is seen as associative processes (i.e. implicit
attitudes) activated automatically with little cognitive capacity,
while brand attitude is evaluative judgments (i.e. explicit
attitudes). Brand salience, “the brand’s propensity to be
noticed or come to mind in buying situations” (Romaniuk and
Sharp, 2004, p. 327), are considered to be both a valid and
effective form of distinction between competing brands across a
range of categories (Ehrenberg et al., 1997; Vriens et al., 2019).
On the other hand, brand attitudes are psychological
tendencies to evaluate brands a degree of
liking. Recent
research suggests that involvement has a positive impact on
consumer brand engagement and willingness to donate to non-
proﬁt organizations (Algharabat et al., 2018). Therefore, we
also test the moderating effect of donor decision involvement
on the relationships between brand salience and brand attitude
with charity choice intention, as well as the potential effects of
control variables. Managerially, the ﬁndings have important
implications for charities in their marketing strategy, and
speciﬁcally how they communicate their brand.

Following discussion of the conceptual background of key
constructs, we present a conceptual model of new donor
decision, accompanied by relevant research hypotheses. Next,
we detail the conceptualization and operationalization of the
focal constructs in the model. This includes the presentation of
the results of a qualitative study devised to develop a
representative range of items for the main constructs within the
context of study. We then present the results of two Australian
surveys conducted with a sample of potential donors to charity,
facilitating the puriﬁcation of measures, testing of the outer

measurement models and assessment of the relationships
between constructs within the structural model. Finally, we
discuss the research implications, study limitations and propose
areas of future research.

2. Conceptual background

2.1 Brand salience
The relative salience of a brand reﬂects its accessibility or
prominence in memory (Hoefﬂer and Keller, 2003). It is a
measure of the probability of a speciﬁc brand being thought of
or noticed in relation to others,
in a certain situation
(Romaniuk and Sharp, 2004). Traditionally deﬁned as the
“degree to which a given brand comes to consumers’ minds in
the context of a particular purchase or consumption occasion”
(Moran, 1990, p. 11) or is evoked under various circumstances
or situations (Keller, 2003), it refers to the prominence of that
brand in memory, the chance that a speciﬁc brand will be
thought of. Hence, the more salient a brand, the greater its
propensity to be recalled and the greater its likelihood to be
considered for donation or purchase (Vieceli and Shaw, 2010).
Brands are considered to function as nodes in memory, with
associations linked to them in that links between a brand and
associations are created and reinforced as consumers are
exposed to the brand in a speciﬁc context over time (Keller,
2003). This increases the relative prominence of the brand,
reﬂected in the quantity and quality of links between the brand
and its associations (Sharp, 2010). Given the theory of memory
the brand salience concept
as an associative network,
incorporates
as
constituents. These
and brand
an individual’s
knowledge. The brand image
perceptions of a brand, which is a function of the associations in
memory related to that brand (Keller, 2003). In Vieceli and
Shaw’s (2010) empirically based model of brand salience,
brand image is subsumed by the broader brand salience
concept. Brand knowledge consists of both the brand node in
memory, as well as the associations linked to it, incorporating
both basic brand awareness and brand image (Keller, 2003).
Brand knowledge comprises components such as familiarity
and expertise, which inﬂuence the prominence of the brand in
memory because of the associations created through previous
brand-related experiences
(Alba and Hutchinson, 1987;
Ehrenberg et al., 2002). Brand salience should not be confused
with brand awareness or brand knowledge, which are less-
comprehensive measures, and not the focus of the current
study. Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably,
brand awareness only considers the link between a product
category and the brand (Sharp, 2010), while brand salience is
more comprehensive and recognizes that there are more
such as
associations
consumption situations that can cause customers to think of
brands (Nedungadi, 1990).

include brand image

and measures

the product

than just

constructs

peripheral

category,

reﬂects

The current study examines two dimensions of brand
salience, namely, prominence and distinctiveness (Romaniuk
and Sharp, 2004). Prominence is characterized by an inherent
element of order, reﬂected in greater importance being
attributed to speciﬁc brands being thought about over others in
a particular situation, rather than how they are perceived
(Miller and Berry, 1998). Distinctiveness refers to the extent to

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

which a brand stands out visually or is distinguished from its
competitors because of its distinctive properties such as colors,
logos and symbols (Romaniuk et al., 2007; Van der Lans et al.,
2008). Distinctive brands are more likely to be noticed in
buying situations and increase the likelihood that brands are
correctly linked to advertising or messaging, thereby creating or
strengthening associations in memory (Sharp, 2010).

2.2 Brand attitude
Contrasting with the situational and memory-based nature of
brand salience, an attitude toward a brand is considered to be a
relatively enduring state, expressed by evaluating that brand
(Eagly and Chaiken, 1993). Hence, brand attitudes are a
function of the salient beliefs of an individual with regard to
brands in terms of the extent to which they possess certain
beneﬁts and the evaluative judgment of these beliefs. Attitudes
are regularly central to models of brand choice and choice
intention that are more cognitive in nature (Laroche et al.,
1996). Attitudes form the basis for evaluation of competing
brands, where the goal is to maximize utility by making the best
choice from amongst a range of options based on a set of
criteria. Past models of charitable giving also express attitude as
a component of a predominantly cognitive view of donor
behavior. For example, Sargeant and Woodliffe (2007b)
criteria”
include
processing
determinants, which are composed of attitudinal dimensions.

“judgmental

decision

as

Although the majority of sector-related conceptualizations of
attitudes and constituent perceptions are presented within a
context of general giving, a small number of studies speciﬁcally
consider charity perceptions as a means of comparison between
them (Sargeant et al., 2006; Sargeant et al., 2004). These
perceptions can be considered to represent dimensions of an
overall attitude toward charity brands on the part of donors,
characterizing various aspects of how organizations are
evaluated or compared, in relation to others. The efﬁciency of
the organization is using donations and its effectiveness in
achieving its objectives (Bendapudi et al., 1996; Sargeant and
Woodliffe, 2007b) create a perception of potential charity
performance. The performance itself can also be a proxy for the
trust placed in an organization to perform the work they say
they will do (Sargeant
et al., 2004). The perceived
professionalism of an organization reﬂects beliefs of how it is
run or managed (Sargeant et al., 2004), while an expectation of
performance in terms of demonstrable, tangible beneﬁts from
assisting a charity (Bendapudi et al., 1996; Sargeant and
Woodliffe, 2007b) may also inﬂuence comparative charity
brand attitude.

2.3 Donor decision involvement
Involvement is widely considered to represent a “state of
arousal and product interest” (Richins and Bloch, 1986,
p. 280). It measures the degree of personal interest in a goal
object, which can be either a product or a purchase decision.
When considered separately, product involvement is enduring
and relatively stable, representing an ongoing concern with a
product independent of context (Richins and Bloch, 1986). In
contrast, purchase decision involvement is situational and
transitory, representing a temporary concern aroused by a
particular purchase decision such as a choice from amongst a
range of brands (Richins and Bloch, 1986). It follows that the

levels of product and purchase decision involvement are not
necessarily uniform. For example, an individual may be highly
involved with a product category, but demonstrate little
involvement with the purchase decision because of caring little
about the brands in the category (Kassarjian, 1981). Hence,
where product involvement may be of value when considering
whether an individual will make a purchase from a particular
product category or not,
the level of purchase decision
involvement exhibited by an individual may have a signiﬁcant
bearing on the process whereby a choice between speciﬁc
brands within that category is made.

Situational donations to charity by donors similarly reﬂect
the distinction between product and purchase decision
involvement. For example, potential donors may be highly
involved with a cause because of the urgency or immediacy of
need following a natural disaster (Micklewright and Wright,
2005), yet be detached or lack interest in the marketing of the
various charities on offer (Kassarjian, 1981). Drawing on the
work of Mittal (1995) deﬁnitions of product and purchase
decision involvement can be adapted to the not-for-proﬁt
marketing context. The charity product is generally referred to
as the “offer,” the combination of beneﬁts existing in a good or
service to satisfy a need of a charity’s target market (Wymer
et al., 2006, p. 123), and is related to a cause. As there may be
for a charity, “donor cause
several
involvement” can be deﬁned as the perceived importance of the
cause on the part of the donor, where a number of charities may
provide solutions to the related need. “Donor decision
involvement” relates to the perceived importance of the choice
between these charities in satisfying the underlying need on the
part of the donor. As with purchase decision involvement, the
level of involvement exhibited by a new donor in the charity
choice decision should inﬂuence the process whereby a charity
is selected for donation. Research supports that involvement in
a non-proﬁt/charity cause leads to more favorable attitudes
toward the brand (Patel et al., 2017) and greater likelihood to
choose one charity brand over another.

stakeholders

target

3. Hypotheses development
Given the absence of research on factors inﬂuencing the choice
of charity for new donors, we propose a brand choice model
with brand salience and brand attitudes as central factors
inﬂuencing brand choice intention. Figure 1 provides a visual
representation of the model and hypotheses (paths), which are
discussed, in turn. Donor decision involvement is presented as
a possible moderator.

3.1 Brand salience, brand attitude and brand choice
intention
A signiﬁcant body of research considers the brand choice to
include a stage of brand evocation prior to any evaluation of
these brands taking place (Holden and Lutz, 1992; Nedungadi,
1990; Roberts and Lattin, 1997). Evocation involves brands
being “brought to mind on a particular choice occasion”
(Nedungadi, 1990, p. 264), a function of their relative salience,
particularly where choice becomes reliant on memory to a
greater or lesser degree (Lynch and Srull, 1982). Potential
donors to charity may use brand salience as a means to quickly
reduce, discount or discard options to arrive at a decision, given

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Figure 1 New donor decision model

Brand attitude

Donor decision
involvement

H2, H4

H1

Brand salience

H3

H5

H6

Brand choice
intention

a lack of expertise in product comparison (Lynch and Srull,
1982). Hence, the brands included within the evoked set for
consideration can be limited to those sufﬁciently prominent to
be retrieved from memory, with evaluation considered to be
separate from but contingent on brand consideration (Holden
and Lutz, 1992). This is especially true for non-proﬁt
organizations that rely heavily on establishing brand identity
cues to signify trust and reliability, reducing uncertainty and
leading to greater brand attitudes (Richie et al., 1999). Brand
prominence (salience), for non-proﬁt brands especially, plays
an important role along with brand attitudes in leading to
positive customer reaction (Baghi and Gabrielli, 2018). Brand
salience also helps non-proﬁt brands to set themselves apart
from the competition clutter when it comes to competing for
funds (Paco et al., 2014). Brands that are more salient are likely
to be more positively evaluated, as that which is familiar tends
to be more liked (Zajonc and Marcus, 1982; Romaniuk and
Sharp, 2004; Baghi and Gabrielli, 2018). Liking is reﬂected in
individual attitude toward the brand; thus, we expect:

H1. There is a positive link between relative brand salience
and the evaluative attitude toward the charity brand.

Brand attitudes are regularly modeled and measured as a
means of evaluation between competing brands. For example,
Laroche et al. (1996) consider the composite attitudes toward a
range of competing brands to provide an indication of the likely
intention to purchase a particular brand. The desire to
maximize utility by making the best choice from amongst a
range of options is a common thread.

There are some instances in non-proﬁt literature where the
attitude toward the charity in question is explicitly included as an
antecedent to the intention to donate to this organization. For
example, Diamond and Gooding-Williams (2002) consider
attitude toward the non-proﬁt to inﬂuence the intention to
donate following a direct mail appeal, while Meijer (2009)
provides further support for the relationship of brand attitude
with brand choice, by using binary logistic regression and actual
giving data to determine the likelihood of an individual being a
donor to that organization or not, based on their attitude toward
it. In light of this support, we offer the following:

H2. There is a positive link between the evaluative attitude
toward a charity brand and the intention to select this
organization for donation.

Brand salience is not only used as a heuristic to create a
prominence-based consideration set for evaluation but also
directly inﬂuences the ﬁnal selection (Hoyer and Brown, 1990;
Macdonald and Sharp, 2000). Known brand names are
repeatedly chosen within categories as a means of lowering risk

Journal of Product & Brand Management

and dealing with uncertainty (Hoyer and Brown, 1990), often
in situations where a perceived lack of experience or prior
knowledge can cause donors to expend little effort in evaluation
between charities and instead seek a simpler solution (Bettman
and Park, 1980). The more prominent a brand implies that
knowledge on the brand is salient and accessible for consumers.
Continued exposure to salient features of the brand (e.g. logo,
trademark and colors) can have a positive effect on outcomes
such as brand attitude, brand commitment or purchase
behavior (Sääksjärvi et al., 2015). Additionally, with repeated
exposure brands become more salient, and hence, accessible in
memory. This increases the ease with which consumers identify
and recognize the brand. Hence, the easier it is for a brand to be
processed in memory, the more positive the individual
is
toward it, increasing the likelihood of choice. The dimensions
of brand salience correspond closely with those of processing
ﬂuency. Conceptual ﬂuency reﬂects the ease with which target
brands come to mind and the processing of this meaning,
aligned with prominence, while perceptual ﬂuency reﬂects the
ease of
identifying a stimulus on subsequent encounters
through the processing of physical features such as shapes and
sounds, aligned with distinctiveness (Lee and Labroo, 2004).
In both cases, the ease of processing is believed to yield a
positive effect, illustrating how relative brand salience can be
used as a heuristic for choice.

Being able to retrieve brands can lead to forming favorable
attitudes. Then, as attitude has a valence and a magnitude, it
serves as a means of assessing the degree of favorability with
which the organization or other branded object is perceived by
its target group (Wymer et al., 2016). Like brand salience, a
favorable attitude is a necessary but not a sufﬁcient condition
for choosing a brand. Charities such as the Red Cross are well-
known, perceived favorably by the public, and enjoy very
favorable attitudes by donors. For a charity to be considered the
top choice in its class, however, something more is required.
The charity must also stand out from others, being the most
prominent and distinctive among other charities having similar
missions. Recent research suggests that how typical a charity is
a sector has a signiﬁcant impact on the intention to donate
money and time (Michel and Rieunier, 2012). Determinants of
a charity’s typicality (i.e. being a representative brand in its
product category, e.g. Red Cross in blood donations),
compared to others in the same group, increases exposure and
signiﬁes an “ideal” charity to the public (Loken and Ward,
1990; Michaelidou et al., 2015b). While brand salience is
expected to impact on the choice of charities directly, its impact
on donor choice also operates through brand attitudes. Based
on the interactive nature between brand salience and brand
attitudes, the following hypotheses are offered:

H3. There is a positive link between the relative brand
salience of a charitable organization and the intention to
select this organization for donation.

H4. Brand attitude mediates the effect of brand salience on

brand choice intention.

3.2 Moderating effect of donor decision involvement
Given the heterogeneity of potential donors to charity, the
inﬂuence of brand attitudes and brand salience on charity

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

brand choice is likely to vary across groups. We believe the level
of donor decision involvement will inﬂuence the relationships
between these variables signiﬁcantly.

Consideration of attitude toward respective charity brands is
generally deemed to be synonymous with high involvement
literature (Hibbert and
choice decisions within contextual
Horne, 1996). A relatively high level of involvement in the
choice between potential charities may cause it to be more
evaluative and cognitive, given this choice may be deemed
“important, expensive, high risk or ego-related” (Kassarjian,
1981, p. 31). In such situations, a potential donor is more likely
to retrieve and choose a preferred charity from memory based
on previously formed attitudes (Van Kerckhove et al., 2011).
Thus:

H5. Donor decision involvement has a positive moderating
effect on the relationship between brand attitude and
brand choice intention.

In contrast with the attitude-dominant, high involvement view
of charity choice, new donors may demonstrate relatively low
levels of involvement in this decision. Although intensely
focused on an important cause, for example, they may be
detached from charity marketing with little interest or
involvement in the choice between the available charities
(Kassarjian, 1981). Perceived costs associated with extended
evaluation (Lynch and Srull, 1982) and a lack of category
expertise can cause simplifying heuristics such as brand salience
to be more highly favored and inﬂuential in such situations,
regardless of the level of interest in the related cause (Mittal,
1995). Van Kerckhove et al. (2011) demonstrate that where the
charity choice is considered to be of little importance, there is
an increased chance of a more salient charity brand being
chosen over one that is more preferred. Furthermore, causal
a “low
monetary donations
involvement” situations whereby donors are more inﬂuenced
by peripheral cues such as brand salience and less motivated to
process information in depth (Bennett and Gabriel, 2003).
Based on this logic, it is expected that:

categorized as

could be

H6. Donor decision involvement has a negative moderating
effect on the relationship between brand salience and
brand choice intention.

4. Methods and data

4.1 Measurement instrument development
Romaniuk and Sharp (2004) provide guidelines as to how a
measure of brand salience might be constructed. It should
contain a representative range of attributes or cues relevant to
all category brands, where these should cover a variety of
aspects that could cause the brand to be thought of by
consumers, such as consumption situations, beneﬁts and
functional qualities (Romaniuk and Sharp, 2003, 2004). Such
a measure is inherently situational, requiring a range of
attributes to be identiﬁed and tested within the context of the
category under
investigation. The salience score should
demonstrate a propensity for a brand to be thought of across
the range of attributes in relation to the other brands, reﬂecting
whether they cause a brand to be thought of (prominence),

rather than an evaluation of it (Romaniuk and Sharp, 2004). In
addition to prominence in memory, measurement of the
unique linkages of distinctive brand assets is also of importance
in capturing brand salience (Romaniuk et al., 2007).
Distinctive brand assets could include colors, logos, taglines or
other brand markings unique to a charity brand.

A small number of scales in relation to the perceptions of and
attitudes toward individual charities have been published
(Sargeant et al., 2006; Sargeant et al., 2004). However,
attitudes toward the sector have on occasion been mixed with
those toward the organizations, while samples comprising
existing or lapsed but not new donors have been used. There is
value in basing an attitudinal measure for new donors on these
existing scales, but selectivity is required when choosing the
factor dimensions and devising items of relevance for this
sample
perceived
professionalism and expectation of demonstrable utility were
considered relevant attitudinal dimensions from which to
proceed (Bendapudi et al., 1996; Sargeant and Woodliffe,
2007b).

group. Organizational

performance,

and research managers

A mixed method approach was used to develop these
measures, commencing with semi-structured interviews with
marketing, media
from two
international aid and relief organizations. These were
conducted to generate representative items for the dimensions
of brand attitude and compile a list of attributes and distinctive
brand assets for the brand salience measure. We selected the
cause of international aid and relief because of the relatively
high levels of awareness of related charity brands, regular
exposure of the public to cause-related needs and high levels of
public interest
in poverty and international assistance
(Micklewright and Schnepf, 2009). The expert interviews were
supplemented with interviews with new, ﬁrst-time donors to
these
research
component were used as a basis for two cross-sectional surveys
for the purposes of scale puriﬁcation. Following the ﬁrst survey,
an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was conducted for the
brand attitude construct, as well as an analysis of the prevalence
of brand salience attributes, resulting in some scale revision.
The second survey facilitated the testing of constructs for
reliability and validity, where partial least squares regression
was used to test the measurement and structural components of
the structural equation model.

from the qualitative

charities. Results

4.2 Study 1 – qualitative study
4.2.1 Data collection and analysis
We conducted semi-structured, in-depth expert interviews with
nine marketing, media and research managers from World
Vision Australia and Oxfam Australia. Experts ﬁrstly provided
responses relating to their perceptions of the international
aid category and its competitive nature, donor behavior and
organizational brand strategy. Thereafter, they assisted with the
generation of attributes and distinctive brand assets for the
brand salience measure following explanation of the nature of
the construct. Next, each charity recruited ﬁve donors who had
made a “once-off” donation following the Haiti earthquake of
2010. Once-off donors were required to describe how they
decided to donate to the cause in question and how they
selected a charity brand. Given the situational nature of the
brand salience measure, donors’ associations with natural

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

disasters and the needs arising from them were captured to
reﬂect the prominence aspect of the construct in the giving
situation. Participants were screened to ensure that they were
not regular givers to the stated cause and had only given once to
the relevant organization. These formed the basis
for
representative category attributes, the cues that would cause
brands to be thought of. Following unprompted generation of
brand assets that donors believed were distinctive to brands in
the category, a prompted matching exercise of a range of these
with brands was conducted to test the prevalence of distinctive
brand assets identiﬁed by the category experts. This exercise
assisted with the development of the distinctiveness dimension
of the brand salience measure. Experts assisted with the
generation of attributes, distinctive properties and items
following explanation of the nature of the two constructs. In
contrast, donors were required to describe how they decided to
donate to the cause in question and how they selected a charity
recipient. Finally, perceptions of various charity brands
reﬂecting overall positive or negative attitudes toward them
were captured in relation to the brand attitude construct.

Interviews lasted for between 60 and 90 min each. They were
recorded, transcribed and then subjected to a content analysis
using QSR NVivo 9 software. Coding techniques follow those
prescribed by Miles and Huberman (1994), with codes being
assigned to segments of text to reduce “large mountains of raw
data into small, manageable piles” (Neuman, 2006, p. 460).
Illustrative quotations detail key ﬁndings, to represent the
predominant views that were expressed. Where relevant, the
designation of expert respondents is included prior to each
relevant quotation, while pseudonyms are used to identify the
responses of individual donors.

4.2.2 Findings
Following discussion of the charity choice decision with both
experts and ﬁrst-time donors, broadly supporting the
hypothesized relationships between the key constructs in the
model, respondents from each group informed the generation
of representative items for the dimensions of brand attitude and
a list of attributes and distinctive properties for the brand
salience measure.

When considering the dimensions of brand salience
speciﬁcally, practitioners identiﬁed aspects of natural disasters
that they believe because the public to take notice, consider a
donation and by association, think of brands. The scale and
broad impact of the disaster, immediacy and unforeseen nature
of the event, high level of casualty, difﬁculty of the operation for
rescue personnel and the need for long-term rebuilding were
identiﬁed as attributes that could cause various brands to come
to mind. In terms of noticing and identifying the brand, logos
and colors were most pervasive, although campaigns, visual
imagery and representative ambassadors were also considered
distinctive for representative brands. Taglines and slogans were
universally rejected.

Similarly, new donors revealed the attributes and needs they
associated with natural disasters, conﬁrming many of those
identiﬁed by experts, but adding additional attributes such as
the need for immediate assistance, rescue, basic services,
longer-term rebuilding and the care of children. New donors
were easily able to think of distinctive brand properties for
category brands without prompting, particularly logos, colors

and campaigns. This was also the case when being required to
link charities with brand properties in a prompted matching
task. Distinctive images and ambassadors appear subjective
with little consistency in matching these with the “correct”
brand. These categories are deemed unsuitable for use in a
relative measure of distinctiveness as a dimension of brand
salience.

Most practitioners questioned believe that the attitude of
potential donors toward charities, reﬂected in evaluative
perceptions and beliefs, can inﬂuence their choice decisions.
They note that donors evaluate charities based on credibility,
professionalism, effectiveness and efﬁciency with which they
use funds. In contrast, it is evident that few new donors actively
evaluate charities based on perceptions or strong prevailing
attitudes, although clearly positive or negative attitudes are
held, which may be deep-seated. Many defaults into the types
of work the charities do, demonstrating an inherent lack of
knowledge or means of distinguishing between them. There is
little support for the contention that donors speciﬁcally select a
charity for the potential to receive a demonstrable beneﬁt in
return, a view shared by practitioners.

4.2.3 Measure construction
Following conceptualization of brand salience by drawing from
existing literature and qualitative research, we propose that it be
modeled as a formative measure. In formative speciﬁcations, a
higher-order construct
is viewed as being caused by its
dimensions, which do not need to be correlated (Ulaga and
Eggert, 2006). The more prominent and distinctive a charity
brand is in the mind of a potential donor, the more likely it is to
be thought of or noticed in a speciﬁc donation situation. These
two dimensions clearly cause the higher-order construct, not
the reverse, while they do not necessarily need to correlate. For
example, a charity brand may be highly salient in memory
because of its distinctive logo, and hence, be noticed yet may
not be thought of as related to the representative attributes of a
speciﬁc occasion. The Red Cross may represent such a
situation. Their logo is one of the most recognized and
distinctive of any organization in the world, yet much of their
aid-related work is rarely advertised, which would hinder the
formation of links between the brand and associations in
memory. While brand salience is considered a formative
measure, the brand attitude construct is best modeled as a
reﬂective measure. Items depicting the evaluative perceptions
and beliefs of an individual regarding the performance and
professionalism of a charity reﬂect his or her prevailing attitude
toward it.

4.3 Study 2 – quantitative research
4.3.1 Measure development
Prior to quantitative analysis of the higher-order constructs, the
items generated from the literature and interviews were
assessed for content and face validity. The item pool of 14
prominence-related attributes, a representative range of logos,
colors and activities to reﬂect distinctiveness along with 13
evaluative perceptions reﬂecting brand attitude were subjected
to scrutiny by a panel of judges comprising four marketing and
research managers from leading international aid and relief
organizations. To improve face validity, we provided each
judge with deﬁnitions of the constructs and then required them

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

to appraise each item for appropriateness and clarity, using a
measurement scale from one to ﬁve (Pritchard et al., 1999). To
be included in a ﬁnal item pool, a majority of the judges were
required to score the item a three or higher on each criterion.
Judges were also requested to provide comments on the
representativeness of the item groupings for construct validity.
Following the exclusion of items because of the lack of face
validity, 12 prominence-related attributes, all the original
distinctive brand properties and 8 evaluative perceptions were
retained.

4.3.2 Survey instrument development
Scale puriﬁcation was conducted by means of two online
surveys, developed with the primary objective of informing a
new donor decision model and thereby simultaneously
providing a means whereby constituent latent variable scales
could be puriﬁed and tested. A natural disaster scenario
(Appendix 1), comprising a ﬁctitious report of a devastating
Tsunami, was used as stimulus prior to respondents answering
questions relating to their intended charity choice, relative
brand salience and attitude toward a range of brands. This
scenario, crafted to simulate the feeling and emotion of a
natural disaster, to the extent that individuals are absorbed into
a story or transported into a narrative world. Transportation is a
convergent process, where all mental systems and capacities
become focused on events occurring in a narrative where
readers get lost in a story, experience emotions and motivations
and become changed by the story (Green and Brock, 2000).
This scenario had been prior tested for its ability to facilitate
transportation, whereby individuals become immersed in the
narrative and consider it as if real (Green, 2004). The scenario
that was ranked highest according to Green and Brock’s (2000)
transportation scale was used as a stimulus for the surveys.

The four largest charity brands in the international aid and
relief sector [Red Cross, World Vision, Oxfam and United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)] based on a historic share
of disaster donations (ACFID, 2005) and brand awareness in
Australia (WVA, 2010) were prompted to provide choice
comparison. Although all are well-established brands in
Australia, Red Cross and World Vision are signiﬁcantly larger
than Oxfam and UNICEF. Brands are prompted to reduce the
risk of brands with smaller market shares being crowded out in
memory by brands with high levels of awareness, with attributes
or associations less likely to be elicited (Laurent et al., 1995).
The use of a prompted measure in contrast to unprompted is
expected to impact on validity. Reported linear
not
relationships between aided and spontaneous awareness, for
example, illustrate that brands with low salience “score low on
any awareness measure, and high salience brands score high”
(Romaniuk et al., 2004, p. 77). The four brands command a
high global proﬁle, strengthening the case for external validity.
All are ranked within the top 40 of charities in the UK by
private donation (Charities Aid Foundation, 2012b) and in
Australia (Third Sector, 2018), with three of the four ranked in
the top 20 in the USA (Forbes.com, 2011).

Proportional scales are used for both formative indicators
comprising the brand salience construct. To generate a score
for prominence, we used a free choice “pick any” prompted
measure whereby respondents identiﬁed the brand or brands
they think of when considering each attribute, such as “when

help is needed immediately.” Each brand’s relative prominence
score is the number of attributes that cause the brand to be
thought of, if any, as a percentage of the total number of
attributes. Similarly, to generate a score for distinctiveness,
respondents linked the prompted brands with items, such as
logos or colors from a range of distinctive property types, which
include some decoys. This differs from the prominence
measure in that the respondent must link the correct asset(s)
with the brand in question for the association to count. Each
brand’s relative distinctiveness score is the number of brand
properties correctly associated with that brand as a percentage
of
the total number of possible asset associations. Both
measures tap into the number of links in memory, as they
capture the number of associations, as well as the quality of
links, as they are measured relative to other brands. Free choice
is preferred over forced choice scales or ranks, as these can
confound unawareness or indifference.

Adapted from a selection of perceptual scale items devised by
Sargeant et al. (2006) and Sargeant et al. (2004) reﬂecting
dimensions of performance and professionalism of non-proﬁt
organizations, each evaluative item comprising the composite
brand attitude construct used a seven-point Likert scale (1 =
“strongly disagree” and 7 = “strongly agree”). Respondents
rated each brand consecutively on each item. Two items were
used to measure the brand choice intention construct,
reﬂecting the likelihood of the respondent to donate to the
charity in question, as well as the proportion of a designated
donation budget that would be allocated to that brand in
comparison to the others. Two items were included as
measures of intention rather than just a single measure to
increase the comprehensiveness of the construct and improve
the estimation of the parameters in the measurement model in
line with the principle of consistency at large (Reinartz et al.,
2009). A composite single item measure was used for the donor
decision involvement moderator. This consisted of four items
taken directly
(1995) purchase-decision
involvement scale with an only minor amendment to match the
charity giving context. The four items measuring donor
decision involvement were captured using a seven-point
semantic differential scale and include:
1

selecting amongst many brands (1 = “do not care at all”
and 7 = “care a great deal”);
importance in making the right choice (1 = “not at all
important” and 7 = “extremely important”);
the outcome of choice (1 = “not concerned” and 7 = “very
much concerned”); and
comparison of brands (1 = “all very similar” and 7 = “all
very different”).

from Mittal’s

2

3

4

Additional control variables such as age, income and gender
were also included in the ﬁnal analysis.

Respondents could only move forward through the survey
and were not permitted to move backward or change responses
once they had moved beyond the page in question. This was
done to ensure that exposure to prompted salience and
attitude-related information in latter sections of the survey did
not inﬂuence choices made in earlier sections or “jog” the
memories of respondents where associations or distinctive
brand assets had not been spontaneously associated with
brands. In addition, the brand order was randomized, as well as

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

the order of the attitudinal items and distinctive brand assets to
reduce the likelihood of pattern answering by respondents.

4.3.3 Sampling procedure and sample characteristics
A leading market
research provider was contracted to
administer a two-stage survey procedure using their online
panel. The integrity of the data was maintained through
random selection of sampling frame from quota groups and the
exclusive use of unique respondents. For both stages, a sample
of potential donors to international aid and relief was selected,
corresponding with the demographic proﬁle of Australian
givers to charity (Lyons and Passey, 2005) and the geographical
spread of
the population across Australia (ABS, 2011).
Selected respondents were screened to exclude those who
contributed once or more per year to associated charities, with
the sample skewed slightly toward younger respondents given
the higher relative propensity for these individuals to be ﬁrst
time donors within this
(Aeberhard, 2008).
Respondents were required to be over 18 years of age and be
Australian citizens to prevent any confounding based on
culture or nationality within the sample.

category

4.3.4 Measurement models
For Stage 1 of data collection, responses were received from 51
respondents as the ﬁrst step in puriﬁcation of items. Eight
reﬂective brand attitude-related scale items across
two
dimensions (professionalism and performance) were subjected
to an EFA across all four prompted brands, in turn. Although
two dimensions were expected, only one factor emerged based
on the Kaiser criterion. This factor represents the composite
attitude of the respondents toward the brand in question,
explaining approximately 80 per cent of the variance of the
eight items for each brand. All eight items were retained, as
alpha coefﬁcients across the brands exceeded 0.96 with
corrected item-to-total
than 0.75,
demonstrating reliability.

correlations

greater

In addition, attributes composing the prominence dimension
of brand salience were reduced to 10 from 12, as two attributes
had markedly lower levels of association with the prompted
brands than the others. All distinctiveness properties of brand
salience were retained. The ﬁnal list of brand salience measures
is
and 3
(distinctiveness), while brand attitude measures are included in
Appendix 4.

included as Appendixes

(prominence)

2

For Stage 2 of data collection, responses were received from
402 respondents. Table I presents information on weights and
loadings of the latent variable measures and the associated t-
values for UNICEF, as well as other data of relevance for
validity testing. All items have signiﬁcant path loadings or
weights (p < 0.01) for UNICEF. The same pattern of
signiﬁcant path loadings (p < 0.01) was also observed for the
other three other charities (Red Cross, Oxfam and World
Vision). To reduce redundancy in presenting similar ﬁndings
on item loadings across all four charities, we only report results
for the item loadings as they relate to the UNICEF brand.
However, we evaluated the speciﬁc path coefﬁcients in testing
our hypotheses for each of
the four charities separately
(Table III).

Conceptualized as a reﬂective measurement model, brand
attitude should be assessed for both reliability and validity.
Composite reliability of brand attitude was 0.98, which far

Table I Table of measurements – UNICEF

Construct

Item

Brand salience (formative)

Weight

Loading

t-value

Prominence
Distinctiveness

0.88
0.39

Brand attitude (reﬂective)
CRa = 0.98
AVEb = 0.85

Attitude 1
Attitude 2
Attitude 3
Attitude 4
Attitude 5
Attitude 6
Attitude 7
Attitude 8

Brand choice intention (reﬂective)
CRa = 0.82
AVEb = 0.70

Choice intention
Donation magnitude

22.05
5.24

96.74
59.38
60.38
63.32
98.35
122.07
55.93
98.31

69.80
22.12

0.93
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.90
0.94

0.91
0.76

Notes: aCR = composite reliability; bAVE = average variance extracted

exceeds the acceptable cut-off of 0.7 (Henseler et al., 2009).
Indicator reliability is also demonstrated, with each indicator’s
standard loading greater than 0.7, as shown in Table I.
Discriminant validity was satisfactory with the square root of
the brand attitude’s AVE greater than its correlation with the
reﬂective brand choice intention construct (0.92 > 0.51). The
case is further strengthened by an examination of cross-
loadings of the reﬂective measures in Table II. We found
similar results when considering the constructs in the models
for Oxfam, World Vision and Red Cross, with reliability and
validity demonstrated throughout. Furthermore, our focal
constructs demonstrated adequate distribution and variance:
brand salience (mean: 0.47 and sd: 0.14), brand attitude
(mean: 4.75 and sd: 1.02), donor decision involvement (mean:
5.15 and sd: 1.33) and brand choice intention (mean: 2.50 and
sd: 0.99).

Conceptualized as a formative measurement model, brand
salience cannot be meaningfully assessed for reliability and
validity as latent variable indicators represent the causes of the
construct, and hence, may not correlate highly (Hair et al.,
2011). As is evident in Table I, both indicators conceptualized

Table II Loadings and cross-loadings for reﬂective measures – UNICEF

Reflective measures

Brand attitude

Brand choice intention

Brand attitude

Attitude 1
Attitude 2
Attitude 3
Attitude 4
Attitude 5
Attitude 6
Attitude 7
Attitude 8

Brand choice intention

Choice intention
Donation magnitude

0.93
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.90
0.94

0.53
0.30

0.48
0.49
0.43
0.46
0.49
0.50
0.47
0.47

0.91
0.76

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

to form the brand salience construct have signiﬁcant path
weights, and hence, make a meaningful contribution to the
constructed index. Assessment of the level of multicollinearity
amongst the formative indicators, determined by calculating a
variance inﬂation factor (VIF), highlights the existence of
redundancy. Excess collinearity can cause the inﬂuence of
individual indicators on the latent variable to become indistinct
(Diamantopoulos and Winklhofer, 2001), thereby causing
indicators to be non-signiﬁcant and face exclusion. The VIF for
both the indicators is 1.01, which is well below the threshold of
5 (Hair et al., 2011).

the

Given

support

theoretical

for
salience

the
construct

current
conceptualization of
in
the brand,
conjunction with its performance against the relevant statistical
criteria, the quality of the formative measurement model is
evident. Of note, however,
is that although prominence
demonstrated signiﬁcance in terms of weight and loading
across all brands, the results for “distinctiveness” varied. We
believe there to be signiﬁcant support for its retention, despite
displaying less inﬂuence on the construct for the bigger brands.
Firstly, distinctiveness
to the
magnitude of the inﬂuence of the construct, especially for
smaller brands. Secondly, an indicator demonstrating a lack of
signiﬁcant effect should have almost no effect on parameter
estimates, thereby demonstrating no real beneﬁt by its removal
from the measurement model of such constructs (Hair et al.,
2011). Finally, agreement on the inclusion of the indicator as
evidenced in the tests of content and face validity supports its
retention.

contributes meaningfully

4.3.5 Non-response bias
Drawing from the recommendations of Mentzer et al. (2001),
we assessed non-response bias by contacting a sample of 54
individuals from amongst those that had qualiﬁed for the
second online survey but had not submitted or failed to
complete it. These individuals were required to provide
answers to the items composing the brand attitude scale, across
the four brands (Appendix 4). t-tests of group mean revealed no
signiﬁcant differences between those who had responded to the
original survey and those who had failed to respond to it. For
this reason, non-response bias was not considered a problem.

4.4 Hypothesis testing
We used data from Stage 2 data collection to test the structural
model, with relationships among constructs
set up as
hypothesized in the conceptual model in Figure 1. Table III

Table III Signiﬁcance of paths and variance explained – all charity brands

shows results of the hypothesized paths for the core model for
all four brands. R2 values for brand choice intention could be
considered high from a consumer behavior perspective varying
from 0.293 for the Red Cross to 0.346 for World Vision. These
values are particularly notable given the criterion variable has
only two antecedents. The following sections discuss the results
in greater detail, in line with hypotheses.

Support was found for H1-H4 across all brands. Relative
brand salience and brand attitude are positively related (H1), as
is evident in Table III in the results obtained for all four
charities. There is a positive relationship between brand
attitude and brand choice intention (H2) and between brand
salience and brand choice intention (H3) again for all four
charities. The direct inﬂuence of brand attitude on brand
choice intention appears stronger than that of brand salience on
brand choice intention across all brands, although the
magnitude of
this difference does vary. However, both
relationships demonstrate signiﬁcance, and both contribute
meaningfully to explaining the variation in the focal
construct. By calculating the variance accounted for (VAF),
we sought to determine the size of the indirect effect in
relation to the total effect. The indirect effects of brand
salience on brand choice intention were also evidence across
Red Cross (b = 0.12 and VAF = 0.28), World Vision (b =
0.25 and VAF = 0.58), Oxfam (b = 0.24 and VAF = 0.56)
and UNICEF (b = 0.20 and VAF = 0.47). As recommended
by Hair et al. (2014), partial mediations take place in the
current study as the VAF scores are in between 0.2 and 0.8;
thus, our ﬁndings lend support to the consistent mediating
role of brand attitude on the brand salience – brand choice
intention relationship (H4).

To test H5 and H6, we conducted moderation analysis with
donor decision involvement as the contingency factor. An
interaction term was created to test its signiﬁcance as a
moderator. As the measurement model of the independent
variable brand salience is formative, a two-stage approach to
create the interaction term with donor decision involvement is
used as the pairwise multiplication of indicators is not feasible
(Chin et al., 2003; Henseler and Chin, 2010). This is because
of the assumption that formative indicators can be independent
and can measure different factors, therefore, the product
indicators of such sets may “not necessarily tap into the same
underlying interaction effect” (Chin et al., 2003). This method
is suitable for use with a mix of formative and reﬂective
measurement models and given its high level of statistical
shown to be
power

in comparison to other methods,

Brand salience to brand
attitude

Path significance
Brand attitude to the
brand choice intention

Brand salience to the
brand choice intention

Charity brand

Red Cross
World Vision
Oxfam
UNICEF

n

402
402
402
402

b

0.37
0.51
0.51
0.48

t

7.77
14.53
14.80
12.35

b

0.34
0.48
0.47
0.41

t

5.76
10.78
10.67
8.90

b

0.319
0.179
0.189
0.222

t

5.26
3.44
3.60
4.76

Note: VAF = variance accounted for

R2

Brand choice
intention

Indirect effect(VAF)
Brand salience to the
brand choice intention

0.293
0.346
0.345
0.303

0.12(0.28)
0.25(0.58)
0.24(0.56)
0.20(0.47)

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

particularly suitable where the signiﬁcance of an interaction
effect is the goal (Henseler and Chin, 2010). We include t-
values of the interaction terms, along with the scores from
Cohen’s f2-test across brands in Table IV, to demonstrate
signiﬁcance, as well as the effect size resulting from the
inclusion of the moderator.

We found empirical support for H5, but not H6 across all
brands. As illustrated in the results obtained for UNICEF,
donor decision involvement exerts a positive moderating effect
on the relationship between brand attitude and brand choice
intention (b = 0.13 and p < 0.01), but the hypothesized
negative moderating effect on the relationship between brand
salience and brand choice intention is not signiﬁcant. In terms
of strength,
the
meaningful effect (0.02 (cid:1) f2 (cid:1) 0.15) on the model (Cohen,
1988), resulting in an improvement in the variance explained.

the moderating effect has a weak, but

Despite a non-signiﬁcant ﬁnding for the hypothesized
negative moderating effect of donor decision involvement on
the relationship between brand salience and brand choice
intention, there is still an indication of a negative inﬂuence
across all brands (Table IV). We decided to split the sample to
observe the differences in path coefﬁcients across “low” and
“high” donor decision involvement conditions. A median split
was performed on the data based on the additive scores given
for the measure of donor decision involvement composed from
four seven-point scales (median = 21). This was done to create
a grouping variable, resulting in a low decision involvement
(n = 178 and mean = 16) and a high decision involvement
group (n = 224 and mean = 24.3). The path coefﬁcients were
estimated for each sub-sample as shown in Table V, where the
differences between them can be interpreted as moderating
effects across each of the four brands.

Differences in the path coefﬁcients across groups reﬂect the
valence of the interaction terms depicted earlier in Table IV.
Although varying in magnitude across brands, the positive
moderating effect of donor decision involvement on the
relationship between brand attitude and brand choice intention
is clearly evident in Table V (e.g. UNICEF low: b = 0.28 and
p < 0.01; UNICEF high: b = 0.48 and p < 0.01), while there is
a consistent indication of the hypothesized negative moderating
effect on the relationship between brand salience and brand
choice intention across all brands (e.g. UNICEF low: b = 0.25
and p < 0.01; UNICEF high: b = 0.20 and p < 0.01).

A comparison of the path coefﬁcients across all brands, but
within each condition, provides further statistical support. The
difference between non-independent path weights was tested for
signiﬁcance by bootstrapping with 5,000 samples. This non-
parametric procedure allows for p-values to be calculated
(Table V), based on the proportion of samples for which the

hypothesized relationship (e.g. bPath A > bPath B) is not true in
relation to the proportion for which it is. The differences in the
path coefﬁcients across low and high-donor decision involvement
conditions are reinforced. For example, where there is no
signiﬁcant difference in the coefﬁcients for the relationship
between brand attitude and brand choice intention and that of
brand salience and brand choice intention in the low decision
involvement condition for UNICEF (p = 0.43), there is a highly
signiﬁcant difference in the high decision involvement condition
(p = 0.01).

What is particularly evident in the path comparison is the relative
effect of brand attitude and brand salience on brand choice
intention. In the “low” condition, brand salience has a relatively
greater effect on brand choice intention than brand attitude,
although brand attitude exerts a stronger absolute inﬂuence on all
brands except the Red Cross. The reverse is true in the “high”
condition, where brand attitude has both a relatively and greater
effect. Although H6 was not supported, there is still an indication
of a consistent, negative moderating effect attributable to the level
of donor decision involvement and evident within the split samples.

4.5 Control variables
Demographic control variables were tested as further potential
sources of inﬂuence. Although gender and age were found to be
insigniﬁcant, income had a seemingly signiﬁcant effect on the
model. Categorical data bands reﬂecting the income ranges of
respondents who chose to reveal their incomes (n = 325) were
collapsed into two groups, “high” and “low,” to allow for group
comparison. With Australian gross household median income
recorded as $68,640 (Year Book Australia, 2012), respondents
with gross household incomes of less than $75,000 were
considered “low” while those earning more were included
within the “high” grouping. Similar to the split sample analysis
of donor decision involvement, the path coefﬁcients were
estimated for each income-related sub-sample as shown in
Table VI, where the differences between them can be observed.
By observation, the data reveal differences in the path
coefﬁcients across groups. Although varying in magnitude
across brands, income appears to have a positive effect on the
relationship between brand attitude and brand choice intention
(e.g. UNICEF low: b = 0.24 and p < 0.01; UNICEF high: b =
0.511 and p < 0.01) while exerting a negative effect on the
relationship between brand salience and brand choice intention
(e.g. UNICEF low: b = 0.332 and p < 0.01; UNICEF high:
b = 0.194 and p < 0.01). Where respondents are characterized
by lower incomes, there appears to be a comparatively stronger
relationship between brand salience and brand choice
intention, while for high-income groups the relationship
between brand attitude and brand choice intention is relatively
stronger.

Table IV Moderator signiﬁcance of donor decision involvement (all charity brands)

Interaction with
brand attitude

Interaction with
brand salience

Charity brand

Red Cross
World Vision
Oxfam
UNICEF

n

402
402
402
402

b

0.12
0.13
0.14
0.13

t

2.40
2.42
3.25
2.97

b

(cid:3)0.07
(cid:3)0.09
(cid:3)0.06
(cid:3)0.06

t

1.34
1.54
1.15
1.21

R2 (with moderator)

f2 score

0.31
0.36
0.36
0.32

0.03
0.02
0.03
0.04

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Table V Moderator signiﬁcance of donor decision involvement – split sample (all charity brands)

Brand attitude to the brand
choice intention

Brand salience to the brand
choice intention

Path
comparison

Charity brand

Red Cross

World Vision

Oxfam

UNICEF

Donor decision
involves

Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High

n

178
224
178
224
178
224
178
224

b

0.199
0.387
0.412
0.536
0.33
0.564
0.278
0.48

t

2.087(cid:4)
6.301(cid:4)(cid:4)
5.471(cid:4)(cid:4)
10.191(cid:4)(cid:4)
4.399(cid:4)(cid:4)
10.338(cid:4)(cid:4)
3.629(cid:4)(cid:4)
8.374(cid:4)(cid:4)

b

0.424
0.261
0.217
0.126
0.242
0.149
0.248
0.201

t

5.796(cid:4)(cid:4)
3.069(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.762(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.038(cid:4)
2.921(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.126(cid:4)
3.124(cid:4)(cid:4)
3.476(cid:4)(cid:4)

Notes:

(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.05 level; (cid:4)(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.01 level

Table VI Moderator signiﬁcance of income (all charity brands)

Charity brand

Income

n

Brand attitude to the brand
choice intention
t
b

Brand salience to the brand
choice intention
t

b

Red Cross

World Vision

0.239
0.554
0.479
0.534
0.434
0.562
0.24
0.511
(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.05 level; (cid:4)(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.01 level

Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High

185
140
185
140
185
140
185
140

Oxfam

UNICEF

Notes:

2.835(cid:4)(cid:4)
5.814(cid:4)(cid:4)
6.894(cid:4)(cid:4)
7.557(cid:4)(cid:4)
7.327(cid:4)(cid:4)
8.036(cid:4)(cid:4)
3.194(cid:4)(cid:4)
7.794(cid:4)(cid:4)

0.347
0.153
0.212
0.037
0.278
0.069
0.332
0.194

4.313(cid:4)(cid:4)
1.102
3.006(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.391
3.722(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.806
4.448(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.801(cid:4)(cid:4)

R2

0.283
0.288
0.301
0.377
0.239
0.433
0.202
0.364

R2

0.225
0.411
0.378
0.308
0.392
0.358
0.248
0.395

p-value
0.01(cid:4)
0.17
0.09(cid:4)
0.00(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.28
0.00(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.43
0.01(cid:4)

Path
comparison
p-value

0.20
0.03(cid:4)
0.03(cid:4)
0.00(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.12
0.00(cid:4)(cid:4)
0.24
0.01(cid:4)(cid:4)

Once again, a bootstrapped comparison of the path coefﬁcients
between brand salience and brand attitude with brand choice
intention across all brands, but within each condition, provides
further support. For example, where there is no signiﬁcant
difference in the coefﬁcients for the relationship between brand
attitude and brand choice intention and that of brand salience
and brand choice intention in the low-income condition for
UNICEF (p = 0.24), there is a highly signiﬁcant difference in
the high-income condition (p = 0.01). This result demonstrates
the reduced effect of brand salience, but increased effect of
brand attitude in the high-income condition, with attitude in
the ascendancy in the reverse condition.

Although potentially unexpected within the context of
charity choice, these ﬁndings are consistent with prevailing
research in information processing. Because of the tendency for
income and education to be positively correlated, as
demonstrated in numerous studies (Cooil et al., 2007),
consumers with higher incomes tend to have a greater
understanding and consciousness of the product quality within
a category as they are better able to process information in
relation to low-income, less educated consumers (Walsh and
Mitchell, 2005). For this reason, such individuals should have
more strongly developed attitudes toward category brands,
with these being relatively more inﬂuential for choice. In
contrast, low-income earners are less able to process large
amounts of information, and hence, are more likely to use
simplifying heuristics when making buying or donation

decisions (Walsh et al., 2008). This is motivated by the desire to
avoid excess information processing and the associated “cost of
thinking” (Walsh et al., 2008). These ﬁndings are discussed in
greater detail in the section to follow.

We also made a comparison on the relative contribution of
prominence and distinctiveness to the brand salience construct
across the four brands, ranked by turnover (size). In Table VII,
prominence is clearly the more dominant of the two formative
indicators, in contributing to brand salience compared to that of
distinctiveness. Interestingly, the strength of prominence appears
to be more important for larger charities, whereas distinctiveness
appears to be more prevalent for smaller charities.

5. Discussion and implications

5.1 Theoretical implications
In the 50 years since the call ﬁrst went out for the concept of
marketing to be broadened to include charitable causes
(Kotler and Levy, 1969), the nature and scope of the charity
sector have evolved signiﬁcantly. The emergence of composite
models of giving and donor decision-making behavior within
marketing journals in the mid-to-late 1990s (Bendapudi et al.,
synthesized disparate strands of
1996; Sargeant, 1999)
literature within the ﬁeld and arguably increased the proﬁle of
this aspect of non-proﬁt marketing. These models tended to
and continue to be causal in nature (Sargeant and Woodliffe,
2007a) and grounded in cognitive choice theory, such as that of
planned behavior (Ajzen, 2002). However, these and many of

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Table VII Comparison of weights and loadings for formative indicators across charity brands

Indicator

Prominence

Charity

UNICEF
Oxfam
World Vision
Red Cross

Distinctiveness

UNICEF
Oxfam
World Vision
Red Cross
(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.05 level;

Notes:

Turnover (2010)
$“000”s

Weight

23
82
347
798

22
82
347
798

0.88
0.94
0.96
0.99

0.39
0.20
0.17
0.06

(cid:4)(cid:4) = signiﬁcant at 0.01 level

t-value

22.05(cid:4)(cid:4)
28.06(cid:4)(cid:4)
36.17(cid:4)(cid:4)
37.55(cid:4)(cid:4)

5.24(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.44(cid:4)
2.19(cid:4)
0.57

Loading

0.92
0.98
0.99
1.00

0.47
0.39
0.31
0.22

t-value

29.77(cid:4)(cid:4)
60.98(cid:4)(cid:4)
70.17(cid:4)(cid:4)
94.58(cid:4)(cid:4)

6.14(cid:4)(cid:4)
4.61(cid:4)(cid:4)
3.46(cid:4)(cid:4)
2.02(cid:4)

the studies that followed afford much attention to “why”
people donate money to charity and how to maintain loyalty
once they have started to give, and little to “how” they donate
(Hibbert and Horne, 1996, p. 5), such as how the choice
between charities is made. Our research extends the literature
on charitable giving by providing insight into how new donors
choose between charities for donation. We believe this to be the
ﬁrst time that brand salience is combined with attitudes in a
choice model. Donor decision involvement, a sector-speciﬁc
adaptation of purchase decision involvement, was also included
as a potential moderator of these relationships. The signiﬁcant
moderating effect of contingency factors demonstrates how
potential new donors to charity should not be treated as a
homogenous group. Although donor decision involvement is
found to exert a signiﬁcant moderating effect on the
relationship between brand attitude and brand choice intention
only, we found a consistent, negative effect on the relationship
between brand salience and brand attitude. This is evident
when examining a split sample of the data, divided into “low”
and “high” donor decision involvement. In the low decision
involvement sub-sample, brand salience has a relatively greater
effect, while in the high decision involvement sub-sample,
brand attitude has a relatively greater effect. A demographic
variable that had not been hypothesized, income was found to
exert a positive moderating effect on the relationship between
brand attitude and brand choice intention and a negative effect
on the relationship between brand salience and brand choice
intention. The signiﬁcant moderating effect of contingency
factors demonstrates how potential new donors to charity
should not be treated as a homogenous group.

Our study is also a response to the call by Vieceli and Shaw
(2010) to modeling both brand salience and brand attitude
within the same model demonstrates the potential links that exist
between these constructs, and with brand choice intention. We
believe that the interplay between brand salience, brand attitude,
donor decision involvement and brand choice intention may hold
the key to advancing the understanding of new donor choice.
Importantly, our result was replicated across four brands within
the international aid and development category, demonstrating a
measure of its generalizability. More broadly our research also ﬁts
with recent advancements in capturing the impact of brand
strength in the non-proﬁt and charity sector suggest (Michel and
Rieunier, 2012; Wymer et al., 2016) where non-proﬁt brand

strength is shown to be antecedent to a target group’s affective
intentions toward the non-proﬁt
dispositions and behavioral
brand. Our ﬁndings provide some evidence supporting the
impact of brand prominence/distinctiveness independently and
together with brand attitudes in forming donation behavior.

Finally, our study also addresses the inﬂuence of memory in
the choice decision, which is an important but overlooked issue.
We believe this aspect to be particularly important for new
donors as they may rely more heavily on memory-based
heuristics for choice because of a lack of category knowledge and
the ability to easily compare charity brands. Brand salience, the
propensity for a brand to “be noticed or come to mind in buying
situations (Romaniuk and Sharp, 2004, p. 327) is one such
memory-related mechanism. It is increasingly considered to be
both a valid and effective form of distinction between competing
for category brands (Ehrenberg et al., 1997; Sharp and Dawes,
2001), where the relative prominence of the brand in memory
increases the propensity for that brand to be thought or chosen.
Our study is an extension of existing conceptualizations,
measuring brand salience as a formative measurement model to
best represent the latent variable in the structural equation
model. Where prominence is clearly the more dominant of the
two formative indicators, distinctiveness makes a particularly
signiﬁcant contribution to the brand salience construct for the
smaller brands, and hence, should be retained to prevent
underreporting of the inﬂuence of the construct. Although the
projection of organizational values remains an important means
of inﬂuencing an enduring positive attitude toward a charity on
the part of a potential donor, the relationship of brand salience
with charity choice cannot be ignored if acquisition of new
donors is to be taken seriously as an organizational objective.

5.2 Practical implications
Managers must be conscious of how brand salience is built and
the implications of this for communication and marketing
strategy. Increasing the quantity and quality of links to and
from the brand in memory and regularly refreshing them is the
most quoted means by which to achieve this (Romaniuk and
Sharp, 2003, 2004; Sharp, 2010; Vriens et al., 2019), where the
quality of
links refers to how unique the concepts and
associations linked to a brand are. Practically, the charity brand
and its distinctive properties should be given frequent exposure
in media and communications to build the links between the

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

brand node and associations in memory to increase the chances
of being thought of (Sharp, 2010). The brand must be
presented regularly to refresh links and consistently to ensure it
is recognized and associations correctly linked to it.

Managers should also strive to understand the level of
decision involvement on the part of potential donors regarding
different charitable appeals and causes, given the effect this may
have on the relative inﬂuence of brand attitude on brand choice
intention. For example, the urgent and immediate nature of the
need resulting from a signiﬁcant natural disaster (Micklewright
and Wright, 2005) may result in potential donors becoming
involved with the cause but have little interest or involvement in
the charity choice decision as their primary motivation is to give
as quickly as possible. In such situations, brand attitude would
be expected to have a lesser relative inﬂuence on the choice
decision, although still important, with brand salience relatively
more inﬂuential. Charity marketing communications should
focus more on distinctive brand cues for the brand to be
noticed, rather than content laden messaging. Maintaining a
consistent media and advertising presence increases the chance
that donors will think of and ultimately choose the brand when
such unexpected events occur. In contrast, a potential donor
may be highly involved in the choice decision of which cancer-
related charity to bequeath a donation to in his or her will. In
such situations, brand attitude would be expected have a
greater inﬂuence on choice, given the time available to make the
decision and the likely inﬂuence of emotion. Targeted
promotional material to such individuals, for example, should
provide a greater quantity of information pertaining to the
performance, professionalism and trustworthiness of
the
organization to inﬂuence the evaluative attitude of the donor
regarding the charity brand.

The nature of marketing or fundraising communications and
advertising should also vary, based on the income level of the
targeted group. Given research ﬁndings, managers should
target wealthier individuals with messages characterized by a
greater level of content and explanation of brand values. In
contrast, charities should focus on developing communication
designed primarily to grow and strengthen the number of
thereby increasing the
associative links with the brand,
lower-income
the brand in memory for
prominence of
individuals. The value in targeting each group speciﬁcally,
rather than a “one-size-ﬁts-all” approach is evident as both
contribute signiﬁcantly, but differently to charity. Although
donors with high incomes generally give more to charity and in
larger individual amounts than those on low incomes (Bennett,
less afﬂuent individuals consistently give a higher
2011),
percentage of their income to charity and have a higher
participation rate than their wealthier counterparts. An
explanation for this can stem from feelings of solidarity and
afﬁliation on the part of the poor in relation to others in
need (Bennett, 2011). This trend appears to be universal,
observed in the USA, Australia and the UK (Ward, 2001;
Davis, 2010). Tactical managers may want to speciﬁcally target
lower-income communities for donation. These gifts, although
small, maybe easier to win than donations from the wealthy,
who may have far more developed attitudes toward charity
brands
and be more dismissive of
communication received.

than the poor

6. Limitations and future research

As with any study, this research is subject to limitations given the
choices made during and constraints placed upon the study.
Firstly, the contextual nature of the brand salience construct
required the selection of a speciﬁc donation situation in which to
base the study, which in this case was the aftermath of a natural
disaster. Representative charity brands were prompted, but this is
not expected to impact on validity (Romaniuk et al., 2004).
Secondly, although considerable time and effort was expended on
ensuring the survey scenario stimulus was realistic and facilitated
transportation (Green, 2004; Green and Brock, 2000), it is still
only an approximation of a real event with the potential for
associated error. Thirdly, although the respondent sample of new
donors was drawn to approximate the demographic proﬁle of
Australian givers to charity, the potential for a cohort effect exists,
as they were all sourced via an online panel. Finally, the data used
is cross-sectional, as opposed to longitudinal. Therefore, certain
brands may demonstrate relatively higher or lower levels of brand
salience, depending on whether
there has been a recent
communications campaign by a certain charity, for example.

There is much scope for extension of this work or future
research in relation to it. A longitudinal analysis of the effect of
time on the relative inﬂuences of brand attitude and brand salience
on brand choice intention could be conducted, particularly in
relation to the inﬂuence of charity brand-related communication
or advertising over that time, and the nature of the advertising
content. The model can also be applied to other giving situations
and causes, such as cancer research and animal welfare, to
compare the results obtained with those for natural disasters.
Appeals for international aid in comparison with local welfare
causes may also provide an interesting comparison. We believe the
inclusion of brand salience as a variable within the prevailing
content and structural models of donor behavior within the sector
(Sargeant and Woodliffe, 2007b) would be of particular value to
provide a more holistic view of why and how people donate.

References

ABS (2011), “Cat. no. 4102.0, population, national summary

1998-2010”, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.

ACFID (2005), “Second quarterly NGO report on the Asian
International

Council

for

tsunami”,
Australian
Development, Canberra.

Aeberhard, P. (2008), “Expectations are changing for disaster
relief”, Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 37
No. 1, pp. 17S-24S.

Alba, J. and Hutchinson, J. (1987), “Dimensions of consumer
expertise”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 13 No. 4,
pp. 411-454.

Algharabat, R., Rana, N., Dwivedi, Y., Alalwan, A. and
Qasem, Z. (2018), “The effect of
telepresence, social
presence and involvement on consumer brand engagement:
an empirical study of non-proﬁt organizations”, Journal of
Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 40, pp. 139-149.
(2002), “Perceived behavioral control,
self-
I.
efﬁcacy,
locus of control, and the theory of planned
behavior”, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Vol. 32
No. 4, pp. 665-683.

Ajzen,

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Baghi, I. and Gabrielli, V. (2018), “Brand prominence in
cause-related marketing: luxury versus non-luxury”, Journal
of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 27 No. 6, pp. 716-731.
(1996),
“Enhancing helping behavior: an integrative framework for
promotion planning”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60 No. 3,
pp. 33-49.

Bendapudi, N., Singh, S. and Bendapudi, V.

Bennett, R. (2011), “Why urban poor donate: a study of low-
income charitable giving in London”, Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 41 No. 5, pp. 870-891.

Bennett, R. and Gabriel, H. (2003), “Image and reputational
characteristics of UK charitable organizations: an empirical
study”, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 6 No. 3,
pp. 276-289.

Bennett, R. and Sargeant, A.

(2005), “The nonproﬁt
marketing landscape: guest editors’ introduction to a special
section”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 6,
pp. 797-805.

Bettman, J. and Park, C. (1980), “Effects of prior knowledge
and experience and phase of the choice process on consumer
decision processes: a protocol analysis”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 234-248.

Blackwood, A., Roeger, K. and Pettijohn, S. (2012), The
in Brief: Public Charities, Giving and

Nonproﬁt Sector
Volunteering, The Urban Institute, Washington, DC.

Boenigk, S. and Helmig, B. (2013), “Why do donors donate?
Examining the effects of organizational identiﬁcation and
identity salience on the relationships among satisfaction,
loyalty, and donation behavior”, Journal of Service Research,
Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 533-548.

Chapleo, C. (2013), “Brand ‘infrastructure’

in nonproﬁt
organizations: challenges to successful brand building?”,
Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 21 No. 3,
pp. 199-209.

Charities Aid Foundation (2012a), available at: www.
charitytrends.org/KeyCharts.aspx (accessed 08 September
2018).

Charities Aid Foundation (2012b), “UK top 1000 charities by
donations”, The Guardian, available at: www.guardian.co.uk/
news/datablog/2012/apr/24/top-1000-charities-donations-britain
Chin, W.W., Marcolin, B.L. and Newsted, P.R. (2003), “A
partial least squares latent variable modeling approach for
measuring interaction effects: results from a Monte Carlo
simulation study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption
study”,
Information Systems Research, Vol. 14 No. 2,
pp. 189-217.

Cohen, J. (1988), Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral
Sciences, 2nd ed., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Cooil, B., Keiningham, T.L., Aksoy, L. and Hsu, M. (2007),
“A longitudinal analysis of customer satisfaction and share of
investigating the moderating effect of customer
wallet:
characteristics”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 71 No. 1,
pp. 67-83.

Davis, M. (2010), “Mining boom big bucks stay in pockets, but
battlers give”, The Age, available at: ww.theage.com.au/national/
mining-boom-big-bucks-stay-in-pocket-but-battlers-give-20100409-
rysv.html?skin=text-only

de Chernatony, L. and Riley, F. (1998), “Deﬁning a ‘Brand’:
beyond the literature with experts interpretations”, Journal of
Marketing Management, Vol. 14 No. 5, pp. 417-443.

Diamantopoulos, A. and Winklhofer, H.M. (2001), “Index
construction with formative indicators: an alternative to scale
development”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 38 No. 2,
pp. 269-277.

Diamond, W.D. and Gooding-Williams, S. (2002), “Using
advertising constructs and methods to understand direct
fundraising appeals”, Nonproﬁt Management and
mail
Leadership, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 225-242.

Eagly, A. and Chaiken, S. (1993), The Psychology of
Attitudes, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers
Fort Worth, TX.

Ehrenberg, A., Barnard, N.

(1997),
“Differentiation or salience”, Journal of Advertising Research,
Vol. 37 No. 6, pp. 7-14.

and Scriven,

J.

Ehrenberg, A., Bloom, H., Barnard, N. and Kennedy, R.
(2002), “Brand advertising as creative publicity”, Journal of
Advertising Research, Vol. 42 No. 4, pp. 7-18.

Faulkner, M. and Romaniuk,

(2019), “Supporters’
perceptions of beneﬁts delivered by different charity
activities”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector Marketing,
Vol. 31 No. 1, pp. 20-41.

J.

Forbes.com (2011), “The 200 largest U.S. Charities”, available at:

www.forbes.com/lists/2010/14/charity-10_rank.html

Gawronski, B. and Bodenhausen, G.V. (2006), “Associative
and propositional processes in evaluation: an integrative
review of implicit and explicit attitude change”, Psychological
Bulletin, Vol. 132 No. 5, pp. 692-731.

GivingUSA (2018), “Americans gave $410.02 billion to charity in
2017, crossing the $400 billion mark for the ﬁrst time”, available
at: https://givingusa.org/giving-usa-2018-americans-gave-410-02-
billion-to-charity-in-2017-crossing-the-400-billion-mark-
for-the-ﬁrst-time/

Green, M.C. (2004), “Transportation into narrative worlds:
the role of prior knowledge and perceived realism”, Discourse
Processes, Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 247-266.

Green, M.C. and Brock, T.C. (2000), “The role of transportation
in the persuasiveness of public narratives”, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, Vol. 79 No. 5, pp. 701-721.

Hair, J., Sarstedt, M., Hopkins, L. and Kuppelwieser, V.
(2014), “Partial least squares structural equation modeling
in business research”,
(PLS-SEM): an emerging tool
European Business Review, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 106-121.

Hair, J., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. and Mena, J. (2011), “An
assessment of the use of partial
least squares structural
equation modeling in marketing research”, Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 40 No. 3, pp. 1-20.

Henseler, J. and Chin, W.W. (2010), “A comparison of
approaches for the analysis of interaction effects between
latent variables using partial least squares path modelling”,
Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal,
Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 82-109.

Henseler, J., Ringle, C.M. and Sinkovics, R.R. (2009), “The use of
partial least squares path modeling in international marketing”, in
Sinkovics, RR. and Ghauri, P.N. (Eds), New Challenges to
International Marketing (Advances in International Marketing), 20,
Emerald Group Publishing, Bingley, pp. 277-319.

Hibbert, S. and Horne, S. (1996), “Giving to charity:
questioning the donor decision process”, Journal of Consumer
Marketing, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 4-13.

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Hoefﬂer, S. and Keller, K. (2003), “The marketing advantages
of strong brands”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 10
No. 6, pp. 421-445.

Holden, S. and Lutz, R. (1992), “Ask not what the brand can
evoke; ask what can evoke the brand”, Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 101-107.

Hoyer, W. and Brown, S. (1990), “Effects of brand awareness
on choice for a common, repeat-purchase product”, Journal
of Consumer Research, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 141-148.

Kassarjian, H. (1981), “Low involvement: a second look”,

Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 31-34.

Keller, K. (2003), “Choosing brand elements to build brand
equity”,
in Craven, W. (Ed.), Building, Measuring, and
Managing Brand Equity, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, pp. 174-227.

Konrath, S. and Handy, F. (2018), “The development and
validation of the motives to donate scale”, Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 47 No. 2, pp. 347-375.

Kotler, P. and Levy, S. (1969), “Broadening the concept of
marketing”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 10-15.
Laroche, M., Kim, C. and Zhou, L. (1996), “brand familiarity
and conﬁdence as determinants of purchase intention: an
empirical test in a multiple Brand context”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 37 No. 2, pp. 15-120.

Laurent, G., Kapferer, J.N. and Roussel, F. (1995), “The
underlying structure of brand awareness scores”, Marketing
Science, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 170-179.

Lee, A. and Labroo, A. (2004), “The effect of conceptual and
perceptual ﬂuency on brand evaluation”, Journal
of
Marketing Research, Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 151-165.

Lee, J. and Shrum, L.J. (2012), “Conspicuous consumption
versus charitable behavior in response to social exclusion: a
differential needs explanation”, Journal of Consumer Research,
Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 530-544.

Loken, B. and Ward, J. (1990), “Alternative approaches to
typicality”, Journal of

understand the determinants of
Consumer Research, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 111-126.

Lynch, J. and Srull, T. (1982), “Memory and attentional
factors in consumer choice: concepts and research methods”,
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 18-37.

Lyons, M. and Passey, A. (2005), Australians Giving and
Volunteering 2004, Department of Families, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs, Australian Government,
Canberra.

Macdonald, E. and Sharp, B. (2000), “Brand awareness effects
repeat
on consumer decision making for a common,
purchase product: a replication”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 48 No. 1, pp. 5-15.

Meijer, M.M. (2009), “The effects of charity reputation on
charitable giving”, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 12
No. 1, pp. 33-42.

Mentzer, J.T., Flint, D.J. and Hult, G.T.M. (2001), “Logistics
service quality as a segment-customized process”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 65 No. 4, pp. 82-104.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M. and Siamagka, N. (2015a),
“An evaluation of nonproﬁt brand image: towards a better
conceptualization and measurement”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 68 No. 8, pp. 1657-1666.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M. and Siamagka, N. (2015b),
“Consumers’ intention to donate to two children’s charity

brands: a comparison of Barnardo’s and BBC children in
need”, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 24
No. 2, pp. 134-146.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M., Kadic-Maglajlic, S.,
Budhathoki, T. and Sarkar, S. (2019), “Does non-proﬁt
brand image mean the same across cultures? An exploratory
evaluation of non-proﬁt brand image in three countries”,
International Marketing Review, Vol. 1

Michel, G. and Rieunier, S. (2012), “Nonproﬁt brand image
and typicality inﬂuences on charitable giving”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 65 No. 5, pp. 701-707.

Micklewright, J. and Schnepf, S. (2009), “Who gives charitable
donations for overseas development?”, Journal of Social
Policy, Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 317-341.

Micklewright, J. and Wright, A. (2005), “Private donations for
international development”, in Atkinson, A. (Ed.), New
Sources of Development Finance, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp. 132-155.

Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994), Qualitative Data
Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook, 2nd Ed., SAGE
publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.

Miller, S. and Berry, L. (1998), “Brand salience versus brand
image: two theories of advertising effectiveness”, Journal of
Advertising Research, Vol. 38 No. 5, pp. 77-78.

Mittal, B. (1995), “A comparative analysis of four scales of
consumer involvement”, Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 12
No. 7, pp. 663-682.

Moran, W.T. (1990), “Brand presence and the perceptual
frame”, Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 30 No. 5,
pp. 9-16.

Mort, G.S., Weerawardena, J. and Williamson, B. (2007),
“Branding in the non-proﬁt context: the case of surf life
saving Australia”, Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ),
Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 108-119.

Nedungadi, P. (1990), “Recall and consumer consideration
sets: inﬂuencing choice without altering brand evaluations”,
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 263-276.
Neuman, W.L. (2006), Social Research Methods: Qualitative and

Quantitative Approaches, 6th ed., Pearson, Boston.
Paco, A., Rodrigues, R.G. and Rodrigues, L.

(2014),
“Branding in NGOs – its inﬂuence on intention to donate”,
Economics & Sociology, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 11-21.

Patel, J., Gadhavi, D. and Shukla, Y. (2017), “Consumers’
response to cause related marketing: moderating inﬂuence of
cause involvement and scepticism on attitude and purchase
intention”, International Review on Public and Nonproﬁt
Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 1-18.

Pritchard, M., Havitz, M. and Howard, D. (1999), “Analyzing
the commitment-loyalty link in service contexts”, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 333-348.
Reinartz, W., Haenlein, M. and Henseler, J. (2009), “An
empirical comparison of the efﬁcacy of covariance-based and
variance-based SEM”, International Journal of Research in
Marketing, Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 332-344.

Richie, R., Swami, S. and Weinberg, C. (1999), “A brand new
world for nonproﬁts”, International Journal of Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 26-42.

Richins, M. and Bloch, P. (1986), “After the new wears off: the
involvement”, Journal of

temporal context of product
Consumer Research, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 280-285.

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Roberts, J.H. and Lattin, J.M. (1997), “Review of research and
prospects for future insights”, Journal of Marketing Research,
Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 406-410.

Romaniuk,

J. and Sharp, B. (2003), “Measuring brand
testing quantity and quality”, Journal of
perceptions:
Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing, Vol. 11
No. 3, pp. 218-229.

Romaniuk, J. and Sharp, B. (2004), “Conceptualizing and
measuring Brand salience”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 4 No. 4,
pp. 327-342.

Romaniuk, J., Sharp, B. and Ehrenberg, A. (2007), “Evidence
concerning
brand
differentiation”, Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ),
Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 42.

importance

perceived

the

of

Romaniuk, J., Sharp, B., Paech, S. and Driesener, C. (2004),
“brand and advertising awareness: a replication and
extension of a known empirical generalisation”, Australasian
Marketing Journal (AMJ), Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 70-80.

Sääksjärvi, M., van den Hende, E., Mugge, R. and van
Peursem, N. (2015), “How exposure to logos and logo
varieties fosters brand prominence and freshness”, Journal of
Product & Brand Management, Vol. 24 No. 7, pp. 736-744.
Sargeant, A. (1999), “Charitable giving: towards a model of
donor behaviour”, Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 15
No. 4, pp. 215-238.

Sargeant, A. and Woodliffe, L. (2007a), “Building donor
loyalty: the antecedents and role of commitment in the
context of charity giving”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector
Marketing, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 47-68.

Sargeant, A. and Woodliffe, L. (2007b), “Gift giving: an
interdisciplinary review”, International Journal of Nonproﬁt
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 275-307.
Sargeant, A., Ford, J. and Hudson, J. (2008), “Charity brand
personality: the relationship with giving behaviour”, Nonproﬁt
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 468.

Sargeant, A., Ford, J.B. and West, D.C. (2006), “Perceptual
determinants of nonproﬁt giving behaviour”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 59 No. 2, pp. 155-165.

Sargeant, A., West, D. and Ford, J. (2004), “Does perception
matter?: an empirical analysis of donor behaviour”, The
Service Industries Journal, Vol. 24 No. 6, pp. 19-36.

Sharp, B. (2010), How Brands Grow, Oxford University Press,

Melbourne.

Sharp, B. and Dawes, J. (2001), “What is differentiation and
how does it work?”, Journal of Marketing Management,
Vol. 17 Nos 7/8, pp. 739-759.

Third Sector (2018), “2018 Most reputable charities revealed”,
available at: https://thirdsector.com.au/2018-most-reputable-
charities-revealed/ (assessed 29 September 2019).

Ulaga, W. and Eggert, A. (2006), “Value-based differentiation
in business relationships: gaining and sustaining key supplier
status”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 70 No. 1, pp. 119-136.
Van der Lans, R., Pieters, R. and Wedel, M. (2008),
“Competitive brand salience”, Marketing Science, Vol. 27
No. 5, pp. 922-931.

Van Kerckhove, A., Vermeir, I. and Geuens, M. (2011),
“Combined inﬂuence of
selective focus and decision
involvement on attitude–behavior consistency in a context of
memory-based decision making”, Psychology and Marketing,
Vol. 28 No. 6, pp. 539-560.

Venable, B.T., Rose, G.M., Bush, V.D. and Gilbert, F.W.
(2005), “The role of brand personality in charitable giving:
an assessment and validation”, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 295-312.

Vieceli, J. and Shaw, R. (2010), “Brand salience for fast-
moving consumer goods: an empirically based model”,
Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 26 Nos 13/14,
pp. 1218-1238.

Voeth, M. and Herbst, U. (2008), “The concept of brand
for advanced non-proﬁt
personality as an instrument
branding – an empirical analysis”, Journal of Nonproﬁt &
Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 71-97.

Vriens, M., Chen, S. and Schomaker, J. (2019), “The
evaluation of a brand association density metric”, Journal
of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 28 No. 1,
pp. 104-116.

Walsh, G. and Mitchell, V.W.

(2005), “Demographic
characteristics of consumers who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to decide”,
Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 23 No. 3,
Marketing
pp. 281-295.

Walsh, G., Evanschitzky, H. and Wunderlich, M. (2008),
“Identiﬁcation and analysis of moderator variables: investigating
the customer satisfaction-loyalty link”, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 42 Nos 9/10, pp. 977-1004.

Ward, L. (2001), “Poor give more generously than the rich”,
Society Guardian, available at www.guardian.co.uk/society/
2001/dec/21/voluntarysector.fundraising

Webb, D., Green, C. and Brashear, T. (2000), “Development
and validation of scales to measure attitudes inﬂuencing
monetary donations to charitable organizations”, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 299-309.
WVA (2010), Marketing Metrics Survey Internal WVA Study,

World Vision Australia, Melbourne.

Wymer, W. and Casidy, R. (2019), “Exploring brand
strength’s
dimensional
net
dynamics”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services,
Vol. 49, pp. 11-22.

nomological

and

its

Wymer, W.W., Knowles, P. and Gomes, R. (2006), Nonproﬁt
for Charitable and
Publications,

Marketing: Marketing Management
Nongovernmental
Thousand Oaks, CA.

Organizations,

Sage

Wymer, W.W., Gross, H. and Helmig, B. (2016), “Nonproﬁt
brand strength: what is it? How is it measured? What are its
outcomes?”, VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary
and Nonproﬁt Organizations, Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 1448-1471.
Year Book Australia (2012), Year Book Australia, Vol. 92,

Australian Bureau of Statistics, Canberra.

Zajonc, R. and Marcus, H. (1982), “Affective and cognitive
factors in preferences”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 9
No. 2, pp. 123-131.

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Appendix 1

Figure A1 Survey stimulus scenario

Appendix 2. Brand salience – prominence-related
attributes

Appendix 3

Figure A2 Brand salience – distinctiveness

(cid:5) When help is needed immediately.
(cid:5) When children are in danger.
(cid:5) When people have lost everything.
(cid:5) When long-term assistance is needed.
(cid:5) When people need to feel safe.
(cid:5) When those affected are very poor.
(cid:5) When basic services need to be restored (water, electricity

and shelter).

(cid:5) When people have no food.
(cid:5) When a large portion of the community is affected.
(cid:5) When those affected are in remote areas.

Branding for non-proﬁts
Gary Gregory, Liem Ngo and Ryan Miller

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Appendix 4. Charity brand attitudes – items
reflecting evaluative brand beliefs

(cid:5) This charity has a good reputation (Pr).
(cid:5) This charity appears professional (Pr).
(cid:5) This charity is an expert in the ﬁeld (Pr).
(cid:5) This charity knows a lot about dealing with need (Pr).
(cid:5) This charity is likely to have an impact on this cause (Pe).
(cid:5) This charity acts in the best interest of those in need (Pe).
(cid:5) This charity uses donations appropriately (Pe).
(cid:5) This charity has a good track record of delivery (Pe).
Pr = original professionalism dimension and Pe = original
performance dimension.

About the authors

Gary Gregory is Senior Lecturer in the School of Marketing
at the Business School of University of New South Wales,
Australia. His research interests are in branding, advertising
and cross-cultural consumer behavior. His work has been
published in Industrial Marketing Management, Journal of
International Marketing,
International Marketing Review,
International Journal of Advertising, Psychology and Marketing,
Journal of Business Research, Journal of Macromarketing, Journal

of Brand
of Product and Brand Management,
Management, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, amongst
others. Gary Gregory is the corresponding author and can be
contacted at: g.gregory@unsw.edu.au

Journal

Liem Ngo is an Associate Professor in the School of
Marketing at the Business School of University of New
South Wales, Australia. His research focuses on resources
and capabilities management
in relation to marketing,
innovation and entrepreneurship in cross-cultural contexts
focus on the Asia-Paciﬁc region. His
with particular
research has appeared in Journal of Product Innovation
Management, Long Range Planning, British Journal of
Management, Industrial Marketing Management, European
Journal of Marketing, Psychology and Marketing, Journal of
Marketing Management, among others.

Ryan Miller is currently Head of Customer Strategy and
Innovation at Anglicare Sydney, a large Australian not-for-
proﬁt organization supporting tens of thousands of people at
all stages of life. He has extensive experience in the ﬁelds of
product and service innovation, customer experience, brand
management, property development, market
research,
channel management and sales within the not-for-proﬁt
welfare, aged care, fast moving consumer goods and education
sectors.

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com