Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Business Research

Towards an identity-based brand equity model ☆
Christoph Burmann ⁎, Marc Jost-Benz, Nicola Riley

Chair of Innovative Brand Management, University of Bremen, Hochschulring 4, 28359 Bremen, Germany

A R T I C L E

I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:
Received 1 January 2008
Received in revised form 1 March 2008
Accepted 1 June 2008

Keywords:
Brand management
Brand equity
Brand strength
Identity
Image

1. Introduction

In the context of increasingly interchangeable product and service offerings, brands are crucial drivers for
product purchasing and usage decisions. Thus, they constitute a substantial intangible asset for most
companies. In order to maximize this asset, current research has developed various brand equity models.
However, the majority of these base their approach on an outside-in perspective by focusing on buyer
perceptions of the brand and their related buying behavior. An integrated approach including for example
employees as an important internal source of brand equity, has so far received little attention. The following
paper aims to close this gap by developing a new integrated brand equity model. This research explores the
sources of brand equity from both internal and external perspectives at the behavioral and ﬁnancial level in
order to achieve a more accurate and sustainable brand equity measurement approach.

© 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Since the late 1980s and the rise of the value-based management
philosophy, brand equity has developed into one of the key marketing
concepts throughout management theory and practice (Srinivasan
et al., 2005). The need for convincing evidence of brand-based equity
creation has led to the development of a wide range of different brand
equity models. To date probably more than 300 different models exist
worldwide (Amirkhizi, 2005). Most of these models focus on the
perspective of the buyer (e.g., Aaker and Joachimsthaler, 2000).
Following predominantly an outside-in approach, their authors argue
that brand equity originates from the brand knowledge of buyers
(Keller, 2003). However, an integrated brand equity approach which
includes an inside–out approach has so far been scarce. Nevertheless,
the creation of brand equity from inside the company is extremely
relevant: Not only do employees represent an important stakeholder
group (Joachimsthaler, 2002; Jones, 2005; Fiedler, 2007), they also
constitute the original source of brand equity.

This paper develops a new integrated approach, thus seeking to
improve the measurement of brand equity and thereby managerial
quality. The proposed model utilizes an identity-based brand manage-
ment approach as its starting point. This model incorporates external
as well as internal perspectives of brand equity creation. Behavioral
and ﬁnancial variables are integrated in order to facilitate both a

☆ The authors would like to especially thank Dr. Brian Bloch, two anonymous
reviewers and the journal editor for their suggestions and comments.

⁎ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: Burmann@uni-bremen.de (C. Burmann),

Jost-Benz@uni-bremen.de (M. Jost-Benz), Nicola.Riley@uni-bremen.de (N. Riley).

0148-2963/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2008.06.009

control system for brand management as well as an economic
evaluation of the brand as an intangible asset: ﬁrstly, the authors
describe the theoretical groundwork of the model (identity-based
brand management and the deﬁnition of brand equity). Secondly, they
introduce the identity-based brand equity model and ﬁnally the
discussion of future research and managerial implications follows.

2. Theoretical background

Despite the substantial body of brand equity models (Leone et al.,
2006), most brand equity models lack a sufﬁciently rigorous
theoretical basis (Raggio and Leone, 2006). In particular, commercial
approaches barely present a conceptual framework for explaining the
selection and weighting of their determinants. However, this basic
theoretical groundwork is necessary in order to prevent arbitrariness.
The proposed approach towards identity-based brand management
represents such a theoretical foundation for the brand equity model
presented in this paper.

2.1. The identity-based brand equity management framework

This framework relies on two dominant strategic management
paradigms: ﬁrstly, the market-based view, and the competence-based
view of the ﬁrm (Porter, 1998; Freiling, 2004; Teece et al., 1997).
Secondly, the brand identity philosophy of branding (Kapferer, 1992b;
Meffert, 1994; Schmitt and Pan, 1994; Upshaw, 1995; Aaker, 1996;
Meffert and Burmann, 1996). In contrast to the outside–in perspective
of various brand equity management approaches, this approach
importance to the inside–out perspective (De
attributes equal
Chernatony, 1999, 2006). Proponents of this approach argue that
brand identity precedes and therefore represents the basis for brand

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

391

image (Kapferer, 2004). Brand image approaches focus on the receiver
side of the brand and analyze how external stakeholders perceive the
brand. In contrast, brand identity approaches start their analyses with
the sender of brand communication. Hence they analyze the role of
internal stakeholder groups ﬁrst. (Burmann and Meffert, 2005). This
approach implies that active management of the brand is only
possible through the management of brand identity.

In this context various approaches have emerged which explore
the nature of brand identity (see Table 1). Despite minor conceptual
differences the authors agree on the direct inﬂuence of the identity of
a brand for the customer's perception (i.e., the brand image).

The second facet of the identity-based brand management approach
is the image of the brand. The image represents a multidimensional,
holistically perceived system of attitudes (Foscht and Swoboda, 2005)
and is based on buyer perceptions of brand-induced signals. These
associations result in a positive perception if the brand is able to satisfy
the functional and emotional needs of buyers. Current research presents
various approaches to the concept of brand image (Nandan, 2005).
Keller's (1993) four dimensions of brand image is one of the most
important and widely used models. This model
introduces brand
awareness, brand attributes and the brand-induced functional and
symbolic beneﬁts as the main pillars of brand image.

O'Shaughnessy (1987) summarizes the apparent interdependence
between the two constructs (brand identity and brand image) by
stating that “brand identity constitutes a necessary condition for
maintaining buyer's trust, which in turn is the basis for long-term
customer relationship and brand loyalty.”

Fig. 1. Brand strength categorization scheme.

2.2. Deﬁning identity-based brand equity

2.2.1. Potentially winning brands

The ongoing interaction of brand identity and brand image forms
the basis for the development of brand equity. In the present paper,
the authors deﬁne brand equity as present and future valorization
derived from internal and external brand-induced performance.
This deﬁnition includes three major categories: psychological
brand equity, behavioral brand equity and ﬁnancial brand equity.
The conceptual proximity of the ﬁrst two categories leads to a com-
prehensive and widely accepted term: brand strength (Owen, 1993;
Francois and MacLachlan, 1995; Walser, 2004). In general, brand
strength comprises the internal behavioral signiﬁcance of a brand for
internal stakeholders (e.g., employees) and the external behavioral
importance of a brand for its external stakeholders (Kranz, 2002;
TAIKN, 2006).

The following example demonstrates the relevance of this
deﬁnition of brand strength. In this context, internal and external
brand strength represent two dimensions of a four-ﬁeld-matrix, from
which four general brand strength types can be derived (see Fig. 1).

Table 1
Conceptualizations of brand identity

Author (s)

Kapferer, J.-N.

Year

1992

Aaker, D. A.

1996

De Chernatony, L.

1999

Meffert, H. and
Burmann, C.

2005
1996

Conceptualizations of brand identity
Hexagonal brand identity prism reﬂecting the brand's
physique, personality, culture, relationship, reﬂection,
self-image
Entity-based categorization with four dimensions:
the brand as a product reﬂects the product-related
associations; the brand as an organization focuses on
organizational associations; the brand as a person
includes the brand personality; the brand as a symbol
includes the visual imagery, metaphors and brand
heritage
Six brand identity dimensions: brand personality,
culture and relationship, vision, brand positioning,
the brand presentation
Six brand identity dimensions: heritage,
organizational capabilities, values, personality,
vision and core offering

Brands with a high level of internal, but low level of external brand
strength prevail in this brand strength category. This domain often
represents the starting point for companies creating brand equity. The
attitudes and behaviors of highly brand-committed employees
(Burmann and Zeplin, 2005) are not reﬂected on the external market
side, hence impacting on the brand's present and future equity de-
velopment in a negative way. A prominent example is the Apple brand
in its early stages. Although equipped with highly brand-committed
employees the company lacked broad market success due to the
market dominance of Microsoft. Therefore, Apple was a brand with
considerable internal substance but limited market acceptance. How-
ever, the introduction of the iPod enabled Apple to circumvent these
market barriers and obtain broader market success.

2.2.2. Champion brands

This category contains brands exhibiting high levels on both
internal and external brand strength dimensions. These brands reveal
considerable internal substance. Furthermore, buyers exhibit an
attractive mental brand image. Hence the brand offers outperforming
growth potential. Starbucks represented a prominent example for this
category: Starbucks staff showed a high level of brand commitment
and brand citizenship behavior and the market exhibited a high level
of external brand strength. One major reason for the past success was
likely to result from the thorough selection and intense training of
Starbuck baristas. This training formed the basis for external brand
acceptance and the related growth of the brand.

2.2.3. Endangered brands

This brand category represents brands with a low level of internal
strength, but a (still) high level of external strength. From an external
perspective, these brands tend to be strong and well accepted, but the
brand's internal substance has been severely damaged. Low levels of
internal brand strength indicate that employees exhibit only a low
level of brand commitment and thus little brand citizenship behavior
(Burmann and Zeplin, 2005). Deutsche Telekom, for instance, shows
low levels of market-orientation, brand commitment and brand
citizenship behavior. Furthermore, several decisions of the new CEO

392

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

intensiﬁed the severe internal problems with the staff resulting in a
strike of several months in 2007. Nevertheless, compared to compet-
ing brands Deutsche Telekom's brand image remains fairly strong
(BBDO, 2005). In the long-term this eroded internal substance is likely
to lead to weak external brand strength, hence diminishing customer
retention rates and negatively affecting ﬁnancial results.

2.2.4. Loser brands

Here internal brand weakness and low levels of external brand
strength result in brands with a hollowed substance and limited brand
acceptance in the market. This category offers almost no future
growth potential. Older brands with a high level of inconsistency
between communicated and delivered product or service beneﬁts,
belong to this category. However, the British retail chain Marks &
Spencer proves that even in this desperate situation a turnaround is
possible (Rose, 2007). The company increasingly suffered under the
food and clothing retail competition which negatively affected both
internal and external brand strength (e.g., service quality). The
corporate turnaround strategy therefore focused—besides necessary
improvements in the product portfolio and store design—on M&S'
service offering. They increased efforts in employee training and
succeeded in improving employees' brand commitment and citizen-
ship behavior which in turn also signiﬁcantly strengthened the
external brand image.

In conclusion, the matrix demonstrates that existing customer-
centric brand strength deﬁnitions and approaches tend to either over-
or underestimate overall brand strength, as they neglect the internal
dimension. However, the matrix presented reﬂects an idealized
environment in which the two dimensions of internal and external
brand strength are independent. In practice, internal and external
brand strength inﬂuence each other, a fact which the authors seek +to
incorporate in the design of the model.

2.3. The identity-based brand equity model

The core concept underlying the proposed model reﬂects the need
for an integrated brand equity approach, since academia and
management call
for fewer, but more integrated measurements
(Clark, 1999). Following this challenge, the proposed model represents
a comprehensive and contemporary brand equity instrument suitable
for the diagnosis, management and economic valuation of many
different corporate, product and service brands. The integrated
assessment of internal and external brand strength should improve
the diagnosis and quality of brand management. The potential to

directly inﬂuence the original source of brand strength (the company's
employees) is unique. In addition, the current model improves the
quality of economic valuation as it fulﬁlls all requirements for
monetary brand valuation (Brand Valuation Forum, 2006) and also
incorporates present as well as future brand equity.

The integration of the model incorporates internal and external
perspectives (Ambler, 2003; Jones, 2005) as well as behavioral and
ﬁnancial determinants (Kriegbaum, 1998). As a neo-behavioral
construct, the authors deﬁne internal brand strength through an
attitudinal and a behavioral component. The former represents the
internalization of brand identity by employees, the latter the actual
employee behavior towards the brand. Analogously, external brand
strength encompasses brand attitudes of buyers (brand image), and
the communication and purchasing behavior relevant to the brand in
question. These factors constitute the behavioral basis for the
assessment of brand equity on a ﬁnancial level. This model considers
two interrelated ﬁnancial aspects: Firstly, the ﬁnancial development
of the brand during the conventional course of business and secondly
the potential growth opportunities based on brand extensions and
other growth strategies. The resulting model structure is detailed in
Fig. 2.

2.4. Assessment of behavioral brand strength

A customer segmentation approach forms the basis for this model
(stage 1.1). This approach stems from product, market and contribu-
tion margin-based criteria and leads to homogenous customer value
segments. This procedure is necessary, since customer attitudes,
buying behavior and especially customer lifetime values (Rust et al.,
2004) are signiﬁcantly different to one another in the respective
customer segments. Furthermore, this approach responds to calls for
the development of an integrated customer equity and brand equity
approach (Keiningham et al., 2005; Burmann and Jost-Benz, 2005;
Leone et al., 2006). Some brand equity models have presented
differentiations of customer segments: For example the TNS Emnid
Conversion Model (Sander, Schefﬂer and Zütphen, 2004) assesses
brand strength separately. This model is based on different customer
lifetime values that comprise current and future cash ﬂows of the
customers.

In addition to the customer value segments, the authors also
consider market and employee information as relevant and hence
they are implemented in the identity-based brand equity model.
Employees are a constituent part of the identity-based brand equity.
However, the authors argue that a detailed segmentation in

Fig. 2. Identity-based brand equity model.

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

393

accordance to hierarchy or seniority can be left out in order to reduce
the model's complexity.
In this context, the relevance of brand
building is not limited to personnel who are in direct contact with
customers. Deﬁned as ‘part-time marketers’ staff who do not directly
interact with customers indirectly inﬂuence the customer's brand
experience by providing the company's product and/or service quality
(Gummesson, 1987).

Section 1.2 in Fig. 2 represents a major challenge. So far, no other
brand equity model effectively integrates both the internal and
external brand strength perspectives. The authors propose to model
the inﬂuence of internal brand strength on the external strength
of the brand as a moderating variable. This approach can be
justiﬁed on the grounds that the discounted cash ﬂows of the
brand directly relate to the buying process, to which internal brand
strength contributes.

Contrary to the external brand strength, the measurement of
internal brand strength has received only limited attention. Burmann
and Zeplin (2005) develop a holistic model in order to assess the
psychological and behavioral brand effects on employees. Their work
utilizes brand identity elements as illustrated in Fig. 3.

The model proposes to measure internal brand strength via two
interrelated constructs: The ﬁrst, brand citizenship behavior, explores
the behavioral process employees engage in, that is what it means for
employees to ‘live the brand’. The second, brand commitment,
explores the psychological processes which lead employees to
practice brand citizenship behavior. The authors deﬁne this construct
as the extent to which an employee is attached to the brand (Burmann
and Zeplin, 2005).

According to O'Reilly and Chatman (1986) two dimensions need to

be considered in this context:

• The identiﬁcation with the identity of the brand. This refers to an
individual's acceptance of social inﬂuences which lead to a feeling of
belonging to a group. This in turn determines the brand experience.
• The internalization of the identity of the brand. This describes the
integration of the identity of the brand into the individual's self-
concept. The highest value achievable would be the perfect ﬁt
between brand identity and personal identity.

Due to the fact that psychological attachment and actual behavior
might deviate under various circumstances the authors recommend

the assessment of both constructs. On a behavioral basis three
determinants reﬂect brand citizenship behavior:

• Helping behavior reﬂects the employee's positive attitude towards
his work, his empathy and responsiveness towards other employees
as well as customers of the brand.

• Brand enthusiasm denotes the employee's propensity of taking
initiatives, outside the line of duty in brand-related

additional
matters.

• Self-development deﬁnes the employee's willingness to continuously

enhance brand-related knowledge and skills.

The measures of brand commitment and brand citizenship
behavior are aggregated into an internal brand strength index. At
‘level zero’ the index represents the industry average of internal brand
strength.

A multitude of research has proposed various assessments of
external brand strength. At least three distinct approaches have
emerged (Walser, 2004). The ﬁrst category focuses on brand knowl-
edge (Keller, 2003). This group perceives brand strength as a set of
associations which derive from different customer interactions
(Srivastava and Shocker, 1991; Krishnan, 1996). The level of brand
strength therefore depends on the quantity and quality of brand
associations. The second category uses brand beneﬁts as its starting
point (Farquhar, 1990; Baldinger, 1990; Aaker, 1991; Simon and
Sullivan, 1993; Rangaswamy et al., 1993): The level of beneﬁt provided
to buyers by the brand corresponds to the amount of brand strength
ascribed to the brand. The third category focuses on (long-term) brand
preferences, that is the relative attractiveness of a brand compared to
its competitors (Francois and MacLachlan, 1995; Park and Srinivasan,
1994). This approach utilizes measurements of the long-term brand–
buyer relationship.

All three approaches include important aspects of external brand
strength and several commercial brand equity models utilize aspects
of them (e.g., Interbrand, 2001; Musiol et al., 2004; Riesenbeck and
Perrey, 2006). Since a strong and prevalent position in the buyer's
knowledge base is not sufﬁcient for a strong brand, its beneﬁts must
be differentiating and relevant to purchase decisions. Only if these
conditions apply, can long-term preferences for the brand emerge.
Therefore, in accordance with the identity-based brand model, the
measurement of external brand strength is further classiﬁed into three

Fig. 3. Internal brand strength conceptualization.

394

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

Fig. 4. External brand strength conceptualization.

categories of knowledge-, beneﬁt- and preference-oriented measures
as detailed in Fig. 4.

Brand awareness falls into the class of knowledge-oriented measures
and as such forms the measurement basis of external brand strength.
This concept reﬂects the ability of the buyer to identify and correctly
classify a brand to a product category. Also, from an internal perspective,
brand awareness is highly relevant for establishing brand strength. A
high level of brand awareness may have a positive impact on an
employee's commitment to a brand, as a well-known brand is likely to
be perceived more positively than an unknown brand. This applies not
only to buyers, but also to employees, representing stability and
trustworthiness. Furthermore, brand awareness might leverage the
inﬂuence of internal brand strength on external brand strength. The
demonstration of brand commitment and citizenship behavior is easier
in cases where the brand is already known in the market, since the
explanation of the brand's business proposition requires less effort.
However, brand awareness itself is not sufﬁcient to create internal or
external brand strength. Rather brand awareness represents a necessary
condition for brand strength since the positive or negative quality of
brand strength is determined by the other dimensions.

Beneﬁt-oriented external brand strength measures are closely
related to the identity-based brand equity model, because they explicitly
reﬂect the necessity to assess functional and symbolic brand beneﬁt
associations. In particular, the authors propose three indicators:

• Brand beneﬁt clarity: this rather new, but nevertheless important
construct derives from the ﬁndings of the consistency theory
(Abelson and Rosenberg, 1958), where a clear brand image
necessitates coherence and integration of the underlying brand
associations.

• Perceived brand quality: Brand beneﬁt clarity itself is not sufﬁcient
for the creation and management of a strong brand, as the buyer's
positive or negative perception of a brand's quality needs to be
measured. This widely accepted indicator entails the level of brand
performance capabilities in the buyer's mind. Therefore, the
indicator can relate primarily to the individual brand attribute
associations. This variable addresses functional and symbolic brand
beneﬁt associations, since quality itself does not represent an end in
itself, but rather a mean to the end of satisfying buyers' needs. The
authors suggest a rather generic operationalization of this item
using a single-attribute quality measure.

• Brand beneﬁt uniqueness: Even a clear and positively perceived brand
would not sufﬁciently generate brand strength, if the brand only
reached parity with its competition (Iyer and Muncy, 2005).

‘Uniqueness’ refers to the extent to which a brand is perceived to
be different from competitors' brands (Netemeyer et al., 2004). In
this context, the self-concept of the buyer is signiﬁcant. The need to
differentiate oneself from other buyers strongly inﬂuences purchase
and usage decisions (Vignoles et al., 2000). The pursuit of
uniqueness through consumption corresponds to the renewal of
the individual's self-conception and his or her social
image.
Consequently, buyers prefer brands which reﬂect and support
their own uniqueness. This factor can be perceived as an expression
of the symbolic beneﬁt associations and hence represent a major
construct within external brand strength assessment (Aaker, 1996;
Agarwal and Rao, 1996). Hence, the authors suggest a generic
operationalization of this item. The third category of external brand
strength measurement reﬂects (long-term) brand preference. This
part delivers relevant information on the sustainability of brand
strength. In the proposed model brand sympathy and brand trust
represent the two indicators for brand loyalty (Chaudhuri and
Holbrook, 2001).

• Brand sympathy: This is a measure of the level of positive brand
perception. In the context of the identity-based brand management
model, this item is highly relevant, since brand sympathy indicates
the interaction between brand identity and brand image. A high
level of brand sympathy reﬂects a close ﬁt between buyer brand
image perception and the company's communicated brand identity.
• Brand trust: This item deﬁnes the willingness of a buyer to rely on
the ability of a brand to fulﬁll the communicated functions and
attributes (Moorman et al., 1992; Morgan and Hunt, 1994). The
concept complements brand sympathy, since the former covers
spontaneous and immediate brand preference, whereas the latter
tends to be a result of an extensive cognitive evaluation process
(Doney and Cannon, 1997).

The model assesses the above mentioned external brand strength
indicators in comparison to the brand's competitors and aggregates
them into an external brand strength index.

In order to measure the overall brand strength the external and
internal brand strength must be assimilated (stage 1.3) based on
balance theory (Heider, 1958), which delivered the conceptual basis
for cognitive dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957) and congruence
theory (Tannenbaum, 1967). The central element of balance theory is a
triangular system between an object and two reference groups, which
can either be in a balanced or unbalanced state. A system is deﬁned as
balanced when both reference groups show the same level of attitudes
and behavior towards the object. A system is unbalanced if positive or

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

395

negative deviations occur. In order to achieve system, capable of
existing in the long-term, an unbalanced status needs to be counter-
balanced. Balance theory can be applied to internal and external
stakeholder groups (Homburg and Stock, 2005), that is internal and
external brand strength must balance in order to maintain the long-
term system of the brand. Based on the ‘mere exposure’ effect
(Obermiller, 1985), which implies that employees are constantly
inﬂuenced by the brand, the authors assume that the dominant
balancing inﬂuence derives from the internal side.

However, this balancing effect depends on the level of interaction
between employees and customers: the higher the interaction the
faster the balancing effect from internal to external brand strength
and vice versa. The model's conceptualization considers this aspect
through the moderating effect of the intensity of the interaction,
which ultimately translates into overall brand strength.

2.5. Assessment of ﬁnancial brand equity

Based on the assessed behavioral brand strength its ﬁnancial
impact represents the second essential component of the identity
based brand equity model, for which the authors choose Rappaport's
(1986) widely accepted cash ﬂow model. Based on this model the
inﬂuence of behavioral brand strength on ﬁnancial brand equity is
described as threefold. Firstly, brand strength inﬂuences the current
cash ﬂows of a company (i.e., the stronger a brand the higher the
current brand-induced cash ﬂows). Secondly, brand strength also
triggers future cash ﬂows (i.e., the stronger the brand the higher future
cash ﬂows). Thirdly, the level of brand strength also inﬂuences the risk
rate applied for the calculation of the discounted brand-induced cash
ﬂow model (i.e., the stronger the brand the lower the risk-adjusted
rate to discount brand-induced cash ﬂows).

In order to isolate current brand-induced cash ﬂows (stage 2.1)
different approaches have emerged which are classiﬁed into two
dominant schools of thought: The ﬁrst assumes that a brand generates
a speciﬁc share of purchase decisions (Stucky, 2004; Riesenbeck and
Perrey, 2005). However, this assumption reﬂects a strongly limited
understanding of the brand, because this approach reduces brands to
an instrument of communication. The other school of thought
perceives the brand as a holistic bundle of beneﬁts which cannot be
separated from other determinants of purchase decisions (e.g., a
Porsche motor car without the logo still reﬂects Porsche brand
strength due to its speciﬁc design, product quality, road handling etc.).
The major advantage of the latter approach is that a direct
transformation of behavioral brand strength into ﬁnancial brand
equity is not required and thus potential subjective inﬂuences on
deﬁning brand shares are minimized. Therefore the authors follow the
latter school of thought and hence recommend adjusting current cash
ﬂows by means of a two-step residual-oriented cash ﬂow approach:
Firstly, the company's overall cash ﬂows are reduced by cash ﬂows
which are not related to the evaluated brand (i.e., cash ﬂows of other
branded or unbranded products or services). Since the results still
include speciﬁc cash ﬂows of assets which contribute to the brand and
which are necessary in order to maintain the brand's cash ﬂows, the
authors recommend to set contributory asset charges (according to
the multi-period excess earnings method). For this purpose the fair
values of the required supporting assets are evaluated. For example,
the brand evaluation of Beck's, a leading beer brand of the InBev brand
portfolio, entailed ﬁrstly the determination of cash ﬂows attributable
to the Beck's brand (i.e., they excluded cash ﬂows of other brands of
the portfolio or of unbranded semi-manufactured products). Secondly,
management subtracted contributory asset charges of supporting
assets such as properties or machinery from the results.

In addition to current brand-induced cash ﬂows the prognosis of
future brand-induced cash ﬂows represents the second stage of the
ﬁnancial brand equity assessment (stage 2.2). This procedure is not
only useful for the purpose of mergers and acquisitions, in which the

future development of the brand represents an important aspect of
the purchase price. The results are also relevant for brand steering
purposes (e.g., budget allocations). As a matter of fact the inherent
brand strength is dynamic. Hence the authors assume that brand
strength develops over time through the assimilation of internal and
external brand strength (stage 1.3). Hence the result of the assimilated
brand strength leads to a positive or negative adjustment of future
brand-induced cash ﬂows. As a consequence, this adjustment needs to
be considered in the prognosis process, especially in the analysis of the
business plan and the analysis of market and competitor data.
Furthermore, the authors recommend the use of expert interviews
in order to validate forecasts.

The discount rate for the calculation of the present value of current
and future cash ﬂows must reﬂect the future risk determined by
market and brand-speciﬁc risk factors (stage 2.3). The latter is
necessary since the volatility of brand-driven cash ﬂows decreases
with increasing brand strength. Although a precise assessment of the
useful lifetime of a brand is hardly possible, the reﬂection in the
discounted cash ﬂows calculation offers a quantitative estimate of the
brand's lifetime based on publicly available information of relevant
benchmarks.

In its recently published brand valuation guideline, the Brand
Valuation Forum (2006), the leading initiative for the standardization
of brand equity measurement in Germany, considers the discounted
cash ﬂow model as the preferred approach for ﬁnancial brand equity
assessment. In its analysis the Forum calls for the isolation of brand-
driven cash ﬂows, the calculation of an appropriate discount rate and a
scientiﬁc determination of the expected useful lifespan of the brand.
The identity-based brand equity model meets all these requirements:
The cash ﬂows are explicitly brand-driven and the discount rate
includes the inﬂuence of brand strength. Although a precise assess-
ment of the useful lifespan of the brand is seldom possible (Meffert
and Burmann, 1999), the discounted cash ﬂow calculation can at least
be based on publicly available information of relevant benchmarks
and thereby create a proxy for a quantitative estimation of the lifespan
of the brand.

2.6. Assessment of potential brand equity

A comprehensive brand equity measurement reﬂects the current
development of a brand, but also its opportunities. As an example of
various brand equity models already implementing this particular
aspect, (Musiol et al., 2004) consider the development of products,
distribution channels and target groups (amongst others) in order to
identify the so-called brand future score. Unfortunately, this approach
lacks transparency in the selection and weighting of its determinants.
By contrast, Maul and Mussler (2004) propose a transparent model
which integrates the strategic options of a brand based on its
extension capabilities. These extension capabilities are expressed by
a brand stretching score (Völckner and Sattler, 2006). This score
represents the success probability of brand extensions and is
translated into a value-based market share. By combining this value-
based market share with previously estimated market potentials one
can calculate the potential equity of the brand. Following this line of
argument, the identity-based brand equity model ﬁrstly assesses the
future market potential for previously deﬁned market segments (stage
3.1). For this purpose secondary market data or expert interviews
should be undertaken. Once one has identiﬁed the market potentials,
brand extension success rates can be assessed for speciﬁc market
scenarios (stage 3.2). At this stage internal and external brand strength
represent important determinants. The rate is transferred in a market
share estimation which in combination with the estimated market
potential leads to the potential brand equity.

In the ﬁnal stage, the ﬁnancial and potential brand equities are
synthesized into total brand equity. This aggregated measurement
ensures both the economic evaluation and the overall diagnosis and

396

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

steering of the brand. Furthermore, the results derived from the
components of brand strength, speciﬁcally the results of internal and
external brand strength, can support brand managers in their daily
operations. Therefore, a separation in delivering single intermediate
outputs of the brand equity model to the relevant management
functions is worthwhile, since the speciﬁc needs vary across different
hierarchy levels.

aspect should be emphasized and promoted, as internal brand
strength represents the basis for external brand strength and thus
company success. Management should focus on the brand concep-
tualization (which is predominantly still designed for external
stakeholder groups) as well as its consistent and continuous
implementation amongst internal stakeholder groups. The identity-
based brand equity model can assist in diagnosing the success of the
internal implementation of the brand.

3. Discussion

3.1. Implications for research

Based on the theoretical background of the identity-based brand
management approach, this paper proposes a new and unique
integrated brand equity model which offers several advantages.
First, most established models use past information from which they
derive prognoses. However, only the integration of an internal
perspective through the employee's attachment to the brand enables
an accurate assessment of the entire, future-oriented brand equity.
Employees are capable of anticipating positive or negative tendencies
of internal and external developments at an early stage. Thus, this
information increases both the timeliness and validity of brand equity
measurements. Secondly, in the majority of existing models, brand
image constitutes the basis of evaluation. Unfortunately, brand
managers cannot directly access nor control the image of the brand.
In this context, Kapferer (1992a) deﬁnes brand image as “a construct
of acceptance”, hence brand image stems from decoding and
interpreting brand signals. In contrast, brand identity represents a
concept of sender (Kapferer, 1992a) and can be managed directly.
Thirdly, the potential and future options of a brand have so far
received little attention (Sattler, 2005). However, a realistic estimation
of the future brand equity needs to integrate the underlying brand
strength. In this context, internal and external brand strength can
be seen as limiting or accelerating factors for the brand`s growth
potential.

3.2. Managerial Implications

The model's practicability represents a key advantage of the
identity-based brand equity model. The authors have had the
in practice in a
opportunity to apply and validate their model
consultancy project in a divisional brand of a leading global
technology corporation. This brand equity assessment is challenging
for several reasons: Throughout the past years, the global technology
market has shown positive volume development and slightly
decreasing value trends. Consequently, the product quality and
competition within the market reached a very high level. Hence,
differentiation from competition on product quality alone became
increasingly hard, whereas the brand increasingly evolved as a major
driver of success.

A broad selection of qualitative and quantitative data created a
thorough ground for testing the proposed identity-based brand equity
model. The preliminary results of the study indicate that this model
can be well applied in daily operations. Not only does this approach
generate a realistic ﬁnancial brand equity value (which was compared
with another already implemented brand equity model by Future-
Brand), but its results on a (behavioral) brand strength level also
generated immediate recommendations for strategic and operative
brand managers. As a result, the management board agreed on adding
brand commitment measurements to its annual management objec-
tives (i.e., a targeted brand commitment increase of 6.7% in the ﬁrst
and 8.6% in the following year).

As a general managerial implication, the identity-based brand
equity model emphasizes the relevance of internal brand strength in
strategic and operative brand management. This aspect tends to
receive little attention by management today. However this very

3.3. Limitations and future research

The proposed model is applicable to different conditions. Despite
the widely held assumption that a differentiation between internal
and external brand strength might only be useful in a service industry
context, the proposed model
is equally applicable in a product
environment, as brand identity always impacts upon brand image
regardless of the company's offering. However, this hypothesis should
be empirically tested in different market contexts as well as non-proﬁt
environments in order to provide the model with scientiﬁc rigor.

References

Aaker David A. Managing brand equity: capitalizing on the value of a brand name. New

York, NY: The Free Press; 1991.

Aaker David A. Building strong brands. New York, NY: The Free Press; 1996.
Aaker David A, Erich J. Brand leadership. New York, NY: The Free Press; 2000.
Abelson Robert P, Rosenberg Milton. Symbolic psycho logic: a model of attitudinal

cognition. Behav Sci 1958;3(1):1–13.

Agarwal Manoj K, Rao Vithala R. An empirical comparison of consumer-based measures

of brand equity. Mark Lett 1996;7(1):237–47.

Ambler Tim. Marketing and the bottom line: the marketing metrics to pump up cash

ﬂow. 2. ed. London: FT Prentice Hall; 2003.

Amirkhizi Mehrdad. Suche nach der Weltformel. Horizont 2005;6:3–4.
Baldinger Allan L. Deﬁning and applying the brand equity concept: why the researcher

should care. J Advert Res 1990;30:RC-2–5 (June/July).

Brand Valuation Forum; 10 Grundsätze zur monetären Markenbewertung; http://www.
markenverband.de//_Rainbow/documents/PM%20Brand%20Valutaion%20Forum%
2023.11.2006.pdf; 23.11.2006.

Burmann, Christoph, Jost-Benz, Marc. Brand equity management vs. customer equity
management? Zur Integration zweier Managementkonzepte—Arbeitspapier No. 19
des Lehrstuhls für Innovatives Markenmanagement der Universität Bremen.
Bremen, 2005.

Burmann Christoph, Meffert Heribert. Theoretisches Grundkonzept der identitätsor-
ientierten Markenführung. In: Meffert Heribert, Burmann Christoph, Koers Martin,
editors. Markenmanagement. Identitätsorientierte Markenführung und praktische
Umsetzung, 2. Ed.Wiesbaden: Gabler; 2005. p. 37–72.

Burmann Christoph, Zeplin Sabrina. Building brand commitment: a behavioral
approach to internal brand management. J Brand Manag 2005;12:279–300 (April).
Chaudhuri Arjun, Holbrook Morris B. The chain of effects from brand trust and brand affect
to brand performance: the role of brand loyalty. J Market 2001;65(April):81–93.
Clark Bruce H. Marketing performance measures: history and interrelationships.

J Market Manag 1999;15:711–32 (November).

De Chernatony Leslie. Brand management through narrowing the gap between brand

identity and brand reputation. J Market Manag 1999;15(1–3):157–79.

De Chernatony Leslie. From brand vision to brand evaluation. The strategic process of
growing and strengthening brands. 2. ed. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2006.
Doney Patricia M, Cannon Joseph P. An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–

seller relationships. J Market 1997;61:35–51 (April).

Farquhar Peter H. Managing brand equity. J Advert Res 1990:RC-7–RC-12 (August/

September).

Festinger Leon. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press; 1957.
Fiedler, Lars, Stakeholderspeziﬁsche Wirkung von Corporate Brands: Ein Modell zur
integrierten Evaluation und Steuerung von Unternehmensmarken auf netzwerk-
und verhaltens-theoretischer Basis. Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitäts-Verlag,
2007.

Foscht Thomas, Swoboda Bernhard. Käuferverhalten: Grundlagen—Perspektiven—

Anwendungen. 2. ed. Wiesbaden: Gabler; 2005.

Francois Pierre, MacLachlan Douglas L. Ecological validation of alternative customer-

based brand strength measures. Int J Res Market 1995;12:321–32.

Freiling Jörg. A competence-based theory of the ﬁrm. Manag Rev 2004;15(1):27–51.
Gummesson Evert. The new marketing—developing long-term interactive relation-

ships. Long Range Plan 1987;20(4):10–20.

Heider Fritz. The psychology of interpersonal relations. 2. ed. London: Wiley; 1958.
Homburg Christian, Stock Ruth. Exploring the conditions under which salesperson work
satisfaction can lead to customer satisfaction. Psychol Market 2005;22(5):292–420.
Interbrand. Interbrand world's most valuable brand's. Methodology; 2001. http://www.

brandchannel.com/images/home/ranking_methodology.pdf; 15.12.04.

Iyer Rajesh, Muncy James A. The role of brand parity in developing loyal customers.

J Advert Res 2005;45:222–8 (June).

C. Burmann et al. / Journal of Business Research 62 (2009) 390–397

397

Joachimsthaler Erich. Mitarbeiter: Die vergessene Zielgruppe für Markenerfolge.

Absatzwirtschaft 2002;11:28–34.

Jones Richard. Finding sources of brand value: developing a stakeholder model of brand

equity. J Brand Manag 2005;13(1):10–32.

Kapferer Jean-Noël. Die Marke—Kapital des Unternehmens. Landsberg/Lech: Verlag

Moderne Industrie; 1992a.

Owen Steward. The landor imagepower survey: a global assessment of brand strength. In:
Aaker David A, Biel Alexander L, editors. Brand Equity and Advertising; 1993. p. 11–30.
Hillsdale (N.J.).

Park Chan Su, Srinivasan V. A survey-based method for measuring and understanding
brand equity and its extendability. J Market Res 1994;31:271–88 (May 1994).
Porter Michael E. Competitive advantage: creating and sustaining superior performance.

Kapferer Jean-Noël. Strategic brand management: new approaches to creating and

New York: Free Press; 1998.

evaluating brand equity. London: Kogan Page; 1992b.

Kapferer Jean-Noël. The new strategic brand management: creating and sustaining

brand equity long term. 3. ed. London: Kogan Page; 2004.

Keiningham Timothy L, Aksoy Lerzan, Perkins-Munn Tiffany, Vavra Terry G. The brand–

customer connection. Market Manag 2005;14:33–47 (July/August).

Raggio Randle, Leone Robert P. The theoretical separation of brand equity and brand
value: managerial implications for strategic planning. J Brand Manag 2006;14(5):
380–95.

Rangaswamy Arvind, Burke Raymond R, Oliva Terence A. Brand equity and the extendibility

of brand names. Int J Res Market 1993;10(1):61–75.

Keller Kevin Lane. Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand

Rappaport Alfred. Creating shareholder value: the new standard for business

equity. J Market 1993;57:1–22 (January).

performance. 14. ed. New York: Free Press u.a.; 1986.

Keller Kevin Lane. Strategic brand management. 2. ed. New Jersey: Upper Saddle River;

Riesenbeck Hajo, Perrey Jesko. Mega-Macht Marke. Erfolg messen, machen, managen. 2.

2003.

Kranz Marcel. Markenbewertung. Bestandsaufnahme und kritische Würdigung. In:
Meffert Heribert, Burmann Christoph, Koers Martin, editors. Markenmanagement.
Wiesbaden: Gabler; 2002. p. 429–58.

Kriegbaum Catharina. Valuation of brands—a critical comparison of different methods.

Dresd Beitr Betr.wirtsch.lehre 1998;98(13):1–26.

Krishnan H Shanker. Characteristics of memory associations: a customer-based brand

equity perspective. Int J Res Market 1996;13:389–405.

Leone Robert P, Rao Vithala R, Keller Kevin L, Luo Anita Man, McAllister Leigh, Srivastava
Rajenda. Linking brand equity to customer equity. J Serv Res 2006;9(2):125–38.
Maul K-H, Mussler Sven. ABV—advanced brand valuation. In: Schimansky Alexander,
editor. Der Wert der Marke, Markenbewertungsverfahren für ein erfolgreiches
Markenmanagement. München: Vahlen; 2004. p. 58–83.

Meffert Heribert. Markenführung in der Bewährungsprobe. Markenartikel 1994;56(12):

478–81.

Meffert Heribert, Burmann Christoph. Identitätsorientierte Markenführung—Grundlage
für das Management von Markenportfolios, Arbeitspapier. Münster, vol. 100. ; 1996.
Meffert Heribert, Burmann Christoph. Abnutzbarkeit und Nutzugsdauer von Marken.

Jahrb Absatz-Verbrauchsforsch 1999;45(3):244–63.

Moorman Christine, Zaltman Gerald, Deshpande Rohit. Relationships between
providers and users of market research: the dynamics of trust within and between
organizations. J Market Res 1992;29(3):314–28.

Morgan Robert, Hunt Shelby. The commitment–trust theory of relationship marketing.

J Market 1994;58(July):20–38.

Musiol Karl Georg, Berens Harald, Spannagl Johannes, Biesalski Alexander. Icon Brand
Navigator und Brand Rating für eine holistische Markenführung. In: Schimansky
Alexander, editor. Der Wert der Marke, Markenbewertungsverfahren für ein
erfolgreiches Markenmanagement. München: Vahlen; 2004. p. 370–99.

Nandan Shiva. An exploration of the brand identity–brand image linkage: a

communications perspective. J Brand Manag 2005;12(4):264–78.

Netemeyer RG, Krishnan Balaji, Pullig Chris, Wang Guangping, Yagci Mehmet, Dean
Dwane, et al. Developing and validating measures of facets of customer-based
brand equity. J Bus Res 2004;57(2):209–24.

O'Reilly Charles A, Chatman Jennifer A. Organizational commitment and psychological
identiﬁcation, and internalization on

attachment: the effects of compliance,
prosocial behavior. J Appl Psychol 1986;71(3):492–9.

O'Shaughnessy John. Why people buy. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1987.
Obermiller C. Varieties of mere exposure: the effects of processing style of repetition on

affective response. J Consum Res 1985;12:17–30 (June).

ed. Wien: Redline Wirtschaft bei ueberreuter; 2005.

Riesenbeck Hajo, Perrey Jesko. Power brands. measuring, making and managing brand

success. Wien: Redline Wirtschaft bei ueberreuter; 2006.

Rose Stuart. Die Renaissance von Marks & Spencer. Harvard Bus Manag 2007;29:112–21

(June).

Rust Roland T, Lemon Katherine N, Zeithaml Valarie A. Return on marketing: using
customer equity to focus marketing strategy. J Market 2004;68:109–27 (January).
Sander Ingo, Schefﬂer Hartmut, Zütphen Tim. Markenwert durch Kundenbindung und
Kundenwert: Das Conversion Model. In: Schimansky Alexander, editor. Der Wert
der Marke. München: Franz Vahlen Verlag München; 2004. p. 270–97. S.

Sattler Henrik. Markenbewertung: state-of-the-art. Z Betriebswirtsch 2005;75(2):

33–57 Special Issue.

Schmitt Bernd, Pan Y. Managing corporate and brand identities in the Asia–Paciﬁc

region. Calif Manag Rev 1994;36(4):32–48.

Simon Carol J, Sullivan Mary W. The measurement and determinants of brand equity:

a ﬁnancial approach. Market Sci 1993;12(12):28–52.

Srinivasan V, Park Chan Su, Chang Dae Ryun. An approach to the measurement, analysis,
and prediction of brand equity and its sources. Manage Sci 2005;51(9):1433–48.
Srivastava Rajenda, Shocker Allan D. Brand equity: a perspective on its meaning and

measurement. MSI Report; 1991. p. 91–124.

Stucky Nik. Monetäre Markenbewertung nach dem Interbrand Ansatz. In: Schimansky
Alexander, editor. Der Wert der Marke, Markenbewertungsverfahren für ein
erfolgreiches Markenmanagement. München: Vahlen; 2004. p. 430–59.

TAIKN; Corporate Brand Census—Markenwert stakeholderorientiert managen; http://

www.taikn.de/TAIKN/downloads/CorporateBrand_Census.pdf; 01.03.2006.

Tannenbaum PH. The congruity principle revisited: Studies in the reduction, induction
and generalization of persuasion. In: Berkowitz Leonard, editor. Advances in
experimental social psychology, vol. 3. New York, NY: Acad. Press; 1967. p. 271–320.
Teece David J, Pisano Gary, Shuen Amy. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management.

Strateg Manage J 1997;18:509–33.

Upshaw Lynn B. Building brand identity: a strategy for success in a hostile market place.

New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1995.

Vignoles Vivian L, Chryssochoou Xenia, Breakwell Glynis M. The distinctiveness
principle: identity, meaning, and the bounds of cultural relativity. Personal Soc
Psychol Rev 2000;4(4):337–54.

Völckner S, Sattler H. Drivers of brand extension success. J Market 2006;70:18–34

(April).

Walser Martin G. Brand strength: building and testing models based on experiential

information. Wiesbaden: Dt. Univ.-Verl.; 2004.