Journal of Consumer Research, Inc.

I’m Moral, but I Won’t Help You: The Distinct Roles of Empathy and Justice in Donations
Author(s): Saerom Lee, Karen Page Winterich, and William T. Ross Jr.
Source: Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 41, No. 3 (October 2014), pp. 678-696
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/677226 .
Accessed: 09/09/2014 05:20
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

The University of Chicago Press and Journal of Consumer Research, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Consumer Research.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I’m Moral, but I Won’t Help You: The Distinct
Roles of Empathy and Justice in Donations
SAEROM LEE
KAREN PAGE WINTERICH
WILLIAM T. ROSS JR.
Donating to charitable causes is generally perceived as a moral, prosocial behavior,
but this may not always be the case. Although moral identity tends to have a
positive effect on prosocial behavior, moral identity does not unconditionally enhance charitable giving. Four studies demonstrate that moral identity decreases
donations when recipients are responsible for their plight. Mediation analysis reveals that empathy and justice underlie these effects such that moral identity increases donations for recipients with low plight responsibility through increased
empathy, but moral identity decreases donations to recipients with high plight
responsibility due to perceptions of justice. Importantly, donations to recipients who
are responsible for their plight can be enhanced when donors’ immorality is made
salient, evoking empathy for recipients, particularly among donors with high moral
identity. This research makes theoretical contributions in addition to providing implications for nonprofit organizations whose recipients may be perceived as responsible for their plight.

S

homeless people, who give the impression of being strung
out on drugs, loitering in front of the shelter. How will Sally
respond to the donation request from the homeless shelter?
With an increasing number of charitable organizations and
over $200 billion donated to charitable causes by individuals
each year in the United States alone (Giving USA 2012),
consumers are inundated with donation requests for charities
supporting an array of causes. Of these, numerous charities,
such as UNAIDS, which raises funds for AIDS patients,
support recipients who may be perceived as responsible for
their plight (hereafter we use recipient responsibility to refer
to perceptions of charity recipients’ responsibility for their
plight). For example, the plight of AIDS patients, the homeless, or drug addicts is often attributed to their own negative
behaviors (Weiner, Perry, and Magnusson 1988), although
such plight can also be caused by external factors or social
problems that have been reproduced and retained by the
economic system and social structure (Fee and Krieger 1993;
Fischer and Breakey 1991). How does recipient responsibility influence donation decisions of consumers who are
generally more charitable based on their propensity to engage in moral behavior?
Research has focused on examining persuasive strategies
in donation appeals (Fraser, Hite, and Sauer 1988; Kristofferson, White, and Peloza 2014; Shang, Reed, and Croson
2008; Small and Verrochi 2009; White and Peloza 2009) as
well as individual donor characteristics motivating consumer

ally is a person who believes that being moral is an
important part of who she is. She not only cares about
being kind and generous to others, but she also cares about
being fair and hardworking. One day she receives a donation
request from a local homeless shelter in the mail. She ponders whether or not to donate to the shelter, and in so doing
she remembers that she often drives by the homeless shelter
on her way home from work. She recalls that she often sees

Saerom Lee is assistant professor of marketing at the University of
Texas at San Antonio, College of Business, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio,
TX 78249 (slee.mktg@gmail.com). Karen Page Winterich is associate professor of marketing at the Pennsylvania State University, 449 Business
Building, University Park, PA 16802 (kpw2@psu.edu). William T. Ross
Jr. is ING Global Chair and professor of marketing, University of Connecticut, School of Business, 2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041, Storrs, CT
06269 (bill.ross@business.uconn.edu). This research was conducted while
the first author was a PhD student at Pennsylvania State University and is
based on the first author’s dissertation, which was the winner of the 2013
Society for Consumer Psychology Dissertation Proposal Competition. The
research was supported by a Smeal Small Research Grant from the Smeal
College of Business, Pennsylvania State University. The authors appreciate
the helpful comments from Hans Baumgartner, Margaret G. Meloy, and
Linda K. Trevinõ on previous versions of this manuscript.
Mary Frances Luce served as editor and Meg Campbell served as associate
editor for this article.
Electronically published June 12, 014

678
䉷 2014 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 41 ● October 2014
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2014/4103-0007$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/677226

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

donations (Reed, Aquino, and Levy 2007; Winterich, Zhang,
and Mittal 2012; Winterich and Zhang, forthcoming). However, most of this research has focused on support for “good”
charity recipients (e.g., those perceived as deserving of aid)
without considering the implications of variations in recipients for donation behavior (see Smith, Faro, and Burson
[2013] for an exception). The limited research regarding
charity recipients has tended to focus on the presentation of
recipients in terms of number or unit (e.g., a single identifiable victim, statistical victims, victims that are perceived
as entitative; Kogut and Ritov 2007; Small, Loewenstein,
and Slovic 2007; Smith et al. 2013) or by group membership
(Duclos and Barasch 2014; Winterich, Mittal, and Ross
2009). Yet, as consumers have limited financial resources
to allocate to charitable giving, they may evaluate the deservingness of the recipients before making donations (Bekkers and Wiepking 2011). This research proposes a new
framework to understand when and why consumers engage
in charitable giving by considering the characteristics of not
only the consumer but also the charity recipients.
Among the various factors that may impact charitable
giving, such as identity congruency (Shang et al. 2008;
Winterich and Barone 2011), agency-communion orientation (Winterich et al. 2009), and emotion (Small et al.
2007; Small and Verrochi 2009), research has found moral
identity—the extent to which moral traits (e.g., fair, just,
kind, compassionate) are experienced as a central part of
one’s overall self-concept (Aquino et al. 2009; Aquino and
Reed 2002)—to be a strong predictor of charitable giving
(Reed and Aquino 2003; Reed et al. 2007; Winterich et
al. 2012, 2013). Moral identity is theorized to increase charitable giving because giving is a moral behavior that is
consistent with one’s moral identity (Aquino and Reed
2002). However, will moral identity always increase giving
regardless of the charity recipients? What will happen when
recipient responsibility comes into question?
We theorize and empirically demonstrate that higher
moral identity does not unconditionally increase charitable
giving when the beneficiaries are perceived as responsible
for their plight. Instead, moral identity decreases donations
to recipients who are responsible for their plight. More importantly, we propose that empathy and justice are the distinct mechanisms underlying these effects. Specifically, we
suggest that (1) empathy mediates the positive effect of
moral identity on donations to recipients who are not responsible for their plight, and (2) justice mediates the negative effect of moral identity on donations to recipients who
are responsible for their plight. Notably, we demonstrate
that the positive effect of moral identity on charitable giving
can be reinstated for recipients who are responsible for their
plight when consideration of consumers’ own past immoral
behavior evokes empathy for the charity recipients.
This research makes theoretical contributions to the charitable giving and moral identity literature, as well as offers
important insights regarding the role of moral identity and
recipient responsibility on charitable giving for marketers
of charitable organizations. The present research extends

679

existing work on charitable giving (Shang et al. 2008; Small
et al. 2007; White and Peloza 2009; Winterich at al. 2009,
2013) by suggesting that charity recipients should be considered as an important factor affecting consumers’ donation
decisions. More specifically, though the moral identity literature may suggest to academics and practitioners alike
that moral identity increases charitable giving, we demonstrate that the positive effect of moral identity is reversed
when charity recipients are perceived as responsible for their
plight.
We also contribute to the moral identity, empathy, and
perceived responsibility literature by exploring the independent roles of empathy and justice as underlying processes
of the joint effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility. Demonstrating that the positive effect of moral identity on donations occurs through empathy whereas moral
identity decreases charitable giving through perceptions of
justice enhances our knowledge of the processes that impact
donation decisions. In doing so, we demonstrate a novel
means of evoking empathy—consideration of donors’ own
moral failings—and motivate charitable giving even when
recipient responsibility is high. This situational stimulation
of empathy, through consideration of one’s own moral failings, is particularly influential for those with higher moral
identity. We next briefly review the literature on moral identity and recipient responsibility.

THE JOINT IMPACT OF
MORAL IDENTITY AND
RECIPIENT RESPONSIBILITY ON
CHARITABLE GIVING
Moral identity represents an individual’s broad associative cognitive network of related moral traits (e.g., being
kind), feelings (e.g., concern for others), and behaviors (e.g.,
helping others; Aquino and Reed 2002). Within this associative network, the strength of these moral associations
reflects the degree to which a person’s moral identity is
chronically important (e.g., whether a person cares about
being a person who has these traits, feelings, and behaviors
in general). Thus, an individual who is characterized by high
moral identity would likely have more thoughts, both in
quantity and speed, regarding moral traits such as fairness
and generosity as well as goals and behaviors of helping
others. To be sure, this conceptualization does not indicate
that an individual with low moral identity does not have
any associations with moral traits or behaviors, but simply
that their associative cognitive network is not as chronically
strong as someone with a higher moral identity. Of particular
relevance to this research, moral identity has been found to
be a strong predictor of charitable giving, even when the
donation recipient is a member of an out-group (Reed and
Aquino 2003; Winterich et al. 2009). For instance, Reed
and Aquino (2003) demonstrated that individuals who are
higher in moral identity expand the circle of moral regard
to others and are more supportive of relief efforts to outgroup members than individuals who are lower in moral

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

680

identity. However, we seek to determine whether moral identity unconditionally increases charitable giving. Specifically,
we consider that recipient responsibility will interact with
moral identity to impact charitable giving.
Schlenker et al. (1994, 635) suggested that “responsibility
is the adhesive that connects an actor to an event and to relevant
prescriptions that should govern conduct; thus, responsibility
provides a basis for judgment and sanctioning.” That is, if a
person produces an action that leads to an outcome, the person
is perceived as responsible for the action and the outcome
(Feather 1996, 1999). Much of the perceived responsibility
literature focuses on negative outcomes connecting the issues
of responsibility to blameworthiness (Feather 1999). Focusing
on negatively valued outcomes, Shaver (1985, 66) defined responsibility as “a judgment made about the moral accountability of a person of normal capacities, which judgment usually
but not always involves a causal connection between the person
being judged and some morally disapproved action or event.”
Consistent with this conceptualization, we focus specifically
on the negative outcome for which charity recipients are
seeking aid and define recipient responsibility as the extent
to which a recipient is perceived as accountable for a morally
disapproved action that has resulted in the outcome (i.e.,
plight leading to need for assistance).
Research has demonstrated that people are less willing to
provide support or aid to those in need when recipients are
judged as personally responsible for their problems (Barnes,
Ickes, and Kidd 1979; Farwell and Weiner 2000; Henry,
Reyna, and Weiner 2004; Skitka and Tetlock 1992; Weiner
1993). For example, Reyna et al. (2005) demonstrated that
perceptions of responsibility affect support for affirmative
action to help certain social groups (e.g., blacks). Similarly,
Weiner et al. (1988) found that people were less willing to
help a stigmatized person when the onset of the stigma was
controllable by the person (e.g., AIDS and drug abuse vs.
Alzheimer’s disease and blindness, which were perceived
as onset-uncontrollable). Nonetheless, charities support recipients whose plight may be attributed to morally disapproved actions for which the recipient is responsible. When
donors receive donation requests from charities supporting
AIDS patients, the homeless, or drug addicts, some donors
may perceive that the plight arose from external factors for
which the recipients were not responsible (e.g., AIDS
through blood transfusion, homeless due to physical disabilities, or addiction due to genetic vulnerability). In contrast, others may perceive that the plight was caused by the
charity recipients’ immoral actions (e.g., AIDS through unprotected sex among HIV patients or sharing needles among
drug users, homeless due to laziness or addiction due to
illegal drug abuse). Considering this, how will recipient responsibility and moral identity jointly impact charitable giving?
Given that moral identity can increase concern for a larger
segment of humanity and charitable giving (Hart, Atkins,
and Ford 1998; Reed and Aquino 2003; Winterich et al.
2009), there is reason to believe that a person with higher
moral identity will be more likely to aid charity recipients

who are responsible for their plight than a person with lower
moral identity. On the other hand, higher moral identity may
not result in the expansion of moral regard to others who
are responsible for morally disapproved behavior. Notably,
there is a negative relationship between moral identity and
negatively valued behaviors such as unethical or antisocial
behaviors (Sage, Kavussanu, and Duda 2006; see Shao,
Aquino, and Freeman [2008] for a review). Individuals who
place high importance on morality may be more critical of
the negative behavior of others, especially when the behavior is violating moral principles. Indeed, moral identity predicted condemnation of others’ negative behaviors (Wiltermuth, Monin, and Chow 2010) and revenge for those who
mistreated others in the presence of a negative reciprocity
norm (Barclay, Whiteside, and Aquino 2014). Given the
extent to which moral identity does not support morally disapproved behaviors, we propose that the positive effect of
moral identity on charitable giving will be limited to those
who are not responsible for their plight. Since individuals
with higher moral identity may even condemn or take revenge
on others who violate moral principles, we propose that moral
identity will decrease charitable giving if charity recipients
are responsible for a morally disapproved behavior. In such
a case, charitable giving may no longer be perceived as a
moral action; as such, moral identity will decrease rather than
increase charitable giving. Taken together, we propose that
moral identity and recipient responsibility will result in a twoway interaction as follows:
H1: Recipient responsibility and moral identity will
jointly impact charitable giving such that moral
identity will increase donations to recipients whose
perceived responsibility for their plight is low. In
contrast, moral identity will decrease donations to
recipients whose perceived responsibility for their
plight is high.

THE MEDIATING ROLES OF
EMPATHY AND JUSTICE
In addition to examining this joint effect, we seek to
understand why moral identity increases versus decreases
donations to recipients depending on recipient responsibility.
We suggest empathy and justice as multiple mediators underlying this effect. Specifically, moral identity motivates
or deters charitable giving based on the salience of empathy
and perceptions of justice.
Empathy and justice, which are two distinct constructs,
both serve as motivations for moral behaviors such as charitable giving (Bagozzi and Moor 1994; Batson et al. 1995;
Eisenberg and Miller 1987; Hoffman 1990, 2000; Kohlberg
1976). Empathy regards the extent to which the donor feels
compassionate about the particular target in the setting (i.e.,
donation recipient; Hoffman 2000). Perceived justice of donating, while also pertaining to the target, regards a judgment about a particular action to the target (i.e., the act of
donating) based on the target’s deservingness of a particular

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

outcome (i.e., improved welfare) resulting from the action
(i.e., donating), rather than a feeling toward the target
(Feather 1999; Lerner 1987). Moreover, the ultimate goal
of empathy is to increase the welfare of the target for whom
empathy is felt, which is different from the goal of upholding
a moral principle of justice (Batson et al. 1995). Thus, engaging in an altruistic behavior based on feelings of empathy
is sometimes in conflict with acting in accordance with justice (Batson et al. 1995).
We suggest that the salience of empathy versus justice
concerns will differ with recipient responsibility, impacting
charitable giving. For instance, in considering donating to
recipients who are responsible for their plight through immoral behavior, feelings of empathy may suggest one should
engage in charitable giving, but more salient concerns regarding the injustice of donating may deter donations. In
contrast, in the case of low recipient responsibility, empathy
and justice concerns should both be favorable to charitable
giving, with empathy being a more salient driver. Since
moral identity represents the strength of moral associations,
both empathetic and justice concerns should be more accessible and thereby more influential in donation decisions
for people with higher moral identity (Aquino and Reed
2002). We detail this theorizing next.

The Role of Empathy
Eisenberg and Miller (1987, 91) define empathy as “an
affective state that stems from the apprehension of another’s
emotional state or condition.” De Waal (2008, 281) defines
empathy in more cognitive terms, suggesting three criteria
for empathy: “Empathy is the capacity to (1) be affected by
and share the emotional state of another, (2) assess the reasons for the other’s state, and (3) identify with the other,
adopting his or her perspective.” Consistent with both the
affective and cognitive components of empathy, research
finds that empathy motivates helping behavior (Batson 1987;
Coke, Batson, and McDavis 1978; Eisenberg and Miller
1987).
We suggest that consumers with higher moral identity
generally feel more empathy for others since empathy is the
feeling and ability that is consistent with most consumers’
sense of a moral person (Reed et al. 2007). Specifically,
given that moral identity expands boundaries toward others,
including out-groups (Hart et al. 1998; Reed and Aquino
2003), and increases expansiveness toward others (Winterich
et al. 2009), those with higher moral identity tend to have
greater identification and perspective taking (Aquino and
Reed 2002), which are the basis of empathy (Coke et al.
1978; Davis et al. 1996). Thus, moral identity should increase empathy. Indeed, moral identity and empathy are
positively correlated (Detert, Treviño, and Sweitzer 2008).
Moreover, since empathy motivates moral behavior (Batson
1987; Eisenberg and Miller 1987), consumers with higher
moral identity are more likely to engage in charitable giving
for the others with whom they empathize. Notably, we theorize that empathy will underlie the positive effect of moral
identity on donations when recipients are not responsible

681

for their plight since other moral concerns regarding donations (i.e., injustice) will not be salient when recipient
responsibility is low. Thus, empathy will mediate the positive effect of moral identity on donations for recipients with
low responsibility.
While we theorize that empathy motivates charitable giving and is greater among those with higher moral identity
than those with lower moral identity, we propose that consumers with higher moral identity may also have other moral
concerns, particularly when recipients are perceived as responsible for morally disapproved behavior. Specifically, we
suggest that consideration of high recipient responsibility
raises justice concerns, stimulating people with high moral
identity to place more weight on perceived justice of donating, suppressing feelings of empathy that might otherwise
motivate charitable donations.

The Role of Justice
Perceived responsibility affects judgments of the justice
of an outcome (Feather 1996, 1999; Reyna et al. 2005). That
is, when a person is responsible for a morally disapproved
behavior, a negative outcome is considered more just than
a positive outcome. For example, people evaluate a penalty
(i.e., negative outcome) as more just when an offender’s
perceived responsibility for the offense is high (Feather
1996). Thus, when charity recipients are personally responsible for morally disapproved behavior that caused their
plight, consumers may perceive that providing a positive
outcome (i.e., support from donors) to the recipients is unjust. Similar to the feeling of empathy as consistent with
consumers’ perception of a moral person, justice is also
consistent with one’s sense of moral self (Aquino and Reed
2002) and is one of five key moral foundations (Graham et
al. 2011), which is an integral part of one’s moral development (Kohlberg 1976). As such, when an action may be
unjust, justice concerns should become highly accessible for
consumers (Skarlicki, van Jaarsveld, and Walker 2008).
When making a donation decision, we suggest that consumers with high moral identity will generally be more focused on empathetic concerns toward recipients without
considering the justice of donating (Eisenberg and Miller
1987). However, when considering donating to charity recipients who are perceived as responsible for their plight,
the recipients’ responsibility may increase the salience of
the justice of donating (Feather 1996). Notably, Batson et
al. (1995) suggested that when empathy and justice are in
conflict, individuals tend to act in accordance with justice
unless they are induced to feel empathy in a given situation.
Thus, when considering donating to recipients with high
responsibility for their plight, consumers with higher moral
identity will tend to focus on the injustice of donating rather
than felt empathy as when recipients are not responsible for
their plight, which will decrease donations.
To summarize, we propose that both empathy and justice
will mediate the joint effect of moral identity and recipient
responsibility on charitable giving. Both feelings of empathy
and judgments of justice are more accessible for consumers

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

682

with higher moral identity (Aquino and Reed 2002; Reed
et al. 2007), but recipient responsibility will impact the extent to which each of these moral sentiments guides charitable giving. When recipient responsibility is low, justice
concerns are not salient and empathy is greater among those
with high moral identity, increasing donations. In contrast,
when recipient responsibility is high, justice concerns become salient and donating is perceived to be less just among
those with higher moral identity, decreasing donations.
Taken together, empathy, rather than justice, will be the
primary driver of the positive effect of moral identity on
donations to charity recipients with low responsibility, but
under high recipient responsibility, justice will drive the
negative effect of moral identity on donations (fig. 1). Thus,
empathy and justice of donating will mediate the joint effect

of moral identity and recipient responsibility on charitable
giving such that:
H2: Empathy will mediate the positive effect of moral
identity on charitable giving when recipient responsibility is low.
H3: Justice of donating will mediate the negative effect
of moral identity on charitable giving when recipient responsibility is high.
We next present a series of four studies. Study 1 tests
hypothesis 1 by examining actual monetary donation allocation. Study 2 provides further support for hypothesis 1
and tests the role of empathy and justice as theorized in
hypotheses 2 and 3 to provide insight into the process

FIGURE 1
MEDIATION THROUGH EMPATHY AND JUSTICE BASED ON LOW (TOP ) OR HIGH (BOTTOM ) RECIPIENT RESPONSIBILITY

NOTE.—The sign in parentheses indicates the direction of the direct effect when mediators are not included. The direct path from moral
identity to charitable giving becomes nonsignificant when mediators are included in the model.

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

through which moral identity affects charitable giving. Study
3 increases the internal validity of our findings by using
temporarily activated moral identity and provides additional
support for hypotheses 2 and 3. Finally, we propose hypothesis 4, which suggests that making salient one’s own
moral failings can reinstate the positive effect of moral identity on charitable giving regardless of recipient responsibility, and we test it in study 4.

STUDY 1
The objective of study 1 is to test hypothesis 1 regarding
whether moral identity and recipient responsibility jointly
impact charitable giving. We examine actual monetary donations to a real nonprofit organization, PACHC (Pennsylvania Association of Community Health Centers). All participant donations were donated to PACHC after the study.

Method and Measures
Participants and Design. A total of 91 participants at
the Pennsylvania State University completed a study with
a 2 (moral identity: low vs. high) # 2 (recipient responsibility: low vs. high) between-subjects design, with moral
identity measured continuously. Participants were mostly
undergraduates (n p 75) but also included graduate students
(n p 4), university staff (n p 6), and one unspecified. To
decrease noise and increase reliability of data, we included
an instructional manipulation check question asking participants to provide a certain answer (e.g., “Not at all”) to the
question (Oppenheimer, Meyvis, and Davidenko 2009). Five
participants who failed to correctly respond to the question
were eliminated from the data set, leaving a total of 86
participants in the final data set (males p 38, females p
30, unanswered p 18). The focal two-way interaction is
significant without excluding these participants ( p ! .005).
Procedure. At the beginning of the study session, participants were provided with two white envelopes. One of
the envelopes was labeled “Compensation” and contained
their compensation for participating in the study. The other
envelope was labeled “Donation.” Participants were given
compensation in $1 bills so they could easily allocate any
portion of their compensation as a donation (Lee and Shrum
2012). To ensure that donations were not dependent on the
magnitude of expected compensation or “bonus” money,
some participants received $5 for compensation and some
participants received $6 ($5 compensation ⫹ $1 bonus).
Then participants were instructed that they would be given
an opportunity to donate to a nonprofit organization. After
reading the description about a nonprofit organization,
PACHC, participants indicated how much they would donate to PACHC and placed their donation in the “Donation”
envelope. After the donation allocation, participants responded to a manipulation check regarding recipient responsibility and completed the moral identity scale. At the
end of the research session, all participants put their donation
envelope in a donation box. Participants were instructed to

683

do so even if their envelope was empty (i.e., made no donation) to preserve the anonymity of their donation allocation decision.
Responsibility Manipulation. Participants read a general
description about PACHC: “This non-profit organization
supports the largest network of community health centers
in Pennsylvania. Community health centers provide medical
treatment for patients who are unable to afford the necessary
medical treatment for serious illnesses and diseases. The
majority of the patients community health centers serve are
individuals who . . .” This description ended with either
“have been working hard at multiple low-wage jobs but are
unable to obtain medical insurance due to poor benefits and
economic conditions” (low responsibility) or “do not have
medical insurance because they do not hold a steady job
due to their drug and alcohol abuse or gambling addiction”
(high responsibility).
Donation Allocation. Participants could make a donation
ranging from $0 to $5 or $0 to $6 depending on their payment. Since the actual dollar amount could differ with their
total compensation ($5 or $6), the dependent variable is the
proportion of compensation donated.
Manipulation Check. After making their donation decision, participants answered an item, “To what extent do
you think the patients are responsible for their problem?”
on a 7-point scale (1 p not at all, 7 p very much).
Moral Identity. Moral identity was measured with the
five internalization items from Aquino and Reed’s (2002)
Self-Importance of Moral Identity scale (a p .82). Participants were presented with a list of moral traits (e.g., caring,
compassionate, kind) and then responded to the five statements (1 p strongly disagree, 7 p strongly agree). Sample
statements include, “It would make me feel good to be a
person who has these characteristics” and “Being someone
who has these characteristics is an important part of who I
am.” The list of moral traits activates a broader associative
network of related traits that form one’s moral identity,
which is not specific to the listed traits (Aquino and Reed
2002).
Both symbolization and internalization dimensions of
moral identity were measured in our studies, but using the
internalization dimension was more appropriate for the purpose of this research. Specifically, internalization reflects the
degree to which moral traits are central to one’s self-concept
and is found to be a more robust predictor of private charitable giving that is the focus of this research (Aquino,
McFerran, and Laven 2011; Aquino and Reed 2002; Reed
and Aquino 2003; Reed et al. 2007; Winterich et al. 2009,
2013). Symbolization is associated with expression of moral
identity in public situations, and, consistent with our expectations, was not significant in our studies.
Additional Measures. To ensure that our manipulation
of recipient responsibility did not alter other perceptions that
might impact donations, perceived need of recipients was
measured by one item, “To what extent are the patients in

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

684

need of financial support?” (1 p not at all, 7 p very much).
Severity of the cause was also assessed with one item, “To
what extent do you think this charity supports a serious
problem?” (1 p not at all, 7 p very much).

FIGURE 2
STUDY 1: MONETARY DONATION TO PACHC

Results and Discussion
Manipulation Check. Regression analysis using recipient
responsibility condition (low p ⫺1, high p 1), moral identity (mean-centered), and the interaction term as the independent variables, total compensation as a control variable,
and perceived responsibility as the dependent variable revealed a significant main effect of recipient responsibility
condition on perceived responsibility (b p .42, t(80) p
2.88, p p .005). Recipients in the high responsibility condition were perceived as more responsible for their problem
(M p 4.87) than recipients in the low responsibility condition (M p 4.02). There was no effect of moral identity
(b p ⫺.13, t(80) p ⫺.81, p 1 .40). The interaction was
marginally significant (b p ⫺.31, t(80) p ⫺1.86, p p
.07). Because of the marginally significant interaction effect,
we conducted an additional study (N p 89) to check the
robustness of the responsibility manipulation. There was
only a significant effect of responsibility condition (b p
.71, t(85) p 4.69, p ! .0001). No other effects were significant ( p 1 .30). Moreover, perceived responsibility was
only affected by the responsibility condition in subsequent
studies, so we concluded that the marginally significant interaction was a statistical anomaly and the manipulation
worked substantially as intended. The degrees of freedom
are lower in this analysis than for donation allocation because one participant failed to complete the manipulation
check.
Donation Allocation. Regression analysis was performed
using recipient responsibility (low p ⫺1, high p 1), moral
identity (mean-centered), and the interaction term as the independent variables, total compensation as a control variable,
and the proportion of dollar amount donated as the dependent
variable. There was no significant effect of moral identity
on donation allocation (b p .01, t(81) p .33, p 1 .70).
There was a significant effect of recipient responsibility on
donation allocation (b p ⫺05, t(81) p ⫺2.20, p ! .05),
such that participants donated more when the recipients were
low in responsibility (M p .36) compared to when the recipients were high in responsibility (M p .27), which is
consistent with past research (Weiner 1993). Importantly,
there was a significant two-way interaction of moral identity
and recipient responsibility condition on donation allocation
(b p ⫺.07, t(81) p ⫺2.94, p ! .005). Specifically, moral
identity increased donations to recipients whose responsibility was low (b p .08, t(81) p 2.24, p ! .05; M(-1SD) p
.29 [$1.5/5 or 1.7/6] vs. M(⫹1SD) p .43 [$2.2/5 or 2.6/6]).
In contrast, moral identity decreased donations to recipients
whose responsibility was high (b p ⫺.06, t(81) p ⫺1.95,
p p .05; M(-1SD) p.32 [$1.6/5 or 1.9/6] vs. M(⫹1SD) p.21
[$1/5 or 1.3/6]), supporting hypothesis 1 (fig. 2). The difference in the total compensation ($5 or $6) did not affect

donations (b p ⫺.07, t(81) p ⫺1.58, p 1 .10). We recognize that prior research has found people to be less willing
to give earned versus unearned money (i.e., the windfall
effect; Cherry, Frykblom, and Shogren 2002), but we likely
did not obtain such an effect from the bonus money on
donation allocation (i.e., a windfall effect) for one of two
reasons. First, a bonus for participation may not have been
coded as a windfall. Second, the bonus of $1, even if coded
as a windfall, was likely not large enough to substantially
impact donation behavior. When we excluded the total compensation control variable, the two-way interaction remained
significant, with the pattern unchanged (b p ⫺.08, t(82) p
⫺3.34, p p .001).
We also conducted a regression with the amount donated
as the dependent variable and a logistic regression with the
dependent variable coded for any donation amount (1) versus no donation (0). The interaction of moral identity and
recipient responsibility was replicated in both analyses (b p
⫺.35, t(81) p ⫺2.90, p ! .005; b p .56, Wald x2 p 4.19,
p ! .05).
To account for possible alternative explanations, we reran
the main analysis including gender and participant occupation as covariates, despite the fact that we did not expect
these covariates to have effects. Neither gender nor occupation had any significant main or interaction effects ( p 1
.10). Including these variables did not dilute the interaction
of interest either. Thus, we excluded these variables from
our analysis in this study and all subsequent studies. We
also conducted analysis to account for potential concerns
about whether our manipulation of recipient responsibility
affected perceived need of the recipients or cause severity.
There was a positive effect of moral identity on perceived

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

685

need of the recipients ( p ! .05), but neither recipient responsibility nor the interaction between moral identity and
recipient responsibility was significant ( p 1 .30). Neither
main effects of moral identity ( p 1 .10) and recipient responsibility ( p 1 .20) nor their interaction ( p 1 .80) impacted
perceptions of cause severity. Including these variables as
covariates did not dilute the focal two-way interaction ( p p
.001).

manipulation check. We randomized the order of empathy
and justice of donating measures. Finally, participants responded to the moral identity scale used in study 1 (a p
.84).

Discussion. The results of study 1 provide support for
our theorizing that moral identity interacts with recipient
responsibility to impact charitable giving. If the charity recipients are responsible for their plight, then those with
higher moral identity donate less than those with lower
moral identity. In contrast, if the recipients are not responsible for their plight, moral identity increases donations,
consistent with past research. Importantly, this two-way interaction of moral identity and recipients’ responsibility is
demonstrated with actual monetary donation to a real nonprofit organization. We proposed that this effect occurred
through feelings of empathy and judgments about justice of
donating. In study 2, we test these predictions.

Empathy. Empathy was measured by six empathy emotion adjectives: “sympathetic,” “warm,” “compassionate,”
“softhearted,” “tender,” and “moved.” Regarding these emotions, participants answered, “When you think about the patients, to what degree do you feel the following emotions?”
(Batson 1987) on a 7-point scale (1 p not at all, 7 p very
much). Responses were averaged and combined to form a
single measure of empathetic emotion (a p .95).

STUDY 2
In this study, in addition to testing hypothesis 1, we seek
to gain insight into the process through which the positive
effect of moral identity on charitable giving is reversed for
recipients who are responsible for their plight. Specifically,
we test hypotheses 2 and 3, which predict that empathy and
justice simultaneously mediate the joint effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility on charitable giving.

Method and Measures
Participants and Design. A total of 172 undergraduates
at the Pennsylvania State University participated in this
study. The study was a 2 (moral identity: low vs. high) #
2 (recipient responsibility: low vs. high) between-subjects
design with moral identity measured as a continuous variable. Nine participants who failed an instructional manipulation check were eliminated from the data set, leaving 163
participants (males p 76, females p 74, unanswered p
13). Retaining these participants does not substantially
change the results (two-way interaction: p ! .05).
Procedure. Similar to the description of PACHC used
in study 1, participants read a description of a Community
Health Clinic: “This facility provides medical treatment for
patients who are unable to afford the necessary medical
treatment for serious diseases. The majority of the patients
this clinic serves are individuals who do not have medical
insurance because they do not hold a steady job. . .” This
description ended with one of the following: “due to massive
layoffs during economic recession” (low responsibility) or
“due to their drug and alcohol abuse” (high responsibility).
After reading the description, participants indicated their
donation likelihood, empathy toward the recipients, perceptions about justice of donating, and recipient responsibility

Donation Likelihood. Participants answered, “How likely
would you be to donate to this charity?” on a 7-point scale
ranging from 1 (very unlikely) to 7 (very likely).

Justice of Donating. Participants responded to two items:
“I should support these patients to be fair” and “I should
donate to these patients to be just” (1 p not at all, 7 p
very much; r p .85, p ! .0001; van Prooijen, van den Bos,
and Wilke 2002).
Manipulation Check. In addition to the item used in
study 1, participants answered, “To what extent do you think
the patients had control over encountering this problem?”
(1 p not at all, 7 p very much; r p .81, p ! .0001).

Results and Discussion
Manipulation Check. We performed a regression analysis using measured moral identity (mean-centered), recipient responsibility condition (low p ⫺1, high p 1) and the
two-way interaction term as the independent variables and
perceived responsibility as the dependent variable. Results
revealed only a significant main effect of recipient responsibility on perceived responsibility (F(1, 159) p 67.93, p
! .0001). Specifically, perceived responsibility was higher
in the high responsibility than in the low responsibility condition (Mhigh p 5.27 vs. Mlow p 3.47; t(159) p 8.24, p !
.0001). Our manipulation of recipient responsibility worked
as intended.
Donation Likelihood. Regression analysis was performed using moral identity (mean-centered), recipient responsibility (low p ⫺1, high p 1) and the two-way interaction term as the independent variables and donation
likelihood as the dependent variable. There was no significant effect of moral identity on donation likelihood (b p
⫺.06, t(159) p ⫺.54, p 1 .50). There was a significant
effect of recipient responsibility (b p ⫺.60, t(159) p
⫺5.72, p ! .0001; Mlow p 4.74, Mhigh p 3.54). More importantly, these effects were qualified by a two-way interaction of moral identity and recipient responsibility on donation likelihood (b p ⫺.33, t(159) p ⫺2.96, p ! .005).
Specifically, moral identity marginally increased donation
likelihood in the low responsibility condition (b p .27;
t(159) p 1.65, p ! .10; M(⫺1SD) p 4.48 vs. M(⫹1SD) p 4.99).
In contrast, moral identity decreased donation likelihood in

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

686

the high responsibility condition (b p ⫺.39; t(159) p
⫺2.57, p p .01; M(⫺1SD) p 3.91 vs. M(⫹1SD) p 3.17). These
results support hypothesis 1 and replicate the results of study
1 (fig. 3).
Mediating Role of Empathy and Justice. We sought to
test hypotheses 2 and 3 regarding the mediating role of
empathy and justice. First, we verified that the moral identity, empathy, and justice of donating constructs loaded on
three different factors through an exploratory factor analysis
(eigenvalues 1 1; Kaiser 1960). Then, to examine whether
the interaction of moral identity and recipient responsibility
(low p ⫺1, high p 1) affects donation likelihood through
empathy and justice, we conducted a bootstrapping analysis
for moderated mediation using empathy and justice as multiple mediators (Process Model 8; Hayes 2012). We use
model 8 because it tests both whether the moderation effect
is mediated and whether the mediation processes are moderated (Hayes 2012; Lisjak and Lee 2014; Samper and
Schwartz 2013; Model 2 in Preacher, Rucker, and Hayes
2007).
Using Model 8, the two-way interaction was mediated by
empathetic emotion and perceived justice of donating as the
95% confidence interval (CI) for the higher-order interaction
did not include zero (Empathy ab p ⫺.18, 95% CI p ⫺.34
to ⫺.06; Justice ab p ⫺.06, 95% CI p ⫺.16 to ⫺.01).
We further examined the indirect effects by responsibility
condition to assess support for moderated mediation. In the
low responsibility condition, mediation through empathetic
emotion was significant (ab p .27, 95% CI p .11 to .53),
but mediation through justice of donating was not significant
(ab p .06, 95% CI p ⫺.01 to .18). This pattern supports
hypothesis 2. In the high responsibility condition, mediation
through empathetic emotion was not significant (ab p ⫺.09,
95% CI p ⫺.27 to .06), but mediation through justice of
donating was significant (ab p ⫺.07, 95% CI p ⫺.19 to
⫺.004), supporting hypothesis 3. Thus, moral identity increased empathy for recipients with low plight responsibility, increasing charitable giving. However, for recipients
with high plight responsibility, moral identity decreased perceived justice of donating, mediating the negative effect of
moral identity on charitable giving.
Discussion. These results further support the interaction
effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility on charitable giving as proposed in hypothesis 1. More importantly,
these results provide insight into the process via empathy
and justice through which moral identity and recipient responsibility jointly affect charitable giving. Specifically,
we show that moral identity motivates charitable giving
through empathy when recipients have low responsibility
for their plight, whereas moral identity leads to lower charitable giving through justice perceptions as donating to
charity recipients is perceived as unjust when the recipients
have high responsibility for their plight, supporting hypotheses 2 and 3.

FIGURE 3
STUDY 2: DONATION LIKELIHOOD TO
COMMUNITY HEALTH CLINIC

STUDY 3
Study 3 has three objectives. First, we temporarily activate
moral identity rather than measuring it to enhance internal
validity as well as practical implications since organizations
could seek to elicit moral identity through advertisements
or donation solicitations (Choi and Winterich 2013). Second,
we provide additional support for the role of empathy and
justice. Third, we seek to increase generalizability of the
findings by using a different charitable cause.

Method and Measures
Participants and Design. A total of 151 undergraduates
at the Pennsylvania State University participated in a study
with a 2 (moral identity prime: low vs. high) # 2 (recipient
responsibility: low vs. high) between-subjects design. Consistent with earlier studies, we excluded seven participants
who failed an instructional manipulation check, leaving 144
participants in the data set for analysis (47% males). The
two-way interaction remains significant (p ! .01) when we
retain these participants.
Procedure and Measures. Participants were first instructed to complete a writing task for a moral identity prime
(adapted from Aquino et al. 2011; Reed et al. 2007). In the
high moral identity condition, participants were asked to
examine nine words related to moral traits (e.g., caring,
compassionate, fair, friendly, generous) from the moral identity scale (Aquino and Reed 2002) and then write about why
they would like to have these characteristics and why being

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

a person with these characteristics is important to them. In
the low moral identity prime condition, participants examined neutral words (e.g., campus, class, couch, TV, computer) and wrote about their typical day and their typical
evening as a student.
After the writing task, participants were directed to the
second part of the study. A description about the Warm for
Winter charity was provided: “This charity helps low-income individuals by providing basic clothing such as pants,
shirts, socks, and coats. The charity relies on monetary donations and clothing drives to provide clothing to these people in need. A recent survey indicated that a lot of people
this charity supports cannot afford such clothing because
they . . .” This general description was followed by specific
descriptions of charity recipients for each responsibility condition: “can only find low-wage jobs for which each paycheck barely covers rent and food (low responsibility)” or
“spend their money to purchase cigarette, alcohol, or illegal
substances (high responsibility).” After reading the description, participants indicated their donation likelihood on a 7point scale ranging from 1 (very unlikely) to 7 (very likely),
as in study 2. Next, participants responded to the same six
items of empathy (a p .94) and the same two items assessing perceived justice (r p .74, p ! .0001) used in study
2. Then, participants responded to the same two responsibility manipulation check items used in study 2 (r p .76,
p ! .0001).

Results and Discussion
Manipulation Check. An ANOVA was performed using
moral identity prime, recipient responsibility condition, and
the interaction as the independent variables and perceived
responsibility as the dependent variable. Only the main effect of recipient responsibility condition on perceived responsibility was significant (Mlow p 3.99 vs. Mhigh p 5.03;
F(1, 140) p 17.79, p ! .0001). Manipulation of recipient
responsibility worked as intended, consistent with previous
studies.
Donation Likelihood. An ANOVA was performed using
moral identity prime, recipient responsibility, and their interaction as the independent variables and donation likelihood as the dependent variable. There was no significant
effect of moral identity prime on donation likelihood (F(1,
140) p .09, p 1 .70), but there was a significant effect of
recipient responsibility (F(1, 140) p 50.93, p ! .0001).
Importantly, there was a significant two-way interaction of
moral identity prime and recipient responsibility on donation
likelihood (F(1, 140) p 8.39, p ! .005). When recipient
responsibility was low, donation likelihood was marginally
higher in the moral identity prime condition (Mmoral identity p
5.41 vs. Mneutral p 4.66; t(140) p 1.76, p p .08). Importantly, when recipient responsibility was high, donation likelihood was significantly lower in the moral identity prime
condition compared to the neutral condition (Mmoral identity p
2.49 vs. Mneutral p 3.42; t(140) p ⫺2.36, p ! .05; fig. 4).

687
FIGURE 4
STUDY 3: DONATION LIKELIHOOD TO
WARM FOR WINTER CHARITY

NOTE.—Error bars indicate confidence intervals.

Mediating Role of Empathy and Justice. We examined
whether empathy and justice underlie the joint effect of
moral identity (neutral p ⫺1, moral identity p 1) and
recipient responsibility (low p ⫺1, high p 1) on donation
likelihood. As in study 2, we conducted a bootstrapping
analysis for moderated mediation using empathy and justice
as multiple mediators (Process Model 8; Hayes 2012). The
two-way interaction was significantly mediated by empathetic emotion and perceived justice (Empathy ab p ⫺.18,
95% CI p ⫺.36 to ⫺.02; Justice ab p ⫺.08, 95% CI p
⫺.19 to ⫺.02). In the low responsibility condition, conditional indirect effects revealed that empathy was marginally
significant (ab p .11, 90% CI p .01 to .41) but justice was
not significant (ab p .07, 95% CI p ⫺.03 to .19). In the
high responsibility condition, the indirect effect via justice
was significant (ab p ⫺.10, 95% CI p ⫺.23 to ⫺.01), but
the indirect effect via empathy was not significant (ab p
⫺.16, 95% CI p ⫺.40 to .06). These results support hypotheses 2 and 3.
Discussion. These results demonstrate that the hypothesized effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility
on charitable giving holds even when moral identity is manipulated rather than measured, which enhances the internal
validity and practical implications of this work for nonprofit
organizations. Importantly, we replicate the negative effect
of moral identity on donations to recipients who are responsible for their plight when moral identity is temporarily
salient. We acknowledge that the positive effect of moral
identity on charitable giving and the corresponding medi-

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

688

ation through empathy is marginally significant in this study,
which may be due to a weaker effect of the moral identity
prime versus measured moral identity. It is also possible that
identifying low recipient responsibility in the charity description positively influences donations of consumers with
lower moral identity, weakening the positive effect of moral
identity relative to previous literature in which responsibility
is not specified. This study also provides additional support
that empathy and justice work as multiple mediators of the
interactive effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility. Specifically, moral identity increases donations when
charity recipients are not responsible for their plight through
empathy, whereas moral identity decreases donations when
recipients are responsible for their plight because giving is
perceived to be more unjust. Given this, it is important to
understand how marketers of charitable organizations can
reinstate the positive effect of moral identity on charitable
giving even for recipients whose perceived responsibility is
high. Thus, we now theorize and demonstrate how consumers with high moral identity may be motivated to donate to
recipients who are responsible for their plight.

IMMORALITY SALIENCE CAN INCREASE
CHARITABLE GIVING
We have theorized and demonstrated that consumers with
higher moral identity have lower donations to recipients who
are perceived as responsible for their plight due to justice
concerns while the positive effect of moral identity occurs
through empathy. Drawing from this pattern, we propose
that increasing the salience of empathy when recipients are
responsible for their plight should reduce the salience of
justice concerns and lead consumers with higher moral identity to increase charitable giving.
Since we have suggested that empathy is less salient when
recipients are responsible for their plight due to consumers’
greater focus on justice concerns, it is important to consider
whether stimulating empathy can alleviate the focus on justice concerns. As discussed earlier, Batson et al. (1995) suggested that individuals act based on justice when empathy
and justice are in conflict, but if they are stimulated to feel
empathy, they should engage in altruistic behavior based on
empathy. Thus, we seek to induce such a situation in which
empathy will positively influence consumers’ charitable giving, regardless of recipient responsibility.
We propose that reminding consumers about their own
moral failings can enable those with high moral identity,
who are generally more prone to empathy, to recognize their
empathy for the recipients who are responsible for their
plight. Levy, Freitas, and Salovey (2002) suggested that
when individuals perceive themselves as more similar to
others, they are more likely to take the perspective of others,
empathize with others, and help others of diverse social
groups. It may be hard for consumers with high moral identity to recognize empathy for recipients responsible for their
plight because these consumers do not perceive themselves
as engaging in behaviors that are immoral. However, if con-

sumers realize that they too have committed immoral behaviors and recognize the similarity between themselves and
the charity recipients who are responsible for their plight,
consumers with high moral identity should more easily take
the perspective of others, which is a key component of empathy (de Waal 2008). Perspective taking will further increase perceived overlap between oneself and the target of
perspective taking and change the representation of the target to be even more similar to the self (Davis et al. 1996;
Galinsky and Moskowitz 2000). Importantly, perceiving
similarity between the self and others and taking the perspective of others increases empathy directed to the other
person as well as the altruistic motivation to help the other
(Batson, Early, and Salvarani 1997; Coke et al. 1978).
Notably, we propose that this strategy will be stronger
for consumers with higher moral identity. This rationale is
supported by Aquino et al. (2011), who find that individuals
with higher moral identity are more influenced by situational
factors that stimulate the experience of emotions (i.e., moral
elevation) leading to altruistic behavior. Specifically, when
individuals were exposed to others’ acts of uncommon moral
goodness, individuals with high moral identity experienced
a higher degree of moral elevation, a feeling of warmth and
expansion that is accompanied by inspiration toward acts of
uncommon moral goodness, compared to those with low
moral identity (Aquino et al. 2011). Moreover, as stated
earlier, empathy is a moral emotion, which is positively
correlated with moral identity (Detert et al. 2008). Therefore,
consumers with high moral identity will be more susceptible
to situational factors stimulating empathy.
Thus, when immorality is made salient via recall of one’s
own moral failings, consumers with higher moral identity
should have greater feelings of empathy toward charity recipients. That is, immorality salience will lead consumers
with higher moral identity to perceive their feelings of empathy to be more relevant, thereby increasing their likelihood
to engage in charitable giving compared to those with lower
moral identity regardless of the perceived responsibility of
the charity recipients.
H4: The effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility on charitable giving will depend on the
salience of the consumers’ own immorality such
that moral identity will increase donations to recipients regardless of their perceived responsibility when consumers’ own immorality is salient.
In contrast, moral identity will increase (decrease)
donations to those whose perceived responsibility
is low (high) when consumers’ immorality is not
salient.

STUDY 4
The objective of study 4 was to test whether reminding
consumers of their own moral failings can reinstate the positive effect of moral identity on charitable giving to recipients with high responsibility for their plight, as theorized

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

in hypothesis 4. We also used a different charity to enhance
generalizability.

Method and Measures
Participants and Design. A total of 216 undergraduates
at the Pennsylvania State University participated in the
study. The study was a 2 (moral identity: low vs. high) #
2 (recipient responsibility: low vs. high) # 2 (immorality
salience: salient vs. neutral) between-subjects design with
moral identity measured as a continuous variable. Twelve
participants who failed an instructional manipulation check
as well as seven participants who did not complete their
randomly assigned writing task (immorality salience or neutral) were excluded. Thus, we retain 197 responses for analysis (males p 81, females p 110, unanswered p 6). Although we sought to exclude all participants who did not
complete the writing task, applying the same rule across
conditions, only participants in the immorality salience condition failed to complete the writing task. Thus, the seven
participants who did not complete the writing task were in
the immorality salience condition. Given the sensitive nature
of the task in this condition relative to the neutral writing
task, we believe that 6% of participants in this condition
(3% overall) choosing not to complete the task is reasonable.
If we retain these participants, the results do not change
substantially and the focal interaction remains significant (p
p .05).
Procedure. Participants were informed that they would
be participating in several short unrelated tasks during the
research session. First, participants completed a writing task
for immorality salience (or neutral), described in the next
paragraph. Then, they were directed to the second task regarding charitable giving, in which they read either a low
or high responsibility description of an AIDS charity, detailed later. Participants then indicated their donation likelihood on a 7-point scale (1 p very unlikely, 7 p very
likely). Next, participants completed the same six items of
empathetic emotion used in previous studies along with one
additional item self-reporting their level of empathy: “To
what extent do you empathize with these AIDS patients?”
(1 p not at all, 7 p very much; a p .93). Finally, they
completed the moral identity scale (a p .81). Since moral
identity was measured at the end, we performed an ANOVA
using immorality salience and recipient responsibility condition as the independent variables and moral identity as the
dependent variable to ensure that moral identity was not
affected by the manipulations in this study. There was no
significant effect of immorality salience (F(1, 193) p .36,
p 1 .50), recipient responsibility (F(1, 193) p .99, p 1 .30),
or the two-way interaction (F(1, 193) p 1.39, p 1 .20) on
moral identity.
Immorality Salience. To elicit immorality salience, we
adapted Zhong and Liljenquist’s (2006) writing task. The
writing task was described as assessing researchers’ interest
in college students’ everyday experiences and behaviors. In

689

the immorality salience condition, participants were asked
to take some time and recall an unethical behavior that they
committed in the past. They were asked to describe in detail
the particular behavior in a few sentences (e.g., when it was,
what situation it was, what you did), following Zhong and
Liljenquist (2006). In the neutral condition, participants
were asked to think about their typical evening routine and
describe in detail the things that they normally do in the
evening in a few sentences.
Recipient Responsibility. All participants read a description regarding an AIDS charity: “This charity supports patients who suffer from AIDS and are unable to afford appropriate medical treatments due to financial circumstances.
These patients were infected with this life-threatening disease . . .” This statement ended with either “from donor
organs they received that had HIV or through birth by a
mother who had HIV” (low responsibility condition) or “by
engaging in unprotected sex or sharing needles for drug
injection with other HIV patients” (high responsibility condition).
Pretest. We tested the effectiveness of the immorality
salience and recipient responsibility manipulations in a pretest (N p 131 undergraduates). In the pretest, participants
completed the moral identity scale at the beginning of the
study session (a p .78). After 20 minutes of unrelated tasks,
participants completed the immorality salience (or neutral)
writing task and indicated the difficulty of the writing task
with two items: “The writing task was difficult” and “The
writing task took me a lot of effort” (1 p not at all, 5 p
to a great extent; r p .77, p ! .0001). Then participants
read either the high or low responsibility description of the
AIDS charity used in the main study and responded to two
responsibility manipulation check items (r p .81, p !
.0001). Participants also responded to the question: “While
completing your writing task, how much did you feel you
are . . .,” for three items on a 7-point bipolar scale, “ethical/
unethical?” “moral/immoral?” and “pure/impure?”). These
three items were combined to form a single measure of
participants’ perceived immorality (a p .85). In addition,
participants indicated how guilty they felt while completing
the writing task (1 p not at all, 7 p very much).
First, we examined if it was harder for consumers with
higher moral identity to recall their immoral actions from the
past since it may reduce practical implications of this method
if this is the case. Regression analysis using moral identity
(mean-centered), immorality salience condition (neutral p
⫺1, immorality salience p 1), and the interaction term as
independent variables and difficulty of the writing task as the
dependent variable was performed. A significant main effect
of immorality salience condition revealed that the immorality
salience writing task was more difficult than the neutral writing task (b p .42, t(123) p 5.44, p ! .0001). However, there
was not a significant effect of moral identity on perceived
difficulty (b p ⫺.15, t(123) p ⫺1.65, p p .10) nor was
there an interaction between moral identity and the immorality
salience condition (b p.08, t(123) p .91, p 1 .30). Thus,

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

690

recalling immoral actions was not any more difficult for consumers with higher moral identity.
Then we assessed the extent to which the writing tasks
differed in making immorality salient. As expected, a regression analysis using moral identity, recipient responsibility (low p ⫺1, high p 1), immorality salience condition,
and all possible interactions as independent variables and
immorality perceptions as the dependent variable revealed
a significant main effect of immorality salience condition
on perceived immorality (b p .64, t(115) p 6.63, p !
.0001). Perceived immorality was higher in the immorality
salience condition (M p 3.85) than in the neutral condition
(M p 2.57). Importantly, perceived immorality was not
influenced by moral identity, recipient responsibility, or any
interactions. Immorality salience prime also produced feelings of guilt, but the level of guilt was not affected by moral
identity, recipient responsibility, or any of the interactions
(p 1 .50). Thus, the immorality salience prime was effective,
and the effectiveness did not differ by moral identity. Therefore, we can rule out a potential alternative explanation that
individuals with high moral identity may be more likely to
feel moral impurity by recalling their own immorality and
engage in moral behavior to restore their moral purity
(Zhong and Liljenquist 2006).
Finally, we sought to ensure that the new recipient responsibility manipulation for the AIDS charity worked as
intended and that the immorality salience prime did not
influence the recipient responsibility manipulation. We performed a regression analysis using moral identity, recipient
responsibility, immorality salience condition, and all possible interactions as independent variables and perceptions
of charity recipients’ responsibility as the dependent variable. Only the main effect of recipient responsibility condition on perceived responsibility was significant (b p 1.04,
t(120) p 7.10, p ! .0001) with higher responsibility perceptions in the high versus low recipient responsibility condition (M p 5.00 vs. 2.90). No other main effect or interaction was significant, indicating that immorality salience
did not impact perceptions of recipient responsibility. Thus,
the pretest confirmed the effectiveness of the immorality
salience prime and the recipient responsibility manipulation
used in the main study.

Results and Discussion
Donation Likelihood. We performed regression analysis
using donation likelihood as the dependent variable and
moral identity, recipient responsibility (low p ⫺1, high p
1), immorality salience (neutral p ⫺1, immorality salience
p 1), and all possible interactions as the independent variables. There was a significant effect of moral identity (b p
.34, t(189) p 2.86, p ! .01) and recipient responsibility (b
p ⫺.52, t(189) p ⫺5.17, p ! .0001), such that participants
donated more to recipients who were low versus high in
responsibility (M p 5.29 vs. 4.26). The effect of immorality
salience was marginally significant (b p .18, t(189) p 1.76,
p p .08). The two-way interaction of recipient responsibility
and moral identity was significant (b p ⫺.39, t(189) p

⫺3.23, p ! .005), consistent with our earlier studies. The
two-way interaction of moral identity and immorality salience was marginally significant (b p .20, t(189) p 1.69,
p p .09), and the two-way interaction between recipient
responsibility and immorality salience was not significant
(b p ⫺.004, t(189) p ⫺.04, p 1 .90). Importantly, the
hypothesized three-way interaction of moral identity, recipient responsibility, and immorality salience on donation likelihood was significant (b p .26, t(189) p 2.16, p ! .05).
In the neutral condition, the two-way interaction between
moral identity and recipient responsibility was significant
(b p ⫺.65, t(189) p ⫺3.50, p ! .001). Specifically, moral
identity increased donations to recipients whose responsibility was low (b p .79, t(189) p 3.10, p ! .005; M(-1SD)
p 4.46 vs. M(⫹1SD) p5.80) but decreased donations to recipients whose responsibility was high (b p ⫺.51, t(189)
p ⫺1.89, p p .06; M(⫺1SD) p 4.52 vs. M(⫹1SD) p 3.64),
replicating our previous findings. In the immorality salience
condition, the two-way interaction between moral identity
and recipient responsibility was not significant (b p ⫺.13,
t(189) p ⫺.83, p 1 .40). Moral identity increased donations
to recipients whose responsibility was low (b p .68, t(189)
p 2.88, p ! .005; M(⫺1SD) p 4.91 vs. M(⫹1SD) p 6.01) and
to recipients whose responsibility was high (b p .42, t(189)
p 2.11, p ! .05; M(⫺1SD) p 4.08 vs. M(⫹1SD) p 4.80). These
results are consistent with hypothesis 4.
In addition, participants with high moral identity donated
more to recipients whose responsibility was high in the immorality salience condition (M p 4.80) than in the neutral
condition (M p 3.64; p ! .01). This is consistent with our
prediction that those with higher moral identity, when
primed with immorality salience, have more salient empathy
for those who are responsible for their plight such that in
this case, moral identity leads to more charitable behavior.
In contrast, participants with low moral identity did not
donate more to recipients whose responsibility was high in
the immorality salience condition (M p 4.08) than in the
neutral condition (M p 4.52; p 1 .20), which is consistent
with the empathy elicitation being stronger for those with
higher moral identity (Aquino et al. 2011). See figure 5 for
results.
Mediating Role of Empathy. Given that empathy was the
process underlying the positive effect of moral identity on
charitable giving in earlier studies, we tested whether salience of one’s own immorality increased donation likelihood to charity recipients whose perceived responsibility
was high through empathy. We conducted this analysis using
Hayes’s process macro (Process Model 8; Hayes 2012). In
the neutral condition, the two-way interaction between moral
identity and recipient responsibility was mediated by empathy (ab p ⫺.15, 95% CI p ⫺.40 to ⫺.01). Specifically,
in the low responsibility condition, the positive effect of
moral identity on donation likelihood was mediated by empathy (ab p .17, 90% CI p .002 to .38). In the high
responsibility condition, empathy did not mediate the relationship between moral identity and donation likelihood

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS
FIGURE 5
STUDY 4: DONATION LIKELIHOOD TO AIDS CHARITY

691

2012). The positive effect of moral identity on donations
was mediated by empathy (ab p .26, 95% CI p .11 to
.45). Specifically, moral identity increased empathy (b p
.44, p ! .005) and empathy increased donation likelihood
(b p .58, p ! .0001).
Discussion. This study demonstrates that the two-way
interaction of moral identity and recipient responsibility on
donation likelihood is moderated by consumers’ immorality
salience, as proposed in hypothesis 4. Specifically, when
consumers’ moral failings are made salient, moral identity
increases donations regardless of recipient responsibility, but
when immorality is not salient, the effect of moral identity
is conditional on the recipient responsibility, consistent with
previous studies. Additionally, this study shows that immorality salience motivates charitable giving of consumers
with higher moral identity by stimulating empathy.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
This research builds on the growing literature on charitable giving by demonstrating that, depending on the responsibility of the charity recipients for their plight, donations may not be perceived as moral behavior. As such, we
show that contrary to the existing literature on moral identity
and charitable giving, consumers whose moral identity is
central to their self-concept are less likely to engage in charitable giving when charity recipients are responsible for their
plight. The studies reported in this article demonstrate that
consumers with high moral identity take into account the
perceived responsibility of charity recipients in their donation decisions. We also find that the joint effect of moral
identity and recipient responsibility on charitable giving is
driven by empathy and justice such that moral identity increases empathy for charity recipients with low perceived
responsibility but not for recipients with high perceived responsibility due to a focus on perceived injustice of donations. Importantly, we demonstrate that when consumers
with high moral identity recall their own moral failings, they
engage in charitable giving based on enhanced empathy for
the recipients regardless of recipient responsibility.

Theoretical Contributions

(ab p ⫺.14, 95% CI p ⫺.43 to .01), supporting hypothesis
2 and consistent with earlier studies.
In the immorality salience condition, given that there was
no significant two-way interaction between moral identity
and recipient responsibility, we conducted an indirect effects
test for the main effect of moral identity on donations controlling for recipient responsibility (Process Model 4; Hayes

These findings add to the literature on charitable giving,
empathy, and moral identity, as well as effects of perceived
responsibility, which has not explored the joint impact of
moral identity and recipient responsibility on charitable giving. Despite the growing body of work on charitable giving
in consumer research (Duclos and Barasch 2014; Kristofferson et al. 2014; Winterich and Zhang, forthcoming), only
limited research has focused on characteristics of the charity
recipients (Smith et al. 2013). In existing research, moral
identity has often been found to increase consumers’ tendency to engage in charitable giving as a moral behavior,
but research has not considered to what extent this factor
motivating donations may be affected by the type of charity
recipients involved. This research offers insights into a

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

692

boundary condition of the effect of moral identity such that
when recipients are responsible for their plight, moral identity decreases rather than increases donations.
More importantly, the theorizing and empirical demonstration of the mechanisms underlying the joint effect of
moral identity and recipient responsibility make contributions to the literature in empathy, moral identity, and perceived responsibility. Building on the research by Batson et
al. (1995), which suggested that empathy and justice may
be independent motives, we make a unique contribution by
demonstrating two different paths (i.e., empathy and justice)
that underlie donation decisions. When recipients are responsible for their plight, perceived injustice tends to increase with moral identity, decreasing donations. However,
the elicitation of empathy through immorality salience can
enhance charitable giving even for these recipients with high
responsibility. These insights regarding the underlying process via empathy and justice add to existing research regarding the mechanisms through which moral identity impacts charitable giving such as inclusion of others in the self
(Winterich et al. 2009) and the state of moral elevation
(Aquino et al. 2011). Demonstrating that recalling one’s own
moral failings evokes empathy for others who are responsible for immoral behavior also contributes to literature in
empathy, perspective taking, and perceived responsibility.
At a broader level, our findings that eliciting empathy can
overcome the effect of justice concerns in donation decisions
for charity recipients responsible for their plight contribute
to the literature recognizing the importance of affect (vs.
cognitions) in consumers’ charitable giving (Bagozzi and
Moore 1994; Batson et al. 1995; Fisher, Vandenbosch, and
Antia 2008; Small et al. 2007; Small and Verrochi 2009).
This research also extends Aquino et al.’s (2011) findings,
which showed that individuals with high moral identity may
be more susceptible than others to experiencing a state of
moral elevation. We demonstrate that individuals with higher
moral identity are also more susceptible than others to experiencing empathy based on the perceived similarity of the
target of empathy and themselves. These findings may imply
that individuals with high moral identity are those who are
more susceptible to experiencing emotions that motivate altruistic desires and helping behavior, although sometimes
acting based on these emotions may be inconsistent with
their justice perceptions.

Practical Implications
Consumers have limited financial resources to donate, and
thus charities compete to attract donors’ support. We demonstrate that charities supporting beneficiaries who are perceived as responsible for their plight may have a difficult time
attracting donations. We acknowledge that charities do not
tend to highlight the responsibility of their recipients for morally disapproved behaviors, but we believe that consumers
tend to perceive recipients to be responsible. In an additional
study, not reported in this article, we find that even when the
cause of recipient plight is unspecified, moral identity does
not increase donations to stigmatized charity recipients, likely

due to consumers’ inferences about recipient responsibility.
As such, the actual responsibility of the recipient for their
plight is not as important in a donor’s decision as the donor’s
perception of the recipient’s responsibility. Thus, charitable
organizations or for-profit organizations engaging in causerelated marketing should be cautious when describing causes
and beneficiaries that they support in their advertising and
fund-raising campaigns, particularly if the recipients could be
perceived as responsible for their plight and thus undeserving
of donations. In such cases, organizations need to be sure to
specify or imply low responsibility of their recipients in their
charitable appeals or, alternatively, seek to elicit empathy to
be most effective in their fund-raising.
Marketers for these charitable organizations need to recognize that drawing upon consumers’ moral identity may
not always benefit their donation solicitation efforts, particularly when they are seeking aid for recipients responsible
for their plight. Specifically, emphasizing the moral principle
of justice may lead consumers to withhold donations to
recipients with high plight responsibility. Therefore, making
a broader spectrum of morality (e.g., including both justice
and empathy) salient in donation appeals may lead to negative consequences. Instead, marketers should specifically
focus on moral values of empathy and benevolence. Nonprofit marketers should also consider that consumers with
higher moral identity are more susceptible to situational
stimulation of empathy, which increases donations. As such,
they may consider using donation appeals that stimulate
empathy in their marketing communications, as in study 4.
While such donation appeals are likely to be effective at
soliciting donations regardless of recipient responsibility
(Bagozzi and Moore 1994; Fisher et al. 2008), they should
be particularly beneficial when beneficiaries may be perceived as responsible for their plight.

Limitations and Future Research
Given past research on the positive effect of moral identity
on charitable giving (Aquino and Reed 2002; Reed et al.
2007, Winterich et al. 2012, 2013), it is important to note
that in studies 2 and 3 the positive effect of moral identity
on donations to recipients who are not responsible for their
plight was only marginally significant. One possibility for
this weaker effect relative to past literature is that specifying
low recipient responsibility positively influenced donations
of consumers with lower moral identity, weakening the positive effect of moral identity, as evidenced by the main effect
of perceived responsibility in these studies and previous
research (Farwell and Weiner 2000; Henry et al. 2004).
Importantly, we consistently demonstrated the negative effect of moral identity on donations to recipients with high
plight responsibility, which is a main contribution of the
current research.
It is important to recognize that perceptions of in-group
versus out-group members may be a potential alternative
explanation for these results. Specifically, since moral identity expands in-group boundaries (Finnel, Reed, and Aquino
2011; Reed and Aquino 2003; Winterich et al. 2009) and

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS

empathy can be greater for in-groups (Cadinu and Rothbart
1996; Galinsky and Moskowitz 2000), it is possible that
people with higher moral identity perceived recipients as ingroups and thus experienced greater empathy for them unless they were explicitly perceived as an out-group due to
their plight responsibility. To address this alternative explanation, we measured in-group perceptions in a study not
reported earlier. Participants (N p 207 students) completed
a study with the same design and scenarios used in study
2. After reading the charity description and indicating their
donation likelihood, they responded to the question, “To
what extent do you think the patients are part of your ingroup (vs. out-group)?” (1 p not at all, 7 p very much).
Regression analysis on in-group (vs. out-group) perception
revealed that recipient responsibility had a significant negative effect (b p ⫺.23, t(203) p ⫺2.15, p ! .05; Mlow p
2.71 vs. Mhigh p 2.26), but neither moral identity (b p .06,
t(203) p .39, p 1 .60) nor the interaction had an effect on
in-group (vs. out-group) perceptions (b p ⫺.04, t(203) p
⫺.23, p 1 .80). Moreover, we replicated the joint effect of
moral identity and recipient responsibility on donation likelihood (b p ⫺.52, t(203) p ⫺3.29, p p .001), but ingroup versus out-group perceptions did not mediate the joint
effect of moral identity and recipient responsibility (ab p
⫺.01, 95% CI p ⫺.09 to .09). Thus, we do not believe
that the current results occur from moral identity affecting
in-group (vs. out-group) perceptions, though future research
should further explore this relationship using different measures of perceived similarity or in-group perceptions such
as inclusion of others in the self (Aron, Aron, and Smollan
1992; Shang et al. 2008; Winterich et al. 2009).
Since perceived responsibility for the plight is a focal
variable in this research, we only examined situations in
which there is a direct causal link between the recipients’
immoral behavior and their plight, consistent with the definition of perceived responsibility by Shaver (1985). Since
donors would not typically be aware of a charity recipient’s
immoral behavior that is unrelated to the recipient’s plight,
we did not explore situations in which recipients committed
immoral behavior that is irrelevant to their plight. However,
future research can explore whether these effects remain
when the immorality of the recipient is unrelated to the
reason for the plight. We believe that there are likely competing hypotheses, which suggests that there may be additional moderators such as cultural differences (Kopalle, Lehmann, and Farley 2010).
In study 4, we did not measure justice, so we could not
verify the process through justice, but it is possible that consumers may be less focused on the justice of donating to
recipients with high responsibility when they recall their own
moral failings. In this study, we demonstrated that immorality
salience reverses the negative effect of moral identity on donations to recipients who are responsible for their plight
through situational stimulations of empathy. Future research
can explore additional ways to reverse this negative effect of
moral identity on donations. For example, it may be possible
to prime consumers to define morality primarily based on

693

empathy and forgiveness rather than justice or integrity. It
may also be possible to prime consumers with a religious
mind-set, which may lead them to focus on forgiveness and
benevolence for the less deserving. In addition, future research
can explore ways to reverse the negative effect of moral identity on donations by altering justice perceptions. For example,
consumers who do not believe that the world is just or consumers who have more liberal political identity may attribute
recipients’ plight to external causes rather than personal moral
transgressions and may perceive donating to the recipients
with high responsibility as more just.
The current research focuses on monetary donations, but
research has demonstrated that giving time and money can
be different (Liu and Aaker 2008; Mogilner and Aaker 2009),
even among those who are high in moral identity (Reed et
al. 2007). Thus, it is important to consider whether these
effects for monetary donations remain for other prosocial
behaviors requiring time. Future research should also seek to
determine whether there are proxies for moral identity that
might show how moral identity is manifested in real life.
Correlations from existing research find some relationships
between moral identity and age and gender (Aquino and Reed
2002), but these results are currently inconclusive. These relationships as well as relationships between moral identity
and income, education, and religion should be explored in
the future. Finally, given the limited consideration of potential
downsides of moral identity, future research should examine
other boundary conditions of the positive association between
moral identity and prosocial behavior.

Conclusion
Contrary to the consistently positive relationship between
moral identity and charitable giving established in the literature, we show that higher moral identity does not unconditionally lead to greater charitable giving. Instead, the
positive effect of moral identity on charitable giving is conditioned on recipient responsibility due to greater focus on
justice concerns. However, we suggest that consumers with
higher moral identity still have a greater potential to donate
to recipients who are responsible for their plight than those
with lower moral identity, because they are more susceptible
to situational factors that evoke empathy. There are many
stigmatized groups of people in society who are in need of
aid but may be perceived as responsible for their plight. This
research provides important implications for nonprofit marketers who are seeking to help these people in dark corners.

DATA COLLECTION INFORMATION
The first author collected the data or supervised the collection of the data by undergraduate research assistants for
all studies at the Pennsylvania State University from fall of
2011 until spring of 2014 (study 1 in 2012, study 2 in fall
2013, study 3 in spring 2014, study 4 in fall 2011). The
first author analyzed these data with the second author’s
guidance.

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

694

REFERENCES
Aquino, Karl, Dan Freeman, Americus Reed II, Vivien K. G. Lim,
and Will Felps (2009), “Testing a Social-Cognitive Model of
Moral Behavior: The Interactive Influence of Situations and
Moral Identity Centrality,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97 (1), 123–41.
Aquino, Karl, Brent McFerran, and Marjorie Laven (2011), “Moral
Identity and the Experience of Moral Elevation in Response
to Acts of Uncommon Goodness,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 100 (4), 703–18.
Aquino, Karl, and Americus Reed II (2002), “The Self-Importance
of Moral Identity,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (6), 1423–40.
Aron, Arthur, Elaine N. Aron, and Danny Smollan (1992), “Inclusion of the Other in the Self Scale and the Structure of
Interpersonal Closeness,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63 (October), 596–612.
Bagozzi, Richard P., and David J. Moore (1994), “Public Service
Advertisements: Emotions and Empathy Guide Prosocial Behavior,” Journal of Marketing, 58 (January), 56–70.
Barclay, Laurie J., David B. Whiteside, and Karl Aquino (2014),
“To Avenge or Not to Avenge? Exploring the Interactive Effects of Moral Identity and the Negative Reciprocity Norm,”
Journal of Business Ethics, 1121 (1), 15–28.
Barnes, Richard D., William Ickes, and Robert F. Kidd (1979),
“Effects of the Perceived Intentionality and Stability of Another’s Dependency on Helping Behavior,” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 5 (3), 367–72.
Batson, C. Daniel (1987), “Prosocial Motivation: Is It Ever Truly
Altruistic?” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
Vol. 20, ed. L. Berkowitz, New York: Academic Press, 65–
122.
Batson, C. Daniel, Shannon Early, and Giovanni Salvarani (1997),
“Perspective Taking: Imagining How Another Feels versus
Imaging How You Would Feel,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23 (7), 751–58.
Batson, C. Daniel, Tricia R. Klein, Lori Highberger, and Laura L.
Shaw (1995), “Immorality from Empathy-Induced Altruism:
When Compassion and Justice Conflict,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68 (6), 1042–54.
Bekkers, René, and Pamala Wiepking (2011), “A Literature Review of Empirical Studies of Philanthropy: Eight Mechanisms
That Drive Charitable Giving,” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40 (5), 924–73.
Cadinu, Maria Rosaria, and Myron Rothbart (1996), “Self-Anchoring and Differentiation Processes in the Minimal Group
Setting,” Attitudes and Social Cognition, 70 (4), 661–77.
Cherry, Todd L., Peter Frykblom, and Jason F. Shogren (2002),
“Hardnose the Dictator,” American Economic Review, 92
(September), 1218–21.
Choi, Woo Jin, and Karen Page Winterich (2013), “Can Brands
Move in from the Outside? How Moral Identity Enhances
Out-Goup Brand Attitudes,” Journal of Marketing, 77 (2),
121–34.
Coke, Jay S., C. Daniel Batson, and Katherine McDavis (1978),
“Empathic Mediation of Helping: A Two-Stage Model,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36 (7), 752–66.
Davis, Mark H., Laura Conklin, Amy Smith, and Carol Luce
(1996), “Effect of Perspective Taking on the Cognitive Representation of Persons: A Merging of Self and Other,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 70 (4), 713–26.
Detert, James R., Linda Klebe Treviño, and Vicki L. Sweitzer

(2008), “Moral Disengagement in Ethical Decision Making:
A Study of Antecedents and Outcomes,” Journal of Applied
Psychology, 93 (2), 374–91.
De Waal, Frans B. M. (2008), “Putting the Altruism Back into
Altruism: The Evolution of Empathy,” Annual Review of Psychology, 59 (January), 279–300.
Duclos, Rod, and Alixandra Barasch (2014), “Prosocial Behavior
in Intergroup Relations: How Donor Self-Construal and Recipient Group-Membership Shape Generosity,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 41 (June), 93–108.
Eisenberg, Nancy, and Paul A. Miller (1987), “The Relation of
Empathy to Prosocial and Related Behaviors,” Psychological
Bulletin, 101 (1), 91–119.
Farwell, Lisa, and Bernard Weiner (2000), “Bleeding Hearts and
the Heartless: Popular Perceptions of Liberal and Conservative Ideologies,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
26 (7), 845–52.
Feather, N. T. (1996), “Reactions to Penalties for an Offense in
Relation to Authoritarianism, Values, Perceived Responsibility, Perceived Seriousness, and Deservingness,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71 (3), 571–87.
——— (1999), “Judgments of Deservingness: Studies in the Psychology of Justice and Achievement,” Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 3 (2), 86–107.
Fee, Elizabeth, and Nancy Krieger (1993), “Understanding Aids:
Historical Interpretations and the Limits of Biomedical Individualism,” American Journal of Public Health, 83 (10),
1477–86.
Finnel, Stephanie, Americus Reed II, and Karl Aquino (2011),
“Promoting Multiple Policies to the Public: The Difficulties
of Simultaneously Promoting War and Foreign Humanitarian Aid,” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 30 (2),
246–63.
Fischer, Pamela J., and William R. Breakey (1991), “The Epidemiology of Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Disorders among
Homeless Persons,” American Psychologist, 46 (11), 1115–
28.
Fisher, Robert J., Mark Vandenbosch, and Kersi D. Antia (2008),
“An Empathy-Helping Perspective on Consumers’ Responses
to Fund-Raising Appeals,” Journal of Consumer Research,
35 (October), 519–31.
Fraser, Cynthia, Robert E. Hite, and Paul L. Sauer (1988), “Increasing Contributions in Solicitation Campaigns: The Use of
Large and Small Anchorpoints,” Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (September), 284–87.
Galinsky, Adam D., and Gordon B. Moskowitz (2000), “Perspective-Taking: Decreasing Stereotype Expression, Stereotype
Accessibility, and In-Group Favoritism,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78 (4), 708–24.
Giving USA (2012), The Annual Report on Philanthropy for the
Year 2011, Chicago: Giving USA Foundation.
Graham, Jesse, Brian A. Nosek, Jonathan Haidt, Ravi Iyer, Spassena Koleva, and Peter H. Ditto (2011), “Mapping the Moral
Domain,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101
(2), 366–85.
Hart, Daniel, Robert Atkins, and Debra Ford (1998), “Urban America as a Context for the Development of Moral Identity in
Adolescence,” Journal of Social Issues, 54 (3), 513–30.
Hayes, Andrew F. (2012), An Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis: A Regression-Based
Approach, New York: Guilford.
Henry, P. J., Christine Reyna, and Bernard Weiner (2004), “Hate
Welfare but Help the Poor: How the Attributional Content of

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LEE, WINTERICH, AND ROSS
Stereotypes Explains the Paradox of Reactions to the Destitute
in America,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34 (1),
34–58.
Hoffman, Martin L. (1990), “Empathy and Justice Motivation,”
Motivation and Emotion, 14 (2), 151–72.
——— (2000), Empathy and Moral Development: Implications
for Caring and Justice, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kaiser, Henry F. (1960), “The Application of Electronic Computers
to Factor Analysis,” Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20, 141–51.
Kogut, Tehila, and Ilana Ritov (2007), “‘One of Us’: Outstanding
Willingness to Help Save a Single Identified Compatriot,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 104
(2), 150–57.
Kohlberg, Lawrence (1976), “Moral Stages and Moralization: The
Cognitive-Development Approach,” in Moral Development
and Behavior: Theory, Research, and Social Issues, ed. Tom
Lickona, New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston, 31–53.
Kopalle, Praveen K., Donald R. Lehmann, and John U. Farley
(2010), “Consumer Expectations and Culture: The Effect of
Belief in Karma in India,” Journal of Consumer Research,
37 (August), 251–63.
Kristofferson, Kirk, Katherine White, and John Peloza (2014),
“The Nature of Slacktivism: How the Social Observability of
an Initial Act of Token Support Affects Subsequent Prosocial
Action,” Journal of Consumer Research, 40 (April), 1149–
66.
Lee, Jaehoon, and L. J. Shrum (2012), “Conspicuous Consumption
versus Charitable Behavior in Response to Social Exclusion:
A Differential Needs Explanation,” Journal of Consumer Research, 39 (3), 530–44.
Lerner, Melvin J. (1987), “Integrating Societal and Psychological
Rules of Entitlement: The Basic Task of Each Social Actor
and the Fundamental Problem for the Social Sciences,” Social
Justice Research, 1 (1), 107–21.
Levy, Sheri R., Antonio L. Freitas, and Peter Salovey (2002),
“Construing Action Abstractly and Blurring Social Distinctions: Implications for Perceiving Homogeneity among, but
Also Empathizing with and Helping, Others,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (5), 1224–38.
Lisjak, Monika and Angela Y. Lee (2014), “The Bright Side of
Impulse: Depletion Heightens Self-Protective Behavior in the
Face of Danger,” Journal of Consumer Research, forthcoming.
Liu, Wendy, and Jennifer Aaker (2008), “The Happiness of Giving:
The Time-Ask Effect,” Journal of Consumer Research, 35
(October), 543–57.
Mogilner, Cassie, and Jennifer Aaker (2009), “‘The Time versus
Money Effect’: Shifting Product Attitudes and Decisions
through Personal Connection,” Journal of Consumer Research, 36 (August), 277–91.
Oppenheimer, Daniel M., Tom Meyvis, and Nicolas Davidenko
(2009), “Instructional Manipulation Checks: Detecting Satisficing to Increase Statistical Power,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45 (2009), 867–72.
Preacher, Kristopher J., Derek D. Rucker, and Andrew F. Hayes
(2007), “Addressing Moderated Mediation Hypotheses: Theory, Methods, and Prescriptions,” Multivariate Behavioral Research, 42 (1), 185–227.
Reed, Americus, II, and Karl F. Aquino (2003), “Moral Identity
and the Expanding Circle of Moral Regard toward Out-

695
Groups,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84
(6), 1270–86.
Reed, Americus II, Karl Aquino, and Eric Levy (2007), “Moral
Identity and Judgments of Charitable Behaviors,” Journal of
Marketing, 71 (January), 178–93.
Reyna, Christine, P. J. Henry, William Korfmacher, and Amanda
Tucker (2005), “Examining the Principles in Principled Conservatism: The Role of Responsibility Stereotypes as Cues
for Deservingness in Racial Policy Decisions,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 90 (1), 109–28.
Sage, Luke, Maria Kavussanu, and Joa Duda (2006), “Goal Orientations and Moral Identity as Predictors of Prosocial and
Antisocial Functioning in Male Association Football Players,”
Journal of Sports Sciences, 24 (5), 455–66.
Samper, Adriana, and Janet A. Schwartz (2013), “Price Inferences
for Sacred versus Secular Goods: Changing the Price of Medicine Influences Perceived Health Risk,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 39 (April), 1343–58.
Schlenker, Barry R., Thomas W. Britt, John Pennington, Rodolfo
Murphy, and Kevin Doherty (1994), “The Triangle Model of
Responsibility,” Psychological Review, 101 (4), 632–52.
Shang, Jen, Americus Reed, and Rachel Croson (2008), “Identity
Congruency Effects on Donations,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45 (3), 351–61.
Shao, Ruodan, Karl Aquino, and Dan Freeman (2008), “Beyond
Moral Reasoning: A Review of Moral Identity Research and
Its Implications for Business Ethics,” Business Ethics Quarterly, 18 (4), 513–40.
Shaver, Kelly G. (1985), The Attribution of Blame: Causality, Responsibility, and Blameworthiness, New York: Springer-Verlag.
Skarlicki, Daniel P., Danielle D. van Jaarsveld, and David D. Walker (2008), “Getting Even for Customer Mistreatment: The
Role of Moral Identity in the Relationship between Customer
Interpersonal Injustice and Employee Sabotage,” Journal of
Applied Psychology, 93 (6), 1335–47.
Skitka, Linda J., and Philip E. Tetlock (1992), “Allocating Scarce
Resources: A Contingency Model of Distributive Justice,”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28 (6), 491–522.
Small, Deborah A., George Loewenstein, and Paul Slovic (2007),
“Sympathy and Callousness: The Impact of Deliberative
Thought on Donations to Identifiable and Statistical Victims,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102
(2), 143–53.
Small, Deborah A., and Nicole M. Verrochi (2009), “The Face of
Need: Facial Emotion Expression on Charity Advertisements,” Journal of Marketing Research, 46 (6), 777–87.
Smith, Robert W., David Faro, and Katherine A. Burson (2013),
“More for the Many: The Influence of Entitativity on Charitable Giving,” Journal of Consumer Research, 39 (February),
961–76.
Van Prooijen, Jan-Willem, Kees van den Bos, and Henk A. M.
Wilke (2002), “Procedural Justice and Status: Status Salience
as Antecedent of Procedural Fairness Effects,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (6), 1353–61.
Weiner, Bernard (1993), “On Sin versus Sickness: A Theory of
Perceived Responsibility and Social Motivation,” American
Psychologist, 48 (9), 957–65.
Weiner, Bernard, Raymond P. Perry, and Jamie Magnusson (1988),
“An Attributional Analysis of Reactions to Stigmas,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 (5), 738–48.
White, Katherine, and John Peloza (2009), “Self-Benefit versus
Other-Benefit Marketing Appeals: Their Effectiveness in Gen-

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

696
erating Charitable Support,” Journal of Marketing, 73 (4),
109–24.
Wiltermuth, Scott S., Benoı̂t Monin, and Rosalind M. Chow
(2010), “The Orthogonality of Praise and Condemnation in
Moral Judgment,” Social Psychological and Personality Science, 1 (4), 302–10.
Winterich, Karen Page, and Michael J. Barone (2011), “Warm
Glow or Cold, Hard Cash? Social Identify Effects on Consumer Choice for Donation versus Discount Promotions,”
Journal of Marketing Research, 48 (5), 855–68.
Winterich, Karen Page, Vikas Mittal, and Karl Aquino (2013),
“When Does Recognition Increase Charitable Behavior? Toward a Moral Identity-Based Model,” Journal of Marketing,
77 (May), 121–34.
Winterich, Karen Page, Vikas Mittal, and William T. Ross Jr.

(2009), “Donation Behavior toward In-Groups and OutGroups: The Role of Gender and Moral Identity,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 36 (August), 199–214.
Winterich, Karen Page, and Yinlong Zhang (forthcoming), “Accepting Inequality Deters Responsibility: How Power Distance Decreases Charitable Behavior,” Journal of Consumer
Research.
Winterich, Karen Page, Yinlong Zhang, and Vikas Mittal (2012),
“How Political Identity and Charity Positioning Increase Donations: Insights from Moral Foundations Theory,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29 (4), 346–54.
Zhong, Chen-Bo, and Katie Liljenquist (2006), “Washing Away
Your Sins: Threatened Morality and Physical Cleansing,” Science, 313 (8), 1451–52.

This content downloaded from 120.150.92.11 on Tue, 9 Sep 2014 05:20:23 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

