Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions
Author(s): David A. Aaker and Kevin Lane Keller
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, No. 1 (Jan., 1990), pp. 27-41
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1252171 .
Accessed: 24/08/2012 01:21

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Journal of Marketing.

http://www.jstor.org 

David A. Aaker & Kevin Lane Keller 

Consumer  Evaluations 
Brand  Extensions 

of 

Two  studies  were  conducted  to  obtain  insights  on  how  consumers 
form  attitudes  toward  brand  exten- 
sions,  (i.e.,  use  of  an  established  brand  name  to  enter  a  new  product  category).  In one  study,  reactions 
to  20  brand  extension  concepts 
involving  six  well-known  brand  names  were  examined.  Attitude  toward 
the  extension  was  higher  when  (1) there  was  both  a  perception  of  "fit"  between  the  two  product  classes 
along  one  of  three  dimensions  and  a  perception  of  high  quality  for  the  original  brand  or  (2) the  extension 
was  not  regarded  as  too  easy  to  make.  A second  study  examined  the  effectiveness  of  different  positioning 
can  be 
strategies 
neutralized  more  effectively  by  elaborating  on  the  attributes  of  the  brand  extension 
than  by  reminding 
consumers  of  the  positive  associations  with  the  original  brand. 

findings  show  that  potentially  negative  associations 

for  extensions.  The  experimental 

THE 

financial  risk of  entering new  markets has be- 
come  formidable  for  many  consumer  product 
manufacturers.  The  cost  of  introducing  a  new  brand 
in some  consumer markets has been  estimated to range 
from  $50  million  to  more  than $100  million  (Brown 
1985),  with  a total cost  estimated  to  run to  $150  mil- 
lion  (Tauber  1988).  The  price  tag is  much  larger than 
in  the  1970s  in  part because  of  the dramatic increase 
in media  costs,  the more extensive  and aggressive  use 
of  promotions  by  established  firms,  and the  cost  and 
difficulty  of  obtaining  distribution.  As  a result,  firms 
are using  established  brand names  to  facilitate  enter- 
ing  new  markets. 

One  such  approach  is  line  extension,  whereby  a 
current brand name is used  to enter a new  market seg- 
ment  in  its  product class  (e.g.,  Diet  Coke  and Liquid 
Tide).  Another  approach is  brand extension,  whereby 

David A. Aaker is J. Gary Shansby Professor of Marketing Strategy, 
School of Business Administration, University of California, Berkeley. 
Kevin Lane Keller is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Graduate School 
of Business, Stanford University. The authors acknowledge financial as- 
sistance from the Institute of Business Economic Research and thank 
Dipankar Chakravarti, Peter Farquhar, David Reibstein, Itamar Simon- 
son, Allan Shocker, Douglas Stayman, Sheri Bridges, and the anony- 
mous JM reviewers for helpful comments. 

a  current brand  name  is  used  to  enter  a  completely 
different product class  (e.g.,  Jello frozen pudding pops, 
Clorox  laundry  detergent,  Ivory  shampoo,  or  NCR 
photocopiers).  The  strategy of  introducing  new  prod- 
ucts as  extensions  has become  widespread. From  1977 
to  1984,  approximately  40%  of  the  120  to  175  new 
brands  that  were  introduced  into  supermarkets  an- 
nually  were extensions  (Nielsen  1985).  In  1986,  more 
than $15  billion  in  retail  sales  and more  than 34%  of 
apparel  and  accessory  sales  comprised  products  that 
were  licenses  or  trademarks of  brand names  (Kesler 
1987). 

Brand  extensions,  the  focus  of  our  research,  are 
attractive  to  firms  that  face  the  reality  of  high  new 
product  failure  rates  because  they  provide  a  way  to 
take  advantage  of  brand name  recognition  and image 
to  enter new  markets.  The  leverage  of  a strong brand 
name  can  substantially  reduce  the  risk of  introducing 
a  product  in  a  new  market  by  providing  consumers 
the familiarity  of  and knowledge  about an established 
brand.  Moreover,  brand extensions  can  decrease  the 
costs  of  gaining  distribution  and/or  increase  the  ef- 
ficiency  of  promotional  expenditures  (Morein  1975). 
The  brand extension  decision  is  strategically  crit- 
ical  to an organization.  Though  an extension  is  a way 
to  exploit  perhaps the most  important asset  owned  by 
a  business,  it  also  risks  decreasing  the  value  of  that 

Journal of Marketing 
Vol.  54  (January  1990),  27-41 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /  27 

asset.  The  wrong extension  could  create damaging  as- 
sociations  that may be expensive,  or even  impossible, 
to change  (Ries  and Trout 1981).  Further, the decision 
usually  involves  an important strategic  growth  thrust. 
If  the  judgment  is  wrong,  substantial  time  and  re- 
sources  are  lost  and  other  market  opportunities  may 
be  missed. 

The success  of  a brand extension  often  depends  on 
certain assumptions  about consumer  behavior,  such as 
(1)  consumers  hold  positive  beliefs  and favorable  at- 
titudes toward the original brand in memory,  (2)  these 
positive  associations  facilitate  the  formation  of  posi- 
tive  beliefs  and  favorable  attitudes  toward  the  brand 
extension,  and  (3)  negative  associations  are  neither 
transferred to  nor created by  the brand extension.  Al- 
most  no  research,  however,  has  provided  guidance 
about considerations affecting  the  likelihood  that these 
assumptions  hold. 

Our exploratory  research consisted  of  two  studies. 
In study  1,  the  extension  reaction  study,  we  obtained 
reactions  to  20  brand extensions  involving  six  well- 
known  brand names.  Respondents  provided  a  set  of 
open-ended associations with the brand name  and each 
of  the 20  extensions  in addition to  scaled  measures  of 
attitude toward the  original  brand and the extensions, 
three measures  of  fit  between  the two  product classes 
involved,  and  the  perceived  difficulty  of  making  the 
extension.  In study 2,  the extension  positioning  study, 
more  information  was  provided  about  the  extension, 
such  as  cues  to  the  positive  attributes of  the  brand or 
elaborations  designed  to  counter  possible  negative 
perceptions  of  the  extension,  and consumer  reactions 
again  were  assessed. 

Research  Questions 
The  purpose  of  our research was  to explore  how  con- 
sumers  evaluate  brand  extensions.  Our  goal  was  to 
gain  useful  insights  into  why  some  brand extensions 
fail  and  others  succeed.  In  particular,  the  following 
research  questions  were  addressed. 

1.  Can useful qualitative insights into consumer evalua- 
tions of  brand extensions be gained by exploring re- 
actions to the six brands and 20 extensions? What kinds 
of  beliefs  about the original brand will  consumers as- 
sociate with the brand extension and in what ways  will 
those  beliefs  affect the extension  attitude? 

2.  How will consumers' perceptions of the overall quality 
of  the original brand affect their evaluations of  an ex- 
tension?  Under  what  circumstances  will  quality  per- 
ceptions  have the largest effects? 

3.  What is the role of  consumers' perceptions of  the "fit" 
between  the  original and the new  product class?  Will 
they affect the transfer of  the quality perception of  the 
brand to the extension? How  should fit be conceptual- 
ized  and measured? 

4.  Will other aspects of the extension context, such as how 
difficult  the  extension  is  to  make,  affect  consumer 
evaluations? 

28  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

5.  How  are consumer evaluations affected when different 
types of  information are provided in the extension con- 
text? 

The  first  four  questions  were  explored  in  study  1 
and the fifth question  was  addressed in study 2.  In the 
next  section,  we  discuss  the  study  1  research  ques- 
tions  in  more  detail  and  introduce  the  relevant  con- 
structs.  The  methods  and  findings  of  the  two  empir- 
ical  studies  then  are  described.  Finally,  unanswered 
questions  and future research directions  are presented. 

Study  1.  Extension  Reaction  Study 
Research  Issues 
Study  1 explored  how  an attitude toward a brand ex- 
tension  is  formed.  In  this  section,  we  introduce  con- 
structs  relevant  to  the  process:  brand  attribute asso- 
ciations,  the  perceived  quality  of  the  brand,  the  fit 
between  the  two  products,  and the  difficulty  of  mak- 
ing  the brand extension.  The  potential  relationship  of 
these  constructs  to  the  attitude  toward  the  extension 
is  discussed. 

Brand  attribute  associations.  A  great  variety  of 
associations  with the brand could  potentially  be  trans- 
ferred to  the extensions.  Perhaps the most-used  brand 
positioning  device  is  product  attributes or  character- 
istics.  Associations  have  been  created in the minds  of 
many  consumers  between  Viva  towels  and durability, 
BMW  cars  and  performance,  and  Apple  and  user- 
friendliness.  A  brand also  can have  an association with 
a  use  situation,  a  type  of  product  user,  a  place,  or  a 
product class  (Aaker  1982).  For example,  Lowenbrau 
beer  is  associated  with  relaxing  with  good  friends, 
Mercedes  with  wealthy,  discriminating  people,  and 
Toyota  with  Japan. Budweiser,  Chevrolet,  Levi's,  and 
Bank  of  America  all undoubtedly  have  strong product 
class  associations.  The  product  class  of  the  original 
brand,  especially  a  familiar  one  like  beer  or  auto- 
mobiles,  can  itself  have  a  set  of  rather strong  asso- 
ciations  that can  attach to  the  extension. 

For most  brand extensions,  a motivating  rationale 
is  that the  original  brand has  associations  that will  be 
helpful  to  the  extension.  The  impact  of  a  brand as- 
sociation,  however,  can  be  harmful to  the  extension. 
For  example,  the  Betty  Crocker  attribute association 
might  be  viewed  as  negative  if  the  name  were  used 
on  a  fashion  product  designed  to  appeal  to  young 
women.  Zeithaml  (1988)  provides  evidence  suggest- 
ing  that thickness  is  related to  high  quality  in tomato- 
based juices  but not in children's  fruit-flavored  drinks 
and pulp  is  related to  high  quality  in  orange juice  but 
to  low  quality  in  apple  juice.  Thus,  the  impact  of  a 
brand belief  or  association  highly  valued  in  the  orig- 
inal  product  class  may  not  be  positive  in  the  context 
of  the  new  product class. 

In  terms  of  an  associative  model  of  memory 
(Anderson  1983; Wyer and Srull 1986),  there are links 
between  a brand such  as  Budweiser  and a  set  of  ele- 
ments  such  as user types  and the product class.  These 
elements themselves  have  links to other elements  (e.g., 
from the beer product class  to beer taste).  As  a result, 
the brand has a set of  associations that vary in strength. 
The  extent  to  which  each  of  these  associations  will 
"transfer" to  a new  product context  is  a central issue. 
It  is  likely  to  depend  not  only  on  the  strength of  as- 
sociation,  but also  on  other factors  such  as the  appro- 
priateness  of  the  association  and  whether  cues  are 
present  to  activate  an association. 

In  the  first  study,  open-ended  associations  for  20 
hypothetical  brand extensions  were  examined  to  ex- 
plore  qualitatively  what  types  of  associations  appear 
and  what  impact  these  associations  seem  to  have  or 
potentially  could  have  on  evaluations  of  the  exten- 
sion.  In  particular,  are  negative  as  well  as  positive 
associations  transferred or  created?  These  qualitative 
insights  should  provide  useful  hypotheses  for  future 
research. 

Attitude toward  the original  brand.  In addition  to 
specific  brand  attributes,  an  important brand  associ- 
ation  is  the  overall  brand  attitude.  Brand  attitude  is 
based  on  certain  attributes  such  as  durability,  inci- 
dence  of  defects, 
features,  perfor- 
serviceability, 
mance,  or  "fit  and  finish"  (Garvin  1984).  However, 
it  may  also  contain  affect  that is  not  reflected  in  the 
measured  attributes,  even  when  a  large  set  of  attri- 
butes  is  included.  Researchers  building  multiattribute 
models  of  consumer  preference  have  included  a  gen- 
eral component  of  attitude toward the brand that is not 
explained by the brand attribute values (e.g.,  Srinivasan 
1979).  The  overall  brand attitude may  be  stored  and 
retrieved  in  memory  separately  from  the  underlying 
attribute  information  (Anderson  and  Hubert  1963; 
Carlston 1980; Lingle and Ostrom 1979; Riskey  1979). 
Attitude  is  conceptualized  here  in  terms  of  the 
consumer's  perception  of  the  overall  quality  of  the 
brand, termed QUALITY.  The perceived  quality con- 
struct has  received  considerable  attention  in  the  mar- 
keting literature (Holbrook and Corfman 1985; Jacobson 
and  Aaker  1987;  Olshavsky  1985).  Zeithaml  (1988) 
defines  perceived  quality  as  a  global  assessment  of  a 
consumer's  judgment  about  the  superiority  or  excel- 
lence  of  a  product.  She  concludes,  after reviewing  a 
set  of  articles,  that  perceived  quality  is  at  a  higher 
level  of  abstraction than a specific  attribute of  a prod- 
uct. 

The  impact of  perceived  quality on the attitude to- 
ward the extension  should be unambiguously  positive. 
If  the  brand is  associated  with  high  quality,  the  ex- 
tension  should  benefit;  if  it is  associated  with  inferior 
quality,  the  extension  should  be  harmed.  The  rela- 

tionship  between  perceived  quality and the attitude to- 
ward the  extension  was  explored  quantitatively  in  the 
first  study  by  relating  a  measure  of  perceived  quality 
to  a  measure  of  brand  extension  attitudes  over  the 
sample  of  respondents  and extensions.  The hypothesis 
is: 

Hi:  Higher quality perceptions toward the original brand 
(i.e.,  higher QUALITY) are associated with more fa- 
vorable attitudes toward the extension. 

Fit  between  the  original  and  extension  product 
classes.  Prior  brand  extension  research  has  empha- 
sized  primarily the role  of  "fit" or similarity  between 
the  two  involved  product  classes  in  the  formation  of 
brand extension  evaluations.  For example,  early fam- 
ily branding research modeled  generalized  preferences 
for a family  brand entry as a function  of  the similarity 
of  brand competition  and price  levels  in the particular 
product  classes  (Fry  1967)  or  similarity  in  shelf  ar- 
rangements  (Neuhaus  and  Taylor  1972).  More  re- 
cently,  Tauber  (1988)  studied  276  actual  extensions 
and  concluded  that  perceptual  fit  (i.e.,  whether  a 
"consumer perceives the new  item to be consistent with 
the parent brand") is  a key  element in predicting brand 
extension  success.  Another  study  (University  of  Min- 
nesota  Consumer  Behavior  Seminar  1987)  provided 
empirical  support for the notion that greater perceived 
similarity  between  the current and new  products leads 
to  a  greater  transfer of  positive  or  negative  affect  to 
the  new  product. 

Why  should  fit be  important to  an extension?  One 
reason  is  that the  transfer of  the  perceived  quality  of 
a brand will  be  enhanced when  the two  product classes 
in  some  way  fit  together.  Several  theoretical  perspec- 
tives  are compatible  with  such  a view:  cognitive  con- 
sistency (Heider 1958; Osgood  and Tannenbaum 1955), 
stimulus  generalization  (Bierley,  McSweeney,  and 
Vannieuwkerk  1985;  McSweeney  and Bierley  1984), 
affect  transfer (Wright  1975),  and categorization  the- 
ory  (Cohen  and  Basu  1987;  Fiske  1982;  Fiske  and 
Pavelchak  1986;  Sujan  1985). 

For example,  categorization  theory suggests  that a 
consumer  would  evaluate  a brand extension  in one  of 
two  ways:  (1)  by  piecemeal  processing,  whereby  an 
extension  evaluation  is  a  function  of  inferred  brand 
attribute  beliefs  and  their  evaluative  importance,  or 
(2)  by  category-based  processing,  whereby  an exten- 
sion  evaluation  is  a  function  of  some  overall  attitude 
toward  the  original  brand.  Specifically,  if  consumers 
perceive  a similarity  or  "fit" between  the original  and 
extension  product  classes,  with  category-based  pro- 
cessing  they  would  transfer quality  perceptions  to  the 
new  brand extension.  In fact,  categorization  research- 
ers have demonstrated that general affect  can be trans- 
ferred from one  object to another (Gilovich  1981; Read 
1983).  Hence,  a  second  hypothesis  is  that: 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /29 

H2: The  transfer of  a  brand's  perceived  quality  is  en- 
hanced when the two product classes  in some  way fit 
together.  When the fit  is  weak,  the transfer is  inhib- 
ited. 

A  second  reason  why  fit  should  be  important  to 
the  extension  is  that  a  poor  fit  may  not  only  detract 
from the transfer of  positive  associations,  but may  ac- 
tually  stimulate  undesirable  beliefs  and  associations. 
When  the fit  is  low,  as  in Betty  Crocker bicycles,  for 
example,  the  consumer  may  question  the  ability  of  a 
food  firm  to  make  good  bicycles.  If  the  fit  is  incon- 
gruous,  the  extension  may  be  regarded  as  humorous 
or ridiculous.  Hence,  another hypothesis  is: 

H3: The fit between the two  involved  product classes  has 
a  direct positive  association  with  the  attitude toward 
the extension. 

Dimensions  of fit.  Prior research focused  on  fit  or 
similarity  but did not consider  the various  bases  of  fit 
between  two  product  classes.  Product  pairs  can  be 
perceived  to  fit  in  many  ways,  however,  and  we  de- 
veloped  three  such  measures.  Two  measures  take  a 
demand-side  perspective  to consider  the economic  no- 
tions  of  substitutes  and  complements  in  product  use. 
The  third  measure  takes  a  supply-side  view  to  con- 
sider  aspects  of  the  firm's  manufacturing  abilities. 

The  first  fit  measure,  COMPLEMENT,  indicates 
the extent to which consumers view  two product classes 
as  complements.  Products  are  considered  comple- 
ments  if  both  are  consumed  jointly  to  satisfy  some 
particular  need  (Henderson  and  Quandt  1980).  The 
second  fit  measure,  SUBSTITUTE, 
is  the  extent  to 
which  consumers  view  two  product classes  as  substi- 
tutes.  Substitute  products tend to have  a common  ap- 
plication  and  use  context  such  that  one  product  can 
replace  the other in usage  and satisfy  the same  needs. 
Consider  Rossignol,  which  makes  downhill  skis. 
A  complementary  extension  might  be  Rossignol  ski 
clothing;  a  substitute  extension  might  be  Rossignol 
cross-country  skis  or  ice  skates.  In  both  cases,  be- 
cause  fit  is  present,  the  transfer of  positive  associa- 
tions  should  not  be  inhibited.  When  fit  is  high,  con- 
sumers are hypothesized to accept the extension concept 
and  not  activate  thought  processes  challenging  the 
quality  and characteristics  of  the  extension. 

The  other  fit  measure,  TRANSFER,  pertains  not 
to  how  consumers view  relationships in product usage, 
but  how  consumers  view  relationships  in  product 
manufacturing.  Specifically,  TRANSFER  reflects  the 
perceived  ability  of  any  firm  operating  in  the  first 
product class  to make  a product in the second  product 
class.  Do  consumers  feel  that  the  people,  facilities, 
and  skills  a  firm  uses  to  make  the  original  product 
would  "transfer" and be  employed  effectively  in  de- 
signing  and making the product extension?  If not,  the 
perceived quality of the brand or beliefs about the brand 

30  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

in  the  original  product  class  may  not  transfer to  the 
extension.  In  fact,  if  a  firm  appears  to  be  stretching 
excessively  beyond  its  area of  competence,  negative 
reactions  such  as  skepticism  or  even  laughter  might 
be  stimulated  and lead  to  negative  associations. 

A  question  of  both  theoretical  and  practical  im- 
portance is the relative role of  each of  the fit measures 
in  terms  of  (1)  their direct  impact  on  the  attitude to- 
ward  the  extension  and  (2)  their  moderating  impact 
on  the  relationship  between  the  perceived  quality  of 
the  original  brand and  the  attitude  toward  the  exten- 
sion,  as  expressed  in  H2 and H3. 

Perceived  difficulty of making  the extension.  Var- 
ious  perceptions  of  the  new  product  class  also  may 
affect  consumer  evaluations  of  a brand extension.  We 
consider  one  such  factor,  the  perceived  difficulty  in 
designing  or  making  the  extension  product,  termed 
DIFFICULT. 

When  consumers  perceive  the  extended  product 
class  to  be  "trivial" or very  easy  to  make  (i.e.,  DIF- 
FICULT  is  low),  a  potential  incongruity  occurs.  The 
consumers may view  the combination of  a quality brand 
and a trivial product class  as  inconsistent  or even  ex- 
ploitative.  The  incongruity  itself  may  trigger  a rejec- 
tion  or  it  might  lead  to  a  judgment  that  the  quality 
name will  add a price higher than is justified  and nec- 
essary  for  such  a product.  This  logic  supports the hy- 
pothesis  that: 

H4: The relationship between the difficulty of  making the 
product class  of  the extension,  DIFFICULT, and the 
attitude toward the extension  is  positive. 

Summary.  Study  1,  the  extension  reaction  study, 
was  an exploratory  study motivated  by the hypotheses 
that  brand  extension  attitudes  are  influenced  by  the 
perceived  quality  of  the  brand name  and  the  fit  be- 
tween  the two  product classes.  Further, an interaction 
was  hypothesized  between  the two  as perceived  qual- 
ity  will  be  more  helpful  when  there  is  a  reasonable 
fit.  Characteristics of  the extension  product class  also 
can  affect  extension  attitudes.  In  particular,  product 
classes  that  are perceived  as  either  too  trivial  or  too 
easy  to  make  were  hypothesized  to  receive  lower  ex- 
tension  evaluations.  In addition,  attribute associations 
were  expected  to  influence  extension  attitudes  both 
negatively  and  positively.  The  open-ended  questions 
in  study  1 were  intended  to  explore  the nature of  that 
influence. 

Method 

Perceptions and evaluations of  a set of  six actual brands 
and  20  hypothetical  brand extensions  were  gathered 
from  107  undergraduate business  students  who  par- 
ticipated  in the study  as part of  a course  requirement. 
A  survey  cover  letter said that the interest was  in their 

opinions,  as  consumers,  about  different  brands  and 
products. 

Stimuli.  The  original  brands were  selected  on  the 
criteria  of  being  relevant  to  subjects,  generally  per- 
ceived  as high quality,  able to elicit  relatively  specific 
associations,  and not broadly extended previously.  The 
20  extensions  selected  had  to  be  reasonable  and  not 
illogical,  but had to provide heterogeneity  on the three 
fit  measures.  High  quality  brands  were  chosen  be- 
cause  the use of  low  quality brands would  have  tended 
to generate extensions  that would  be less  realistic.  Ac- 
tual  selection  of  the  brand  names  and  product  class 
extensions  involved  analyzing  the  responses  of  two 
focus  groups and a survey  of  almost  100 subjects  sim- 
ilar to  those  in the  actual data collection.  The  follow- 
ing  brands and extensions  satisfied  the  criteria. 

Original  Brand 

Product  Class  Extension 

Heineken Beer 
Vuaret  Sunglasses 

Haagen-Dazs Ice  Cream 

Vidal  Sassoon  Shampoo 

Crest Toothpaste 

McDonald's  Meal 

Light beer,  wine,  popcorn 
Skis,  wallets,  sportswear, 

watches 

Popcorn, cottage cheese, 

candy bar 

Skin cream,  suntan lotion, 
perfume,  sportswear 
Mouthwash,  chewing  gum, 

shaving cream 

Frozen fries,  theme park, 

photo processing 

Measures.  Open-ended  associations  were obtained 
first for  the  original  brand and then  for  the  set  of  ex- 
tensions.  Respondents  were  asked  to  take  roughly  30 
seconds  to write down  the associations or thoughts that 
came  to  mind  when  they  considered  the  idea  of  pur- 
chasing  each  brand name  product  or  extension.  The 
set  of  26  open-ended  association  tasks  was  split  into 
three parts separated by  sets  of  scaling  tasks. 

The  open-ended  responses  to  the  thought-listing 
questions  were  classified  by  two  coders  blind  to  the 
purpose  of  the  study.  The  coding  was  done  qualita- 
tively  by  having  coders  group  associations  into  clus- 
ters  according  to  perceived  similarity  (see  Tables  1 
and  3  for  examples  of  the  associations).  The  coders 
agreed  on  82%  of  the  associations  (i.e.,  placed  the 
association  into the same  type of  cluster).  Because  the 
differences  in  coding  were  believed  to  be  a  function 
of  subjective  interpretations in judgments  and not sys- 
tematic  deviations,  the  results  reported  are  the  aver- 
ages  of  the  two  judges'  codings. 

Three fit  measures  were  used,  with  7-point  Likert 
scales  (1  =  strongly  disagree,  7  =  strongly  agree). 
Subjects assessed  the extent to which the products were 
substitutes  that they  would  select  between  in  certain 
usage  situations (SUBSTITUTE)  and complements  that 
they  would  be  likely  to  use  together  in  certain  usage 
situations  (COMPLEMENT).  The  third  scale  mea- 

sured  the  perceived  ability  of  a  competent  manufac- 
turer in the original  product class  to make  the product 
extension  (TRANSFER).  Would  the  people,  facili- 
ties,  and skills  used  in developing,  refining,  and mak- 
ing  the original  product be helpful  if the manufacturer 
were  to  make  the  product  extension  (1  =  not  at  all 
helpful,  7  =  very  helpful)?  Note  that the TRANSFER 
measure  was  not  linked  to  any  specific  brand in  the 
product class. 

A  7-point  scale  measured  the  difficulty  in  design- 
ing  and making  the product,  DIFFICULT  (1  =  not  at 
all  difficult,  7  =  very  difficult).  Would  specialized 
people,  facilities,  and  skills  be  needed  to  make  the 
extended  product  class?  A  7-point  scale  assessed  the 
overall  quality  of  each  original  brand,  QUALITY  (1 
=  inferior,  7  =  superior).  Finally,  the attitude toward 
the  extension  was  operationalized  by  two  different 
measures:  the  perceived  overall  quality  of  the  exten- 
sion  (1  =  inferior,  7  =  superior)  and  the  likelihood 
of  trying  the  extension  assuming  a  purchase  was 
planned  in  the  product  class  (1  =  not  at all  likely,  7 
=  very  likely). 

To  avoid  confounding  the  reactions  to  the  exten- 
sions,  the only  information subjects had was the brand 
name.  Consumers'  reaction  to  extension  concepts  so 
presented  should  be  relevant  to  managers  who  must 
make  decisions  about  introductory  marketing  cam- 
paigns  for  brand extensions.  It  provides  information 
on  what  baseline  reactions  occur  and the  associations 
that a marketing program must counter or upon which 
it can  build. 

Qualitative  Results 

The  objective  of  the  qualitative  phase  of  the  research 
was  to  see  what  types  of  associations  would  emerge 
from  a  thought-listing  about  the  original  brands  and 
the extensions  and thus gain  insights  about why  eval- 
uations  were  more  favorable  toward  some  of  the  ex- 
tensions  than toward  others. 

Original  brand  associations.  Table  1 summarizes 
the  coded  open-ended  associations  and average  qual- 
ity  ratings  for  the  original  brands.  Four of  the  brands 
received  extremely  high  ratings  (Heineken,  Vuarnet, 
Haagen-Dazs,  and  Crest),  whereas  the  other  two  re- 
ceived  above  average or average quality ratings (Vidal 
Sassoon  and McDonald's).  These  quality  assessments 
are  reflected  in  the  stated  associations,  with  many 
subjects  noting  overall  brand quality.  Perceived  price 
was  mentioned  frequently,  with  most  subjects  noting 
that  four  of  the  brands  were  characterized  by  high 
prices.  Many  associations  were  more  specific,  refer- 
ring  to  particular product  attributes  (Haagen-Dazs- 
smooth/creamy),  packaging  (Vidal  Sassoon-dark 
brown bottle),  facts about the manufacturer (Vuamet- 
French),  user characteristics (Crest-family),  or usage 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /31 

Summary  of  Coded  Brand  Associations 
Heineken Beer (5.57) 

Expensive 
High quality 
Green bottle/label 
Imported 
European 
Good  beer 

Haagen Dazs Ice Cream (5.85) 

Expensive 
Good tasting 
Great flavors 
Good  ice  cream 
High quality 
Rich 
Creamy 
High calories 

TABLE 1 

for  Original  Brands:  Number  of  Respondents  Mentioning  Item" 

44 
24 
27 
23 
23 
15 

55 
28 
20 
18 
16 
17 
17 
13 

Vuarnet Sunglasses  (5.87) 

Expensive 
Skiing 
Quality 
Stylish/fashionable 
Trendy 
UV protection 

Vidal Sassoon  Shampoo  (4.33) 

Expensive 
Good scent 
Brown bottle 
High quality 
French/French hair designer 
Fashionable 
Used  in salons 

68 
33 
28 
27 
13 
12 

24 
15 
14 
14 
13 
12 
11 

Crest Toothpaste  (5.48) 

McDonald's Meal (3.33) 

Cavity fighter 
Traditional 
Tastes  good 
Brand loyal 

46 
45 
23 
20 
19 
13 
aNumbers in parentheses  are the  average  quality ratings. Associations  and  ratings are based  on  a  sample  of  107 undergraduate 
business  students. 

Fast food 
Cheap 
Tastes  bad 
Good fries 
Greasy 
Golden Arches/Ronald  McDonald 

36 
24 
17 
16 

situations  (Vuaret-skiing). 
Thus,  analysis  of  the 
stated associations  for the original brands is consistent 
with  the  notion  that those  brands are associated  with 
a  variety  of  specific  attributes,  as  well  as  overall  at- 
titudes. 

Brand  extension  associations.  Table  2  reports the 
average  ratings  of  the  20  brand extensions  and Table 
3  summarizes  the  accompanying  open-ended  associ- 
ations.  An  examination  of  the  most  frequently  men- 
tioned  associations  for brand extensions  receiving  low 
evaluations  is  illuminating.  Three  primary  problems 
emerge:  (1)  the fit between  the original  and extension 
product  classes  was  perceived  as  low,  (2)  the  exten- 
sion  was  perceived  as  too  easy  to  make,  and  (3)  the 
original  brand  carried  damaging  attribute  character- 
istics  to  the  extensions. 

One problem  with low  rated extensions  was  a lack 
of  perceived  fit  or similarity  between  the original  and 
extension  product classes.  The  firm was  seen  as  lack- 
ing  the  ability  to  make  a  product  that  would  be  su- 
perior  to  competitors  in  the  extension  product  class. 
These  fit  concerns  were  expressed  in  several  ways. 
For example,  some  subjects  reacted to  the  concept  of 
McDonald's  photo  processing  by  stating  either  that 
McDonald's  should  stick  to  food  and  had  no  credi- 
bility  as a photo processor  (n  =  33)  or that they  would 
prefer to  stay  with  established  photo  processors  (n  = 
16).  In  evaluating  Heineken  popcorn,  some  subjects 

felt  that popcorn  and beer do  not  mix  (n  =  26).  Sim- 
ilarly,  some  subjects  felt  that  a  beer  and  wine  pro- 
ducer is  a bad combination  (n  =  32)  or that Heineken 
lacked  the  technical  experience  to  make  wine  (n  = 
17). 

A  second  problem  was  that the  product class  was 
considered  too  "easy  to  make."  In  reacting  to  Hei- 
neken popcorn,  some  subjects maintained that all pop- 
corn  is  the  same  (n  =  20).  Because  all  brands  are 
about  the  same,  the  extension  was  presumably  per- 
ceived  as  being  unlikely  to  be  superior  to  existing 
products.  This  lack  of  perceived  difference  in  quality 
in  the  product class  is  also  evident  for  Vidal  Sassoon 
perfume  (n  =  14),  Crest shaving  cream (n  =  20),  and 
Haagen-Dazs  cottage  cheese  (n  =  11). 

A  third problem with less  successful extensions  was 
that  the  brand name  carried  damaging  product  class 
associations  or beliefs  to  the extension.  For example, 
some  subjects  commented  on  how  Heineken  popcorn 
would  probably either taste specifically  like  beer (n  = 
15)  or,  more  generally,  would  have  an  unappetizing 
taste (n  =  18).  Vidal  Sassoon  perfume was  associated 
by  some  subjects  with  an  undesirably  strong  sham- 
poo-like  scent  (n  =  17).  Crest  chewing  gum  was 
thought by  some  either to taste specifically  like  tooth- 
paste  or,  more  generally,  to  taste  bad or unappealing 
(n  =  25). 

An  interesting  illustration  of  the  transfer of  attri- 
butes  is  the  contrast  of  Crest  chewing  gum  to  Crest 

32  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

4.75 
1.81 
5.19 
2.44 
4.96 
3.08 
1.81 

2.10 
3.58 
4.29 
5.46 
4.12 
3.58 
5.93 
3.87 
5.43 
4.51 
2.88 
3.50 
4.29 
3.88 
1.86 

TABLE 2 
Study  1  Means' 

Attitude 
Toward 
Extension 
2.03 
2.30 
2.94 
3.13 
3.24 
3.26 
3.28 

QUALITY 
3.33 
5.57 
5.57 
5.85 
4.33 
5.48 
5.85 

TRANSFER 
1.43 
1.98 
4.36 
3.67 
3.58 
3.63 
2.39 

SUBSTITUTE 
1.50 
1.92 
4.35 
2.85 
2.41 
2.12 
3.95 

COMPLEMENT 
1.69 
5.35 
5.26 
2.08 
4.27 
4.47 
3.19 

DIFFICULT 

1.  McDonald's  photo  processing 
2.  Heineken  popcorn 
3.  Heineken  wine 
4.  Haagen  Dazs  cottage  cheese 
5.  Vidal  Sassoon  perfume 
6.  Crest  shaving  cream 
7.  Haagen-Dazs  popcorn 
8.  McDonald's  frozen  french 

fries 

3.37 
3.43 
3.48 
3.56 
3.63 
3.78 
3.91 
3.98 
4.07 
4.76 
4.81 
4.86 
5.15 
3.60 
1.65 

skin  cream 

suntan  lotion 

9.  Crest  chewing  gum 
10.  Vidal  Sassoon  sportswear 
11.  McDonald's  theme  park 
12.  Vidal  Sassoon 
13.  Vaurnet  wallets 
14.  Vaurnet  skiis 
15.  Vidal  Sassoon 
16.  Vaurnet  watches 
17.  Heineken  light  beer 
18.  Haagen  Dazs  candy  bar 
19.  Crest  mouthwash 
20.  Vaurnet  sportswear 
Average 
Standard  deviation 
aStudy means  are averages  of  107 subjects' perceptions of the  following  measures:  attitude toward the  extension,  the  average of 
perceived overall quality of the  extension  (1 =  inferior, 7  =  superior) and likelihood of trying the  extension  (1  =  not at all likely, 
7  =  very  likely); QUALITY, the  overall quality of  the  original brand (1  =  inferior, 7  =  superior); TRANSFER, the  usefulness  of 
manufacturing skills and resources in the  original product class  for making the  extension  product (1 =  not at all helpful, 7  =  very 
helpful); SUBSTITUTE, substitutability of  the  original and  extension  products in  use  (1  =  low,  7  =  high); COMPLEMENT, com- 
plementarity of  the  original and  extension  product classes  in  use  (1  =  low,  7  =  high);  and  DIFFICULT, perceived  difficulty in 
designing  and making the  extension  (1  =  not at all difficult, 7  =  difficult). 

3.40 
3.80 
3.19 
3.98 
5.09 
4.65 
6.09 
3.92 
4.86 
5.49 
4.26 
5.64 
5.75 
4.32 
2.03 

3.33 
5.48 
4.33 
3.33 
4.33 
5.87 
5.87 
4.33 
5.87 
5.57 
5.85 
5.48 
5.87 
5.08 
1.53 

4.22 
3.75 
1.71 
1.99 
2.79 
2.26 
2.11 
2.42 
2.75 
5.56 
5.30 
4.43 
2.88 
3.06 
2.08 

5.84 
4.06 
1.91 
2.31 
4.66 
2.71 
2.79 
4.33 
2.87 
6.71 
4.37 
6.08 
3.25 
3.65 
2.02 

mouthwash.  The  mouthwash  extension  has  a  much 
higher  quality  rating than the  gum  extension,  despite 
the  fact  that  in  both  cases  there  are many  "good  for 
teeth"  associations.  However,  a  larger  incidence  of 
damaging  "bad  taste"  or  "taste  like  toothpaste"  as- 
sociations  is  found  for  the  gum  (n  =  25)  than for  the 
mouthwash  (n  =  10).  The  Crest taste  thus  seemed  to 
be acceptable,  or perhaps even  an asset,  in the mouth- 
wash  context  but  a  liability  in  the  gum  context. 

Another  interesting  illustration  of  the  transfer  of 
attributes to  an extension  involves  Heineken  popcorn 
and Vuamet  skis.  These  two  brands both received  very 
favorable  perceived  quality  ratings  for  their  original 
products  and  both  extensions  had  very  high  comple- 
mentarity ratings but low  marks on  substitutability and 
transfer.  Yet,  Vuarnet  skis  received  much  more  fa- 
vorable  attitude  ratings  than  Heineken  popcorn.  The 
fact  that some  subjects  perceived  popcorn  to  be  easy 
to  make  contributed  to  the  negative  evaluation  of 
Heineken  popcorn,  but it also  could  have  been  caused 
by the negative  association  of  beer taste mentioned  by 
some  subjects.  The  Vuaret  name,  in  contrast,  had  a 
rather remarkable ability  to be exported  to other prod- 

uct  classes.  In  this  case,  complementarity  may  have 
led  to  an inference  that the  extension  would  have  the 
"stylish"  attribute associated  with  the  Vuaret  name, 
and this attribute was  valued  in the different extension 
contexts. 

Two  additional  points  should  be  made  about  the 
qualitative  analysis  of  the  associations.  First,  some 
brands received  relatively few  associations  (e.g.,  Crest 
shaving  cream,  Haagen-Dazs  popcorn,  Vidal  Sassoon 
suntan  lotion,  and  Vuarnet  sportswear).  For  these 
brands,  consumers  may  simply  have  had  difficulty 
visualizing  what the extension  should be like,  perhaps 
because  the  brand  name  associations  were  not  very 
relevant  to  the  new  product class.  Second,  some  ex- 
tensions  received  rather pronounced categorization that 
allowed  subjects'  responses  to  be  divided  into  clearly 
defined  segments.  For  example,  some  subjects  asso- 
ciated  Vidal  Sassoon  sportswear with trendy,  fashion- 
able,  or  high  status  designer  labels  (though  perhaps 
partly because  of  the jeans  line  with  a similar name). 
Other  subjects  felt  that  Sassoon  should  stick  to  hair 
care  and found  the  idea  of  Sassoon  sportswear tacky, 
unoriginal,  and unappealing. 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /33 

Summary  of  Coded  Brand  Associations 

for  Brand  Extensions: 

Number  of  Respondents  Mentioning  Item' 

TABLE 3 

Processing  (2.03) 
redibility 

1.  McDonald's Photo 
Stick to  food/no  cr 
Low quality 
Fast 
Would not  use 
Cheap 

3.  Heineken Wine (2.91) 

Beer and wine  are bad combo 
Low or bad quality 
Not much experience/stick  to  beer 
Good quality/good  name 
Expensive 

5.  Vidal Sassoon  Perfume (3.24) 

Smells  like shampoo 
Good quality/smells  good 
Bad scent 
All are alike 
Low/medium  quality 

7.  Haagen Dazs Popcorn (3.28) 
Bad mix/stick  to  ice  cream 
Expensive 
Flavors/sweet/rich 
All popcorn is the  same 
High quality 

9.  Crest Chewing  Gum (3.43) 

Prevents cavities 
Good for teeth 
Bad taste 
Sugarless 
Good taste 

11.  McDonald's Theme  Park (3.56) 

For kids/families 
McDonald's characters 
Fun 
Stupid/silly/awful 
Food 

13.  Vuarnet Wallets  (3.78) 

Expensive 
High quality 
Fashionable/stylish 
Sporty 
Not leather/velcro 

15.  Vidal Sassoon  Sun  Lotion (3.98) 

Expensive 
High quality 
No technical  knowledge 
Fashionable/glamorous 
Low quality 

33 
29 
20 
16 
15 

32 
24 
17 
12 
8 

17 
17 
17 
14 
13 

31 
23 
19 
16 
13 

37 
26 
25 
23 
17 

56 
29 
14 
14 
11 

33 
21 
24 
15 
15 

19 
15 
10 
8 
8 

2.  Heineken Popcorn (2.30) 

Popcorn and  beer don't  mix 
All popcorn is the  same 
Unappetizing/bad  idea 
Tastes  like beer 
Goes  with  beer 

4.  Haagen Dazs Cottage  Cheese  (3.13) 

High quality 
Good taste 
Bad associations 
Stick to  ice  cream/inconsistent 
All the  same 

6.  Crest Shaving  Cream (3.26) 

Same  as  others 
Stick with toothpaste 
Good  product 
Good quality 
Reasonably priced 

8.  McDonald's Frozen French Fries (3.37) 

Good  quality 
Not as  good  as  real thing 
Bad/gross 
Greasy 
Convenient 

10.  Vidal Sassoon  Sportswear  (3.48) 

Stylish/trendy/fashionable 
No appeal/would  not  buy 
Low quality 
Expensive 
Stick to  hair care 

12.  Vidal Sassoon  Skin Cream (3.63) 
Trust because  of  reputation 
High quality 
Expensive 
Scented 
Stick to  hair care 
14.  Vuarnet Skis  (3.91) 

High quality 
Expensive 
Trendy/fashionable 
No technical  knowledge 
Stick to  established  manufacturer 

16.  Vuarnet Watches  (3.78) 
Trendy/fashionable 
Expensive 
Like Swatch 
Sporty 
High quality 

26 
20 
18 
15 
14 

17 
15 
15 
12 
11 

20 
20 
15 
10 
9 

29 
25 
19 
11 
8 

21 
19 
29 
16 
12 

26 
21 
20 
12 
7 

33 
32 
25 
12 
11 

40 
35 
35 
17 
15 

Modeling  Consumer  Evaluations 
of  Brand  Extensions 
The  qualitative  analysis  provides  support for  the  im- 
portance  of  some  of  the  constructs  thought  to  affect 
consumers'  evaluations  of  brand  extensions 
(e.g., 
perceived  product class  fit  and perceived  difficulty  of 
making  the  product  extension).  To  address  these  ef- 
fects  more  formally  and explore  the role  of  perceived 

quality,  we  estimated  a  regression  model  motivated 
by  the  four  hypotheses. 

The  dependent  variable  was  attitude  toward  the 
extension,  operationalized  by  the  average  of  the  per- 
ceived  quality  of  the  extension  and the  likelihood  of 
trying  the  extension  measures.  The  use  of  two  indi- 
cators provided  a more reliable measure of the attitude 
construct,  as the correlation between  the two  was  .67, 

34  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

Summary  of  Coded  Brand  Associations 

for  Brand  Extensions: 

Number  of  Respondents  Mentioning  Itema 

TABLE 3  (continued) 

17.  Heineken Light Beer (4.76) 

Good taste 
High quality 
Fewer calories 
Expensive 
European/imported 
19.  Crest Mouthwash  (4.86) 
Good  like toothpaste 
Fights cavities 
High quality/works  well 
Tastes  good 
Tastes  bad 

34 
32 
24 
22 
16 

35 
23 
18 
11 
10 

18.  Haagen Dazs Candy Bar (4.81) 

Tastes  good 
Expensive 
Worth trying 
Chocolate 
Good quality 

20.  Vuarnet Sportswear  (5.15) 

Expensive 
Stylish/trendy/fashionable 
High quality 
Sporty 
Status  symbol 

32 
23 
17 
16 
14 

48 
44 
32 
19 
12 

"Numbers in parentheses  are the  extension  attitude ratings. Associations  and ratings are based on a sample  of  107 undergraduate 
business  students. 

TABLE 4 
A  Regression  Model  of  the  Attitude  Toward  the  Extension 

Independent Variable 
QUALITY (perceived quality of  original brand) 
TRANSFER (transfer of  skills/assets  from original to  extension 

COMPLEMENT (degree  to  which the  two  product classes  are 

SUBSTITUTE (degree  to  which the  two  product classes  are 

product class) 

complements) 

substitutes) 

QUALITY x  TRANSFER 
QUALITY x  COMPLEMENT 
QUALITY x  SUBSTITUTE 
DIFFICULT (difficulty of  making extension) 
Sample  size  =  2140 
Adjusted  r2 =  .26 

Standardized 
Regression 
Coefficient 
-.01 

Regression 
Coefficient 
-.01 

t-value 
-.1 

.15 

-.02 

-.08 
.12 
.25 
.18 
.12 

.12 

-.02 

-.06 
.02 
.03 
.02 
.12 

2.0 

-.4 

-1.0 
1.4 
3.2 
2.1 
6.2 

suggesting  a reliability  of  .79.  Further, when  separate 
regressions  were  run for  each,  none  of  the regression 
coefficients  were  significantly  different. 

The  independent  variables  follow  the  four  hy- 
potheses  and  are listed  in  Table  4.  The  first  variable 
is  the perceived  quality  of  the original  brand, QUAL- 
ITY,  from  HI.  Next  are  the  three  fit  variables, 
TRANSFER,  COMPLEMENT,  and  SUBSTITUTE, 
from  H3.  The  following  three  terms  reflect  the  inter- 
actions  of  the  three  fit  variables  with  the  perceived 
quality  variable,  from  H2.  The  final  variable  is  the 

'Because  the  analysis  is  conducted  across  subjects  and  across  ex- 
tensions,  a confounding  scaling  effect  may  be  present.  If  some  sub- 
jects  tended  to  use  the  upper part of  the  7-point  scale  on  both  the 
independent and dependent variables and others tended to use the low 
part of  the scale,  even  if  there were no relationship for an individual, 
a pooled,  aggregate analysis would  show  a significant effect  between 
the variables. The source of  this effect,  however,  would  be spurious. 
To check this possibility,  a main-effects-only  model was run with data 
standardized within each  subject (i.e.,  each  subject's  mean was  sub- 
tracted for each specific  value for the dependent and independent vari- 
ables,  and this difference was divided by the standard deviation).  The 

perceived  difficulty  of  making  the  extension,  DIFFI- 
CULT,  from H4. The regression  was  run over  the  107 
subjects  and the 20  extensions,  making  a sample  size 
of  2140.1  The resulting standardized regression or beta 
coefficients,  regression  coefficients,  and t-statistics are 
reported in  Table  4.2 

Perceived  brand  quality.  The  beta  coefficient  for 
the  QUALITY  variable  is  essentially  zero,  indicating 

resulting regression coefficients are essentially identical to those found 
for the raw data, ruling out the possiblity that scaling effects  confound 
the findings. 
2The correlation matrix for the Table  2  variables is  based on  the re- 
sponses  of  107 subjects for 20  extensions. 

QUAL-  TRANS-  COMPLE-  SUBSTI-  DIFFI- 
MENT 
TUTE  CULT 

FER 

ITY 

Extension 

attitudes 
QUALITY 
TRANSFER 
COMPLEMENT 
SUBSTITUTE 

.29 

.34 
.08 

.31 
.19 
.27 

.25 
.14 
.44 
.21 

.13 
.00 
-.07 
.16 
.09 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /  35 

that,  in  contrast  to  HI,  there  is  no  direct  link  from 
perceived  quality  of  the  brand to  the  attitude  toward 
the  extension. 

Perceived  product  class  fit.  The  beta  coefficients 
for  two  of  the  fit  variables,  COMPLEMENT  and 
SUBSTITUTE,  are not significant.  However,  the beta 
coefficient  for  TRANSFER,  the  extent  to  which  the 
assets  and  skills  of  a  firm  making  the  product  class 
associated  with  the  original  brand name  could  be  ap- 
plied  to  making the extensions,  is  substantial (.15)  and 
significant  (p  <  .05).  Hence,  the direct association  of 
fit  with  the attitude toward an extension,  H3, is  found 
for  only  one  of  the  three  fit  variables,  TRANSFER. 

Model  interactions.  The  beta  coefficients  for  the 
interactions  of  QUALITY  with  COMPLEMENT  and 
SUBSTITUTE  are both  substantial  (.25  and  .18,  re- 
spectively)  and significant  (p  <  .01  and p  <  .05,  re- 
spectively),  as  in  H2.  The  beta  coefficient  for  the  in- 
teraction  of  QUALITY  with  TRANSFER 
(.12), 
however,  is  not  significant  (p  >  .15).  The  model  re- 
sults  suggest  that high  perceived  quality  for  the  orig- 
inal  brand name  is  related  to  acceptance  of  the  brand 
extension  only  when  fit  based  on  complementarity  or 
substitutability  is  present.  Thus,  picking  an extension 
that  is  complementary  or  a  substitute  may  not  over- 
come  low  perceived  brand quality. 

The  ability  of  a  firm  in  the  original  product class 
to  make  the  extension  by  applying  current  skills  or 
assets,  TRANSFER,  has  primarily  a  direct  relation- 
ship.  Hence,  it may  detract from  the attractiveness  of 
an  extension  even  in  the  presence  of  high  levels  of 
perceived  quality  for  the  core  brand.  Perhaps  this 
transfer of  skills  and  assets  establishes  credibility  in 
making  the extension  that is  necessary  independent  of 
opinions  of  the  original's  brand quality. 

Which fit  variable?  Of  the  three fit  variables  pro- 
posed  and explored  in  this  study,  which  are the  most 
useful?  The  results  suggest  that the  TRANSFER  and 
COMPLEMENT  fit  variables  are  more  important  in 
explaining  variance  in  extension  attitudes  than  the 
SUBSTITUTE  variable.  In  a  main-effects-only  model, 
where  the  interactive  effects  are omitted  so  that both 
direct and indirect effects  of  the three fit variables  can 
be  summarized,  the  standardized  regression  coeffi- 
cients  for  TRANSFER,  COMPLEMENT,  and  SUB- 
STITUTE  are respectively  .24,  .17,  and  .08  (all  dif- 
ferences  significant  at the  .01  level).  Moreover,  if  the 
two  beta  weights  involving  TRANSFER  and  COM- 
PLEMENT  are added,  they  total  .27  for each.  In con- 
trast,  though  SUBSTITUTE  has  an  interactive  effect 
with  perceived  quality,  because  of  the  negative  coef- 
ficient  for  the  main  effect,  the  two  beta  weights  in- 
volving  SUBSTITUTE  only  total  .10.  In this  setting, 
COMPLEMENT  and  TRANSFER  appear  to  be  the 
most  important fit  variables. 

36  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

COMPLEMENT and  TRANSFER-are  both  need- 
ed?  If  complementarity  and  the  ability  of  a  firm's 
manufacturing  skills  and  assets  to  transfer  from  one 
product  context  to  another  are  the  fit  variables  most 
strongly  related to  extension  attitudes,  what is  the ef- 
fect  of  their combination?  When  a COMPLEMENT/ 
TRANSFER  interaction  term  is  added  to  the  model, 
the beta is  -.17  and statistically significant (t  =  -2.8, 
p  < 
.01)  and  the  other  coefficients  remain  basically 
the  same.  This  negative  relationship  suggests  that fit 
on one of the two  variables is adequate-little 
is gained 
by  having  a  fit  on  both  dimensions. 

Perceived  difficulty  of  making  the  extension.  The 
difficulty  of  making  the  extension,  DIFFICULT,  has 
a significant  beta of  .12,  which  is  significantly  higher 
than  the  SUBSTITUTE  variable.  Hence,  H4,  that an 
extremely  easy-to-make  extension  is  on  average  less 
likely  to  be  accepted  than  other  extensions, 
is  sup- 
ported.  Two  explanations  seem  reasonable.  First, 
consumers  may  feel  it  is  incongruous  to  introduce  a 
quality  brand name  in a trivial product class.  Second, 
the association of  a quality name with an easy-to-make 
product class  may suggest  to consumers  the likelihood 
of  an overpriced  product. 

Study 2.  Extension 
Positioning Study 

Research Issues 

The  stimulus  presentation  for  the brand extensions  in 
study  1 was  very  terse; the only  information provided 
was  the  brand name  and product class.  The  reactions 
therefore  were  to  extension  concepts  prior to  any  in- 
troductory  marketing  campaign.  During  the  actual 
launch  of  a  new  extension,  a  firm  can  influence  the 
perception  of  an  extension  by  providing  information 
cues  through advertising  and other marketing mix  ac- 
tivities.  The  purpose  of  study  2,  the  extension  posi- 
tioning  study,  was  to  pursue  the  fifth  research  ques- 
tion:  How  are  consumer  evaluations  affected  when 
different  types  of  information  are provided  in  the ex- 
tension  context? 

The  study  1  findings  that favorable  brand quality 
perceptions  are  related  to  favorable  extension  evalu- 
ations and that low  extension evaluations can be caused 
by  transferred attribute associations  suggest  two  gen- 
eral  strategies.  One  approach  is  to  provide  a  cue  to 
consumers on  the general quality of  the original brand, 
so  that positive  aspects  of  the  brand will  be  more  sa- 
lient  and  negative  elements  less  salient  in  the  new 
context.  For  example,  if  consumers  are cued  and re- 
minded  that  Crest  chewing  gum  is  from  a  leader  in 

the control  of  cavities  and tartar, positive  elements  of 
the extension  may  be  more  salient  (e.g.,  that the gum 
will  help  in  dental  hygiene).  A  second  approach is  to 
elaborate  on  a brand extension  attribute to  inhibit  the 
development  of  any  potentially  negative  beliefs  that 
consumers  may  infer.  For example,  stating  that Crest 
chewing  gum  is  available  in  spearmint  and  pepper- 
mint  flavors  should  reduce  the  probability  that  con- 
sumers  will  think the gum  has  a taste like  toothpaste. 
Study  2  examined  both  of  these  approaches. 

Method 

The  method  in  terms  of  measures,  procedures,  and 
subjects  was  essentially  the same  as that used  in study 
1,  though the  121  students who  participated came  from 
a different  semester's  course  offering.  Only  four low- 
rated brand extensions,  however,  were  used  as  stim- 
uli:  McDonald's  photo  processing,  Heineken  pop- 
corn,  Crest  chewing  gum,  and  Vidal  Sassoon  per- 
fume. 

The  design  was  a  repeated  measures,  2  x  2  fac- 
torial  design  with  two  between-subject  factors,  each 
with two  levels,  (1)  original brand quality cue  (present 
or  absent)  and  (2)  brand extension  attribute elabora- 
tion  (present or absent).  The  cues  referred to the high 
quality and leadership  status of  the original  brand; the 
elaborations  were  brief,  neutral descriptions  of  an at- 
tribute about which  subjects  in  study  1 had expressed 
some  uncertainty  and  concern  (see  Table  5  for  the 
specific  cues  and  elaborations  used).  Subjects  were 
assigned  to one  of  four groups,  each  of  which  saw  the 
same  type  of  information  for  all  four  extensions. 

Group 1.  No  quality cues  or attribute elaborations 
Group 2.  Quality cues 
Group 3.  Attribute elaborations 

TABLE 5 
Description  of  Cues  and  Elaborations 

Original Brand Quality Cue Condition 

McDonald's photo  processing:  From the  providers 
of fast,  inexpensive,  and convenient  service. 

Crest chewing  gum:  From a  leader in the  control of 

cavities  and tartar. 

Heineken popcorn:  From the  makers of  a  high 

quality premium beer. 

Vidal Sassoon  perfume:  From the  makers of  high 

quality personal care  products. 

Brand Extension Attribute Elaboration Condition 

McDonald's photo  processing:  Physically separated 

from the  food  service  and  using  a well- 
established  camera  retailer to  process  the  film. 
Crest chewing  gum:  In spearmint and  peppermint 

Heineken popcorn: In regular and cheddar cheese 

Vidal Sassoon  perfume: With a  subtle,  but sensual 

flavors. 

flavors. 

fragrance. 

Group 4.  Quality cues  and attribute elaborations 

The  fourth group provided  a test of  interactive  ef- 
fects  between  cues  and elaborations  (i.e.,  will  the two 
types  of  information  have  an additive  impact  in  com- 
bination?).  In  additon  to  evaluating  the  four  test  ex- 
tensions,  each  group also  considered  two  filler  exten- 
sions,  Vuarnet skis  and Haagen-Dazs  candy  bar.  The 
two  main  dependent  measures  were  perceived  quality 
and  likelihood  of  trying  the  extension,  which  again 
were  averaged;  the  main  independent  variables  mea- 
sured were  the perceived  quality of  the original  brand 
and the  fit  measures. 

Results 

The mean values  for the attitude toward the extension, 
as  operationalized  by  the  average  of  the  perceived 
quality and intent to try scales,  are summarized in Ta- 
ble  6.  Though  the  general  pattern across  the  four ex- 
tensions  is  similar  to  the  corresponding  ratings  from 
study  1,  the  mean  values  for  study  2  are  somewhat 
higher.  This  difference  may  reflect  a  contrast  effect 
of  the different  contexts:  study  1 included  other more 
favorably  rated extensions,  providing  a more positive 
context,  whereas  the stimuli  in study 2 were  weighted 
heavily  toward extensions  that were not well  received. 
An  analysis  of  variance  was  conducted  with  the 
extension  attitude measure  to  test  the  main  and inter- 
action effects of the cue and elaboration factors. Though 
the main effect  of elaboration is significant  (F  =  4.86, 
p  < 
.03),  the  main  effect  of  cue  and  the  interaction 
effect  of  the cue  and elaboration  are not significant  (F 
<  1). 

Table 6 indicates  rather clearly  that the elaboration 
was  very  effective  in affecting  the attitude toward the 
extension  whereas  the  use  of  a  quality  cue  was  not. 
The  elaboration  impact  was  strong  for  the  aggregate 
and all  of  the  test  brands with  the exception  of  Vidal 
Sassoon  perfume.  One  explanation  for  the  Vidal 
Sassoon  case  is  that  the  elaboration  ("a  subtle,  but 
sensual  fragrance"),  which  was  developed  by drawing 
on words used in other perfume ads,  was not adequate 
to  expunge  the  shampoo  odor  association,  especially 
without  strong  visual  presentation.  The  overall  con- 
clusion,  though,  is  that  to  overcome  the  potential 
transfer  of  negative  associations  for  a  proposed  ex- 
tension,  the  concept  should  be  elaborated  in  such  a 
way  that  it  appears  inconsistent  with  the  potentially 
damaging  attribute. 

To  gain  more  insight  into  how  the  manipulations 
affected  brand evaluations,  two  main  effects  regres- 
sion  analyses  were conducted  with QUALITY,  COM- 
PLEMENT,  SUBSTITUTE,  and  TRANSFER  as  in- 
dependent  variables.  The  first  analysis  compared  the 
regression  coefficients  for  the  no-elaboration  groups 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /  37 

TABLE 6 
Extension  Attitude  Means  for  Study  2' 

Brand Extension 
McDonald's photo  processing 
Crest chewing  gum 
Heineken popcorn 
Vidal Sassoon  perfume 
Average 
Standard deviation 
Sample  size 
aExtension attitudes are the average of perceived extension  quality (1 =  inferior, 7 =  superior) and likelihood of trying the extension 
(1 =  not at all likely, 7  =  very likely). 

Cue and 
Elaboration 
3.12 
4.97 
3.60 
3.78 
3.87 
1.54 

Elaboration 
Only 
3.10 
4.83 
3.87 
3.92 
3.93 
1.59 

No Cue or 
Elaboration 
2.67 
4.65 
3.36 
3.81 
3.62 
1.58 

Cue 
Only 
2.62 
4.42 
3.24 
3.63 
3.48 
1.58 

30 

29 

31 

31 

(1  and  2)  and the  elaboration  groups  (3  and 4). 

The  standardized beta  for  TRANSFER  is  signifi- 
cantly  higher  (p  <  .01)  in  the  no-elaboration  groups, 
.32,  than in the elaboration groups,  .11.  The presence 
of  a  brand extension  attribute elaboration  appears  to 
reduce  the  importance  of  the  fit  issue,  inhibiting  the 
emergence  of  negative  beliefs.  If  a  potentially  dam- 
aging  brand  attribute is  present,  a  lack  of  fit  accen- 
tuates  its  effect.  If  this  attribute is  neutralized,  how- 
ever,  fit is less  an issue  in the sense  that the consumer 
is  less  likely  to  base  evaluations  on  a  perceived  lack 
of  fit. 

The  second  analysis  compared  regression  coeffi- 
cients  for  the  no-cue  groups  (1  and  3)  and  the  cue 
groups  (2  and  4).  The  standardized  beta  is  not  sig- 
nificantly  higher for QUALITY  in the cue  groups,  nor 
are the betas  significantly  different  for the  other vari- 
ables  (p  >  .20).  Combined  with  the ANOVA  results, 
the lack of  a cue  effect  suggests  that favorable  quality 
perceptions  must have been  salient to no-cue  subjects. 
This  favorable  image,  however,  could  not  offset  the 
fact  that  the  relationship  with  the  original  brand's 
product  class  cued  undesirable  associations  such  as 
toothpaste  taste,  greasy  food,  beer  taste,  or  shampoo 
scent  in  the  extension  context.  Thus,  in  this  research 
setting,  a  more  effective  introductory strategy  for  the 
brand extension  is  to  protect  it  from  negative  associ- 
ations,  rather than attempting to reinforce  positive  as- 
sociations  about  the  original  brand. 

Summary  of  Main Findings 
Our  studies  not  only  shed  light  on  how  consumers 
evaluate  brand extensions,  but also  are relevant to  the 
broader research objective  of  understanding how  brand 
names  and brand associations  are used  by  consumers 
in their purchase decisions.  The  findings  are based  on 
a  limited  set  of  brands  and  hence  generalization  be- 
yond  that  set  should  be  made  with  caution.  Further, 
as study  1 provides only  correlational data, the strength 
of  its  implications  is  limited.  With  these  qualifying 
statements  in  mind,  we  offer  the  following  five  ob- 

38  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

servations  about  consumer  evaluations  of  brand  ex- 
tensions  based  on  the  research findings  from  the  two 
studies. 

1.  Inferred attribute beliefs both enhanced and harmed the 
evaluations of  a  brand extension. For example, the 
qualitative associations suggest that the Crest taste was 
an asset for a mouthwash extension  but a liability  for 
a  gum  extension.  Inferred beliefs  associated  with  un- 
favorably evaluated extensions often were for concrete 
product class  attributes, such as the taste of  toothpaste 
or beer. Inferred beliefs associated with favorably eval- 
uated  extensions  often  were  for  abstract brand attri- 
butes,  such as  style. 

2.  Subjects' perceptions of the quality of the original brand, 
QUALITY,  and the relationship or  "fit" between  the 
original and extension  product classes  had an interac- 
tive effect  on evaluation of  an extension.  The relation- 
ship of  a positive  quality image  for the original brand 
with  the  evaluation  of  a  brand extension  was  strong 
only  when  there was  a  basis  of  fit  between  the  two 
product classes. 

3.  The  three dimensions  of  fit  between  the  original  and 
extension  product classes  were  the perceived  applica- 
bility of  the skills  and assets of  a competent manufac- 
turer in the original product class for making the prod- 
uct extension (TRANSFER), the perceived product class 
complementarity (COMPLEMENT), and the perceived 
product  class  substitutability  (SUBSTITUTE).  The 
COMPLEMENT and  SUBSTITUTE  fit  measures  in- 
teracted with the perceived quality of the original brand 
to  predict brand extension  evaluations,  but  TRANS- 
FER had primarily a direct impact on the evaluations. 
Overall, TRANSFER and COMPLEMENT were more 
important as predictors than SUBSTITUTE,  and there 
was  evidence  of  a  negative  interaction between  those 
two  fit variables. Thus,  a fit on either TRANSFER or 
COMPLEMENT may be  adequate; a good  fit on  both 
is  not necessary. 

4.  Subjects'  perceptions of  the  difficulty  of  making  the 
extension (DIFFICULT) had a positive relationship with 
evaluations of  an extension,  supporting the hypothesis 
that an extremely easy-to-make extension,  on average, 
is  less  likely  to be accepted.  Consumers may attribute 
the act of  placing  a quality brand into what is  viewed 
as  a  trivially  easy-to-make  product class  as  a  blatant 
effort to capitalize on a brand name image to command 
higher than justified  prices  or  they  may  feel  it  is  in- 
congruous to introduce a quality brand name in a trivial 
product class. 

5.  In study 2,  cueing  subjects about positive  qualities  of 
the original brand did not affect evaluations for exten- 
sions  that had low  evaluations in  study  1.  Providing a 
brief elaboration of  an extension  attribute about which 
subjects may  have  been  uncertain and which  had  the 
potential to damage the extension, however, led to more 
favorable extension evaluations. Because generally well- 
known and well-liked  brands were used,  reminders of 
quality  evidently  were  unnecessary.  The  elaboration, 
by  clarifying  the nature of  an important attribute, ap- 
peared to be effective  in inhibiting the transfer of  neg- 
ative  associations.  It  also  appeared to  reduce  the  sa- 
lience  of  perceived credibility of  a firm in the original 
product class  in  making the extension. 

Implications  and  Future 
Research  Directions 

Predicting Attribute Transfer to  Extensions 
What types of brand attributes and contexts will result 
in the  "export" of  an attribute to  an extension? The 
distinction between concrete attributes, those defined 
by physical, tangible product characteristics, and ab- 
stract attributes, those  involving  intangible product 
perceptions (e.g.,  Johnson and Fornell 1987; Myers 
and Shocker 1981; Olson and Reynolds 1983; Zeithaml 
1988), may be helpful. One could hypothesize that an 
abstract attribute, such as style associated with Vuarnet, 
might be transferred to a broader set of product classes 
than concrete attributes, which usually are associated 
with specific product classes. 

The Process Generating the  Fit and 
Attitude Judgments 
Does  a  perception of  poor fit  between two  product 
classes contribute to the transfer of negative attributes 
to the extension or low extension evaluations, or does 
the presence of  a negative evaluation or negative as- 
sociation inferred about the extension lead to  a per- 
ception of  poor fit? What is  the critical problem for 
an extension, the perception of  poor fit or the asso- 
ciation with a  negative attribute? Understanding the 
mediating role of fit is an important research priority. 
Dimensions of Fit 
The conclusions about the roles of  the three fit vari- 
ables should be explored with other stimuli and in other 
contexts. There may be conditions under which their 
relative roles are affected. For example, for abstract 
attributes, complementarity may have a more impor- 
tant role in fit judgments (e.g.,  as with Vuarnet). For 
concrete  attributes,  however,  substitutability and 
manufacturing credibility may be the more relevant fit 
measures. Other fit conceptualizations also may war- 
rant exploration, for example, shared attributes or fea- 
tures such as  in  the contrast model  (Johnson 1986; 
Tversky 1977; Tversky and Gati 1982). 

Extending a Brand to  a Relatively Trivial 
Product Class 
Our findings suggest that consumers may not always 
accept the extension of a high quality brand to a prod- 
uct class that is by comparison trivial or very easy to 
make,  even  if  fit  is  good.  We  advanced two  hy- 
potheses: (1)  the extension is perceived to be priced 
too  high  and (2)  the combination of  a  high quality 
brand with an easy-to-make product is considered in- 
congruent or exploitative. Future research could pro- 
ductively explore the conditions under which each hy- 
pothesis might hold. 

Positioning Strategies  for Extensions 
In study 2,  elaborating attributes of extensions is found 
to be a more effective way to neutralize undesirable 
brand associations than using original brand quality 
cues.  In addition to replicating and testing this find- 
ing,  future research should explore other strategies. 
Can any other cues possibly enhance extension eval- 
uations? For example, perhaps fit perceptions can be 
influenced by references to manufacturing capability 
or complementarity. Can cases be found and studied 
in which such positioning strategies affected the suc- 
cess of the extension? 

Prototypicality of the  Brand 
Will a brand that is  considered prototypical (a good 
example) of a product class be particularly difficult to 
extend because of its strong product class association? 
Tauber (1981)  discusses the risk of  extending brand 
names such as Kleenex, Scotch tape, or Band-Aid that 
are closely  associated with a  product. However, an 
association between  brand prototypicality and  per- 
ceived quality was observed in our study and others 
(e.g.,  Nedungadi and Hutchinson 1985; Ward and 
Loken 1988). In study 1, a measure of prototypicality 
(how good an example of the product category is the 
brand, on  a 7-point scale?) had a correlation of  .34 
with perceived quality (QUALITY). 

Branding Strategies Across Multiple 
Product Classes 
Research  is  needed  that  explores  more  complex 
branding strategies. How will  consumers respond to 
extensions of brands already associated with multiple 
product classes,  such as  Heinz or General Electric? 
How do various combinations of  product class asso- 
ciations affect brand associations? When does an um- 
brella brand strategy rather than distinct brand names 
make sense? 

The Role  of  Involvement  in  Extending  Brands 
What is  the effect  of  involvement on  brand exten- 
sions? When the motivation or ability to process in- 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /  39 

formation is low,  consumers  might be expected  to rely 
on  perceived  brand quality  and brand familiarity  as  a 
peripheral cue  in their brand evaluations  (Baker et  al. 
1986;  Petty  and  Cacioppo  1986).  However,  high  in- 
volvement  contexts  may  involve  higher  risk  and thus 
consumers  may need the reassurance of  an established 
brand name.  MacKenzie  and  Lutz'  (1989)  model  of 
the  antecedents  of  and  relationship  between  attitude 
toward the ad (AAd) and attitude toward the brand (AB) 
may have  some  theoretical relevance  to understanding 
this  issue. 

Reciprocal  Impact  of  Brand  Extension 
A  critically  important strategic  issue  is  the  impact  of 
the extension  on the original brand. It can be positive. 
For example,  promotions  for Sunkist  extensions  were 
thought  to  have  enhanced  both  name  recognition  and 
associations with good health and vitality (Kesler 1987). 

An  extension  may,  however,  cannibalize  the  sales  of 
the  original  brand  or  damage  its  image  by  creating 
new  associations or by confusing the current ones  (Ries 
and Trout  1981).  For example,  Miller  Lite  may  have 
damaged  Miller  High  Life  because  of  the  light  beer 
associations  (Tauber  1981). 

This  reciprocal  impact  is  especially  important  in 
vertical  extensions  in  which  an upscale  or downscale 
version  of  the  brand is  introduced.  Several  questions 
arise.  What impact will  downscale  extensions  have  on 
the original  brand? Can positive  effects  be  stimulated 
or  negative  effects  be  minimized?  Conversely,  what 
impact  will  an upscale  extension  have  on  the original 
brand?  How  readily  will  consumers  accept  such  an 
extension?  Park, Jaworski,  and Maclnnis  (1986)  pro- 
vide  a framework for managing brand image  over time 
that may  be  useful  in  addressing  these  questions. 

REFERENCES 
Aaker,  David  A.  (1982),  "Positioning Your Product," Busi- 

ness Horizons,  25  (May/June),  56-62. 

Anderson,  John  R.  (1983),  The  Architecture  of  Cognition. 

Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University  Press. 

Anderson,  Norman H.  and Stephen Hubert (1963),  "Effects 
of  Concomitant Verbal Recall  on Order Effects  in Person- 
ality  Impression Formation," Journal  of  Verbal Learning 
and  Verbal Behavior,  2  (5-6),  379-91. 

Baker,  William,  J.  Wesley  Hutchinson,  Danny  Moore,  and 
Prakash Nedungadi (1986),  "Brand Familiarity and Adver- 
tising:  Effects  on  the  Evoked  Set  and Brand Preference," 
in Advances  in  Consumer Research,  Vol.  13,  Richard J. 
Lutz, ed.  Provo,  UT: Association  for Consumer Research, 
637-42. 

Bierley,  Calvin,  Frances  K.  McSweeney,  and  Renee  Van- 
nieuwkerk (1985),  "Classical Conditoning  of  Preferences 
for Stimuli," Journal  of  Consumer Research,  12 (Decem- 
ber),  316-23. 

Brown,  Paul (1985),  "New? Improved?" Business  Week (Oc- 

tober 21),  108-12. 

Carlston,  Donald  E.  (1980),  "The Recall  and Use  of  Traits 
and Events in  Social  Inference Processes,"  Journal  of Ex- 
perimental Social  Psychology,  16 (July),  303-28. 

Cohen,  Joel  B.  and Kunal Basu  (1987),  "Alternative Models 
of  Categorization: Toward a Contingent Processing Frame- 
work," Journal of  Consumer Research,  13 (March), 455- 
72. 

Fiske,  Susan T.  (1982),  "Schema-Triggered Affect:  Applica- 
tions  to  Social  Perception,"  in Affect and  Cognition:  The 
17th Annual Carnegie Symposium on  Cognition,  Margaret 
S.  Clark and Susan T.  Fiske,  eds.  Hillsdale,  NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates,  55-78. 

and Mark A.  Pavelchak  (1986),  "Category-Based 
Versus  Piecemeal-Based  Affective  Responses:  Develop- 
ments  in  Schema-Triggered Affect,"  in  The Handbook of 
Motivation and Cognition: Foundations of Social Behavior, 
Richard M.  Sorrentiono and E.  Tory  Higgins,  eds.  New 
York: Guilford Press. 

40  /  Journal of Marketing, January 1990 

Fry, Joseph, N.  (1967),  "Family Branding and Consumer Brand 
Choice," Journal of Marketing Research,  4 (August), 237- 
47. 

Garvin,  David  A.  (1984),  "Product Quality:  An  Important 
Strategic Weapon," BusinessHorizons, 27 (May-June), 40-3. 
Gilovich,  Thomas (1981),  "Seeing the Past in the Present: The 
Effect of Associations to Familiar Events on Judgments and 
Decisions,"  Journal of Personality and Social  Psychology, 
40  (May),  797-808. 

Heider,  Fritz (1958),  The Psychology  of Interpersonal Rela- 

tions.  New  York: John Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc. 

Henderson, James M.  and Richard E.  Quandt (1980),  Micro- 
economic  Theory: A  Mathematical Approach.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill Book  Company. 

Holbrook,  Morris B.  and Kim  P.  Corfman (1985),  "Quality 
and Value in the Consumption Experience: Phaedrus Rides 
Again,"  in Perceived  Quality,  Jacob Jacoby and Jerry 01- 
son,  eds.  Lexington,  MA: Lexington Books,  31-57. 

Jacobson, Robert and David A.  Aaker (1987),  "The Strategic 
Role  of  Product Quality," Journal  of Marketing,  51  (Oc- 
tober),  31-44. 

Johnson,  Michael  D.  (1986),  "Consumer  Similarity  Judg- 
ments:  A  Test  of  the  Contrast Model,"  Psychology  and 
Marketing,  3  (Spring),  47-60. 

and Claes  Fornell (1987),  "The Nature and Meth- 
odological  Implications of  the Cognitive Representation of 
Products," Journal  of  Consumer Research,  14  (Septem- 
ber),  214-28. 

Kesler,  Lori (1987),  "Extensions Leave Brand in New  Area," 

Advertising Age  (June 1),  S1. 

Lingle,  John H.  and Thomas  M.  Ostrom (1979),  "Retrieval 
in  Memory-Based  Impression  Judgments," 
Selectivity 
Journal  of  Experimental Social  Psychology,  23  (March), 
93-118. 

MacKenzie,  Scott  B.  and Richard J.  Lutz  (1989),  "An Em- 
pirical Examination of  the  Structural Antecedents of  Atti- 
tude Toward the Ad in an Advertising Pretesting Context," 
Journal of Marketing, 53  (April),  48-65. 

McSweeney,  Frances K.  and Calvin Bierley  (1984),  "Recent 
Developments  in Classical Conditioning," Journal of Con- 
sumer Research,  11 (September),  619-31. 

Morein,  J.  (1975),  "Shift From Brand to  Product Line  Mar- 
keting,"  Harvard Business  Review,  53  (September-Octo- 
ber),  56-64. 

Myers,  James H.  and Allan  D.  Shocker (1981),  "The Nature 
of  Product-Related Attributes," in Research  in Marketing, 
Vol.  5,  Jagdish Sheth, ed.  Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Inc., 
211-36. 

Nedungadi,  Prakash, and J. Wesley  Hutchinson (1985),  "The 
Prototypicality  of  Brands:  Relationships  With  Brand 
Awareness,  Preference,  and Usage,"  in Advances  in Con- 
sumer  Research,  Vol.  12,  Elizabeth  C.  Hirschman  and 
Morris B.  Holbrook, eds.  Provo, UT: Association  for Con- 
sumer Research,  498-503. 

Neilsen,  A.  C.  (1985),  Testing Techniques,  Vol.  1,  No.  1. 
Neuhaus,  Colin  F.  and James  R.  Taylor  (1972),  "Variables 
Affecting  Sales  of  Family-Branded Products," Journal  of 
Marketing Research,  14 (November),  419-22. 

Olshavsky,  Richard W.  (1985),  "Perceived Quality  in  Con- 
sumer  Decision  Making:  An  Integrated Theoretical  Per- 
spective,  in Perceived  Quality, Jacob Jacoby and Jerry O1- 
son,  eds.  Lexington,  MA:  Lexington Books,  3-29. 

Olson, Jerry C. and Thomas J. Reynolds (1983),  "Understand- 
ing Consumers' Cognitive  Structures: Implications for Ad- 
vertising Strategy," in Advertising and Consumer Psychol- 
ogy,  L.  Percy  and  A.  Woodside,  eds.  Lexington,  MA: 
Lexington Books. 

Osgood,  C.  E.  and P.  H. Tannenbaum (1955),  "The Principle 
of  Congruity in  the  Prediction of  Attitude Change,"  Psy- 
chological  Review,  62  (1),  42-55. 

Park, C. Whan, Bernard J. Jaworski, and Deborah J. Maclnnis 
(1986),  "Strategic  Brand  Concept-Image  Management," 
Journal of Marketing, 50  (October),  135-45. 

Petty,  Richard E.  and John T.  Cacioppo  (1986),  Communi- 
cation  and Persuasion.  New  York: Springer-Verlag. 
Read,  Stephen J.  (1983),  "Once is Enough: Causal Reasoning 
From a Single Instance," Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology,  45  (August),  323-34. 

Ries,  Al  and Jack Trout (1981),  Positioning:  The Battle for 

Your Mind.  New  York: McGraw-Hill,  Inc. 

Riskey,  Dwight  R.  (1979),  "Verbal  Memory  Processes  in 
Impression Formation," Journal  of Experimental Psychol- 
ogy:  Human Learning and Memory,  5  (3),  271-81. 

Srinivasan, V.  (1979),  "Network Models for Estimating Brand- 
Specific  Effects  in  Multi-Attribute  Marketing  Models," 
Management Science,  25  (January), 11-21. 

Sujan, Mita (1985),  "Consumer Knowledge: Effects  on Eval- 
uation  Strategies Mediating Consumer Judgments," Jour- 
nal  of  Consumer Research,  12 (June),  31-46. 

Tauber, Edward M.  (1981),  "Brand Franchise Extensions: New 
Products Benefit  from  Existing  Brand Names,"  Business 
Horizons,  24  (2),  36-41. 

(1988),  "Brand Leverage: Strategy for Growth in a 
Cost-Controlled World," Journal of Advertising Research, 
28  (August/September),  26-30. 

Tversky,  Amos  (1977),  "Features of  Similarity," Psycholog- 

ical  Review,  84  (4),  327-52. 

and Itamar Gati  (1982),  "Similarity,  Separability, 
and the Triangle Inequality," Psychological  Review, 89 (2), 
123-54. 

University of  Minnesota Consumer Behavior Seminar (1987), 
"Affect Generalization to Similar and Dissimilar Brand Ex- 
tensions,"  Psychology  and Marketing, 4  (Fall),  225-37. 
Ward, James and Barbara Loken  (1988),  "The Generality of 
Typicality Effects  on  Persuasion and Comparison: An  Ex- 
ploratory Test,"  in Advances  in Consumer Research,  Vol. 
15,  Michael  J.  Houston,  ed.  Provo  UT:  Association  for 
Consumer Research. 

Wright, Peter L.  (1975),  "Consumer Choice  Strategies: Sim- 
plifying  vs.  Optimizing," Journal of Marketing Research, 
11 (February), 60-7. 

Wyer,  Robert S.,  Jr.  and Thomas  K.  Srull (1986),  "Human 
Cognition in Its Social Context," Psychological  Review,  93 
(July),  322-59. 

Zeithaml, Valarie A.  (1988),  "Consumer Perceptions of Price, 
Quality,  and Value: A  Means-End Model  and Synthesis of 
Evidence,"  Journal  of Marketing, 52  (July),  2-22. 

Reprint No.  JM541101 

Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions /  41