This article was downloaded by: [Fresno Pacific University]
On: 15 January 2015, At: 05:30
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

Developing a Marketing Strategy for
Nonprofit Organizations: An Exploratory
Study
a

b

Jennifer A. Pope PhD , Elaine Sterrett Isely & Fidel Asamoa‐Tutu

c

a

Seidman College of Business , Grand Valley State University ,
Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA
b

Annis Water Resources Institute, Grand Valley State University ,
Muskegon, Michigan, USA
c

Seidman College of Business, Grand Valley State University , Grand
Rapids, Michigan, USA
Published online: 27 May 2009.

To cite this article: Jennifer A. Pope PhD , Elaine Sterrett Isely & Fidel Asamoa‐Tutu (2009)
Developing a Marketing Strategy for Nonprofit Organizations: An Exploratory Study, Journal of
Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 21:2, 184-201, DOI: 10.1080/10495140802529532
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10495140802529532

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 21:184–201, 2009
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1049-5142 print / 1540-6997 online
DOI: 10.1080/10495140802529532

Developing a Marketing Strategy for Nonprofit
Organizations: An Exploratory Study
JENNIFER A. POPE
Seidman College of Business, Grand Valley State University, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

ELAINE STERRETT ISELY
Annis Water Resources Institute, Grand Valley State University, Muskegon, Michigan, USA

FIDEL ASAMOA-TUTU
Seidman College of Business, Grand Valley State University, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA

Nonprofit organizations have grown tremendously in the last three
decades. With this growth has come a greater interest from the
nonprofit sector in the importance of marketing. Nonprofits did
not apply marketing techniques until 1960–1970, but it is now a
well accepted practice. Traditional marketing strategies do not
work for nonprofit organizations, and this study proposes the
development of a new marketing strategy specifically for this
sector. Through the use of interviews and surveys, the authors
examine issues of marketing strategy that are distinct for
nonprofits. Unlike previous studies, this study examines these
issues from the viewpoint of the nonprofit organization. The
perception of marketing is different in nonprofit organizations,
and the strategic implications of this finding are discussed.
KEYWORDS marketing strategy, nonprofit marketing, nonprofit
survey

The authors would like to thank all of the nonprofit organizations that donated their time
and effort to participate in this study. The authors would also like to thank Grand Valley State
University’s Seidman College of Business and the Dorothy A. Johnson Center for Philanthropy
for providing funding for project expenses.
Address correspondence to Jennifer A. Pope, PhD, Grand Valley State University,
Seidman College of Business, 401 Fulton Street West, Grand Rapids, MI 40401. E-mail:
popeje@gvsu.edu
184

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

185

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

INTRODUCTION
Nonprofit organizations (NPOs) are an important part of our modern
society. Although it may seem counter-intuitive, in the United States
these organizations contribute significantly to the national economy.
Since the early part of the 21st century, jobs in the nonprofit sector have
grown at a faster rate than those in the for-profit sector (Bilzor, 2007),
currently making up almost 11% of the total workforce. While the
individual nonprofit employee tends to make less than his or her forprofit counterpart, the nonprofit sector overall paid out more in total
wages in 2004 than the utility, wholesale trade, and construction sectors
combined (Bilzor, 2007). Furthermore, NPOs contribute billions of dollars
to the economy every year in products and services—products and
services that our state, local, and federal governments are relieved from
supplying. In four counties in western Michigan alone, NPOs had an
economic impact of $3.4 billion in 2006 (Community Research Institute,
2007).
The number of NPOs in the United States has grown tremendously in
the last three decades. This has created more competition for the limited
amount of funds available to NPOs from individual donors, the government,
corporations, and foundations (Clark & Mount, 2000; Gwin, 2000; Katz, 2005;
Peloza & Hassay, 2007). This in turn has resulted in greater interest from the
nonprofit sector in marketing and in the importance of the marketing
profession overall (Clarke & Mount, 2000; Katz, 2005). In general, NPOs did
not use marketing techniques until the ‘‘late 1960s and early 1970s,’’ but it is
now a well accepted—if often misunderstood—practice (Wenham et al.,
2003).
While there is general agreement that NPOs have a greater need for
marketing than they did 30 years ago, there is little agreement on how NPOs
should approach marketing. The goal of traditional marketing efforts at forprofit firms is most often improving the company’s bottom line. An example
of a common definition of marketing states that it is ‘‘the management
process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer
requirements profitably’’ (Smith & Saker, 1992, p. 6). For NPOs, this type of
definition is problematic. A Michigan ‘‘nonprofit corporation’’ is one that is
incorporated for any lawful purpose ‘‘not involving pecuniary profit or gain’’
for its directors, officers, shareholders or members (Michigan Compiled Laws
450.2108(3)1993). This creates a disjoint between traditional marketing and
the need for NPOs to do marketing. So, to assist local NPOs in western
Michigan in improving their marketing and planning efforts, we have begun
the development of a model nonprofit marketing strategy. The first steps in
this process were to determine how NPOs viewed marketing and to identify
real and perceived challenges and obstacles to these current NPO marketing
efforts.

186

J. A. Pope et al.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

LITERATURE REVIEW
Most NPOs, especially smaller organizations, strive to make a bigger impact
within their communities—both economically and socially. There has been a
considerable amount of research in the last 30 years into the reasons behind
charitable giving and the role of the for-profit firm in cause-related marketing,
as well as the application of economic and sociological theories to the
management of NPOs (Helmig, Jergers, & Lapsley, 2004). However, there has
been little research into marketing from the NPO’s point of view. While some
may feel that marketing practices used by for-profit companies are applicable
to nonprofit firms, Clarke and Mount (2000) point out that marketing’s
‘‘dominant exchange paradigm … is currently ill equipped for use in the
nonprofit sector, in particular the voluntary nonprofit sector’’ (p. 79) Along
with recent increased recognition of the importance of marketing to NPOs,
Andreasen and Kotler (2007) found that marketers still recognize that forprofit marketing practices often do not apply within the context of NPOs.
Perhaps the most obvious reason for this lack of fit is that NPOs have
three target markets to which they must appeal: clients or customers,
volunteers, and donors or funders (Helmig et al., 2004; Padanyi & Gainer,
2004). Often these three target markets are very distinct and respond to the
marketing mix in different ways (Padanyi & Gainer, 2004; Andreasen &
Kotler, 2007). Furthermore, the benefits gained by these multiple constituencies are often non-monetary in nature, making it more difficult for NPOs to
communicate clear benefits to each of these markets (Padanyi & Gainer,
2004, MacMillian, Money, Money, & Downing, 2005). This necessitates the
need for NPOs to develop multiple marketing strategies aimed at radically
different markets.

The NPO Consumer
For many NPOs, getting customers or clients in the door is not a problem.
NPOs are generally created to provide services that the government does not
offer or which the private, for-profit sector cannot be trusted to provide
(Andreasen & Kotler, 2007). However, although the organizational employees are often passionate about their NPO’s cause, they often lack business
experience or long-term objectives (Bissell, 2003). Citing Akchin (2001),
Wenham et al. (2003) suggest that NPOs lack a customer orientation in their
marketing practices, and few embrace a marketing approach to their
marketing operations.
Much of the research into NPO consumers focuses on targeting
customers of arts organizations or use of direct marketing (Arnold & Tapp,
2003, Izquierdo & Samaniego, 2007, Hume & Mort, 2008). For example,
Hume and Mort (2008) investigated ways for nonprofit organizations to
measure the perceived value of performance arts and the impact of those

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

187

perceptions on customer satisfaction. Another study examined the impact of
direct marketing on fundraising and season ticket sales for an arts
organization and found that such marketing methods had a greater impact
on the consumers than on the donors (Arnold & Tapp, 2003). However, most
articles referring to NPO customers were actually focused on donors rather
than clients (Arnold & Tapp, 2003, Kristoffersen & Singh, 2004).

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

The NPO Volunteer
Furthermore, little has been written about what encourages or modifies
volunteer behavior in the nonprofit sector. While volunteers are essential to
the survival of many NPOs (Govekar & Govekar, 2002), most of these
organizations do not understand volunteer recruitment and management as
a marketing function. Therefore, nonprofit organizations often run into
difficulty recruiting and keeping good volunteers.
One recent study discussed the need to develop a practice of relationship
marketing in developing committed volunteers (Bussell & Forbes, 2006).
These authors found that it is not simply a matter of finding individuals who
are passionate about the NPO’s cause. Nonprofit organizations must also
provide volunteers with some benefit (e.g., self-esteem, material goods) in
return for their time and effort (Briggs, Landry, & Wood, 2007). When the
benefits of volunteering are ignored, individual passions can diminish and
volunteers fade away. Andreasen and Kotler (2007) found that the day-to-day
management of volunteers is one of the more frustrating tasks for nonprofit
managers. One manager developed what he called the rule of thirds: one third
of the volunteers could always be counted on, one third volunteered for the
sake of volunteering, and the middle third worked well if targeted well
(Andreasen & Kotler, 2007). NPOs should consider volunteers as an additional
target market for their marketing campaign. They should determine not only
what drives an individual to volunteer in general, but also what motivates a
particular individual to volunteer for a particular NPO doing a particular job,
and what keeps them coming back (McCurley, 1994).
This is especially true of volunteer board members. Unlike other
volunteers, board members are asked to make long-term, legal commitments
to the NPO. These board volunteers are also generally passionate about the
NPO’s cause, but they can be reluctant to make tough decisions when needed
(Katz, 2005). One study found that only 17% of NPO executives thought that
their board of directors was effective (Jansen & Kilpatrick, 2005).

The NPO Donor/Funder
One issue that all NPOs struggle with is determining what motivates
individuals to donate to a particular charity. Several authors suggest that, just

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

188

J. A. Pope et al.

like for-profit firms, NPOs need to segment their markets and only target
those individuals who are most likely to donate to their cause.
In one study, Bennett (2003) found clear evidence that both personal
values and demographic factors such as age, income, and education
influence individual choices about which charities to support. Surprisingly,
he did not find personal experience to be a universal determinate in
donation behavior. For example, individuals who owned pets were more
likely to donate to animal rescue organizations, but individuals who have
had or who currently have family members or friends with cancer were not
necessarily more likely to donate to cancer research organizations. In a
subsequent study, Bennett (2006) looked at factors that contributed to
repeated donations to a particular NPO. He found that the length of the
relationship that the donor had with the charity, the donor’s overall
involvement in charitable giving (e.g. number of charities donated to), and
the so-called ‘‘helper’s high’’ all contributed to continued and repeated
donations to an individual NPO.
Sargeant, West, and Ford (2003) examined the impact of donor
perceptions about particular charities on donor behavior. These authors
found that perceived effectiveness and efficiency of a NPO influences
whether a person donates. They also discovered that family ties to an
organization or its cause impacted donor behavior, but that those individuals
needed a different message for encouragement to donate.
An important stumbling block to NPO marketing is the fact that
individual donors and many large funders often do not see the importance of
marketing and view marketing expenses as a waste of money (Helmig et al.,
2004; Bennett & Savani, 2004). Many funds are restricted, and NPOs wanting
to do marketing have to solicit money specifically for that purpose (Pope,
2006). However, fundraising is not the only area NPOs can and should
engage in marketing. Many NPOs have an educational component to their
mission and strive to raise public awareness of the various causes that they
champion (e.g., children’s rights or animal welfare), which could provide
marketing opportunities for which funding might be less of a problem.

A Special Note on Internet Marketing
Internet marketing is ‘‘the use of the Internet to achieve marketing
objectives’’ (Wenham et al., 2003, p. 213). According to Hart (2002), NPOs
are increasingly turning to the Internet to raise funds, improve relationships,
increase their advocacy efforts, and keep their publics well-informed.
However, not all NPOs are taking full advantage of their online resources.
Waters (2003) found that many NPOs focused only on one-way online
communication, instead of using the Internet as a method to develop client
and donor relationships. Hart (2002) recommends the prudent use of e-mail,

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

189

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

‘‘send to a friend’’ invitations, ‘‘pass-along’’ marketing, and Internet-based
donations (Hart, 2002).
Another major failure of NPO’s Internet use was poor ‘‘capture
efficiency’’, or the failure of search engines to return the NPO’s Web site
near the top of the search list (Wenham et al., 2003). However, to resolve
this, the NPO need only ensure the proper registration of a Web site with
these search engines (Hart, 2002). The key to this form of marketing is
having someone on staff with the time and ability to maintain the Web site.
Unfortunately, for many NPOs, lack of expertise, financial resources, or
available technology hindered them from taking full advantage of these
online resources and opportunities (Pinho & Macedo, 2006).

METHODOLOGY
In 2005, we set out to assist local NPOs in western Michigan with their
marketing and marketing planning efforts. A review of current marketing
theory produced no useful results, and we sought to develop a new
nonprofit marketing strategy from which to make recommendations to these
local organizations. To start this process, we began an in depth literature
search, coupled with informal, personal discussions with the executives of
local NPOs. Based on the information gleaned from this research period, in
2006 we drafted a marketing survey for nonprofit organizations. This survey
asked open-ended questions about NPOs’ current marketing practices, use
of volunteers, and areas where marketing efforts needed improvement
(Appendix). It was mailed to random samples of NPOs from the U.S.
International Revenue Service list of over 42,000 NPOs (or NPO chapters) in
the state of Michigan (Internal Revenue Service, 2003). We mailed a hardcopy of the survey to a random sample of 400 NPOs, and subsequently
mailed invitations to complete the same survey online to four additional
random samples of 500–800 NPOs. In all, 3,301 surveys or invitations to
complete the online survey—and follow-up reminder post cards—were
mailed to NPOs throughout Michigan in 2006–2007.
These mailings resulted in responses from 124 NPOs (3.8%) of varying
types and sizes (Tables 1 and 2) and 96 returns from the U.S. Post Office
(2.9%). We read the responses, searching for patterns and trends in the data,
and then analyzed the results. The 29 survey respondents that indicated that
marketing was only ‘‘somewhat important’’ or ‘‘not important’’ to their NPO
and the 17 respondents who did not complete the survey because they ‘‘did
not do marketing’’ were pulled aside and examined separately.
We also conducted in-person interviews with the executive directors or
board presidents of 43 NPOs—most of which were located in or near the city
of Grand Rapids in the western lower-peninsula of Michigan. Although these
NPOs were asked the same questions that were on the written survey, the

190

J. A. Pope et al.

TABLE 1 Categories of Participating NPO-Respondents

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Categories

Interviews

Surveys

1
8
11
4
2
2
0
0
2
3
5
0

5
7
23
25
12
5
5
6
3
1
13
7

Medical
Advocacy
Social welfare
Education
Religious
Sports (Education/Training)
Fundraising
Philanthropic
Environmental
Animal welfare
Arts and entertainment
No response or not applicable

respondents provided more detailed answers and we were able to ask
follow-up questions. Using the snowball method to obtain additional
interviews (Denzin & Lincoln, 2000), we increased the interview response
rate to almost 90% (87.7%): 43 of the 49 NPOs contacted agreed to an
interview. Some of the NPOs contacted were more willing to be interviewed
if we had been directly referred by a colleague or business associate. All
interviews were recorded onto coded audio tapes, but several were
unusable due to technical problems. As a result, 38 interviews were
transcribed by student workers. The responses were analyzed using the
same methodology as the survey responses.

RESULTS
This study has revealed several key findings that both support and contradict
previous research. Unlike most studies, this research focused on marketing
from the viewpoint of the NPO, rather than on marketing from the
perspective of either donors or for-profit corporations. Furthermore, unlike
other studies, such as Andreasen and Kolter (2007), we focus specifically on
smaller, local non-profits. This provides a unique view into the world of the
TABLE 2 Full-Time and Part-Time Staff-Size of NPO-Respondents
Number of employees
0–10 employees
11–20 employees
21–30 employees
31–40 employees
41–50 employees
50+ employees
No response or not applicable

Interviews

Surveys

15
5
9
1
1
7
0

60
11
6
4
3
16
7

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

191

NPO. When asked about limitations to their organizational marketing efforts,
interview and survey subjects answered almost universally the same: money,
time, and/or resources (personnel). This refrain is also a common theme in
the literature. However, the results here show several other impediments to
marketing efforts for the NPO.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Defining Marketing
One hundred percent of the interview subjects and 62.1% of the survey
respondents said that marketing was important to their organization, but
often they were less clear about what marketing meant. Marketing was
usually tied to fundraising or fund development, and generally not to
communications with clients or volunteers. Moreover, 82.4% of interview
respondents stated that they did not have a specific target market for
their fundraising efforts. They either focused on friends of board
members, individuals who had donated previously, or—if the NPO
had the financial capability—a purchased list from a from a promotions
firm. NPOs generally recognized the need for marketing, but often not
the how of marketing. In addition, 65.8% of the NPO interview subjects
in this study did not distinguish between marketing, public relations, and
fundraising (see Table 3 for results).
Twenty three (23.4) percent of the survey respondents stated that
marketing was only ‘‘somewhat important’’ or ‘‘not important’’ to their
organization. We looked for themes or trends among these respondents, but
none were apparent. Just over half (55.1%) of these survey respondents were
advocacy, educational, or social welfare NPOs, and the remaining 44.9% ran
the gamut for services provided or consumers served. Furthermore, 48.2% of
these respondents were funded primarily through membership fees or the
sale of products or services, with 51.8% of respondents receiving funding
from a variety of sources. However, 75.8% of this group of survey
respondents did not have a marketing plan. In fact, only three of these
survey respondents confirmed that they had one in place, two were working
on it, and two did not respond to the question. While not all NPOrespondents that felt that marketing was ‘‘important’’ had marketing plans in
place, they were far more likely to have clearly-stated marketing goals than
those in this latter group (Table 3).
There were 17 respondents that contacted us (either in writing, through
e-mail, or by telephone), stating that they did not engage in marketing
activities or that they were somehow otherwise unqualified to respond to the
survey. Of this group, 58.8% stated that they did not do ‘fundraising’ or
otherwise deal with donors, and 23.5% stated outright that they did not do
marketing. The ‘no fundraising’ respondents included a sorority, a professional guild, a lodge organization, a family foundation, and NPOs
supported only by their membership. The ‘no marketing’ respondents

192

J. A. Pope et al.

TABLE 3 Summary of Results

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Results

Interviews

View that marketing was important
Failure to define target market
Failure to separate marketing from fundraising or public relations
Have a marketing plan in place
Lack of resources for marketing
Identified direct competitors
Have no trouble finding clients
Use volunteers
Use volunteer board
Have a Web site
Solicit online donations

100%
82.4%
65.8%
57.9%
100%
64.8%
73.7%
92.1%
100%
100%
21.0%

Results

Surveys

View that marketing was important
View marketing as somewhat or not important
Did not use marketing
Have a marketing plan in place
Lack of money for marketing
Lack of staff for marketing
Lack of time for marketing
Lack of marketing skill sets
Problems of visibility
Identified direct competitors
Use volunteers
Have a Web site

62.1%
23.4%
13.7%
34.6%
36.3%
13.4%
12.1%
11.3%
8.1%
44.9%
86.0%
77.6%

included a ‘non-paid, all volunteer’ lake-beautification group, NPOs that rely
solely on ‘word of mouth’, and an NPO that only advertises in local
newspapers. Three (17.6%) of these respondents stated that there was no time
or no one at the NPO to answer surveys; three more said that the survey was
not addressed to the right person (and therefore would not be answered); one
NPO was inactive and expected to dissolve within a couple of months; and
one respondent stated that he had lost the survey and had no Internet access.

Lack of Resources/Support for Marketing
All interview subjects mentioned either the lack of staff, time, funding, a
clear marketing message, or the basic knowledge of what to do as
impediments to their ability to market their NPO. For the survey
respondents, lack of money was the most popular reason for problems
with marketing (36.3%), followed by lack of staff (13.4%), lack of time
(12.1%), lack of marketing skill sets (11.3%), and problems with visibility
(8.1%). Two interview subjects specifically mentioned that they could not

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

193

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

spend as much as they wanted to on marketing because donors specified
that their funds must to go toward the NPO’s cause. One interview subject
observed that it was difficult to get the public and potential donors to
understand all facets of the organization, including the importance of
marketing the NPO. Another interview subject discussed how difficult it was
to get even their board to see the importance of marketing and to include
funding for it in the annual budget. This is further complicated at some NPOs
by how much they try to accomplish. Many of the NPO-respondents
mentioned that they had a hard time focusing their resources because they
were trying to meet so many different needs.

Ambiguous Target Markets and Competition
Another issue making NPOs less efficient in their marketing efforts is the lack
of clear target marketing for all three NPO target markets. All of the NPOs
could clearly identify their target market for clients, but they were often
unable to do so when it came to donors or volunteers. When asked about
competitors, 64.8% of the NPO-respondents identified their direct competitors (for goods or services provided), but also identified every other NPO as
an indirect competitor (for funding). Interestingly, only 44.9% of survey
respondents identified direct competitors. Those that did not focused on the
uniqueness of their service, or on cooperation rather than competition.

Low Brand Recognition
Interview subjects and survey respondents associated with small, local NPOs
had concerns about lack of brand recognition. While most (73.7%) of interview
respondents stated that they had no trouble finding clients, one interviewee
stated that her NPO was unable to reach clients in certain ethic or economic
groups, despite several attempts to do so. She noted that one of the organizational goals was to educate different groups within the community about the
importance of the NPO’s mission, and the difficulty in reaching these other
groups was likely because of differing perceptions and cultural attitudes
toward the services offered. Another interview subject stated: ‘‘We have been
around nine years; people (still) don’t know us.’’ Smaller NPOs continue to
have trouble getting their name out there, whether it is from lack of funding or
lack of knowledge about how to reach their target markets.

No Targeted Marketing to Volunteers
Ninety two (92.1) percent of the NPO-interviewees and 86.0% of the survey
respondents utilized volunteers in some way at their organization. For those
NPOs that did not, the primary reason for not using volunteers was the

194

J. A. Pope et al.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

nature of their organization (e.g. sensitivity of information, size of
organization, or need for certain qualifications or skills). None of the
NPO-respondents mentioned that they had trouble finding volunteers, but
there was some lack of clarity about how often or how much the volunteers
worked for the organization. Moreover, none of the NPO-respondents had
marketing plans specific to attracting and keeping volunteers. All of the
NPOs that used volunteers also had a volunteer board. However, some
NPOs felt that their board was missing certain skill sets, including marketing.
While all of the interviewees praised the work of their boards, three asked
the interviewing author if she would be interested in joining the board for
their NPO.

Failure to Use Online Marketing
All of the interview subjects and 77.6% of the survey respondents had Web
sites for their NPOs; however, none of the NPO-respondents were using
these Web sites to their fullest potential. Interview subjects discussed a desire
for online donation capabilities, but only eight had implemented the process
at the time of the study – five of these were part of national NPOs. Most of
the smaller, local NPOs had yet to establish the capability to solicit on-line
donations. Although all had expressed the desire to do so, with lack of
someone to manage the site as the most common reason for not have that
available on the Web site. As noted above, most study participants used
their Web sites for only one-way communications, although they did
provide contact information—either through a direct link on the Web site or
via e-mail.

DISCUSSION
Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy
Traditional marketing strategies are not well-adapted to meeting the goals of
NPOs. Because NPOs are not motivated by the financial bottom line, these
for-profit strategies fall short in helping NPOs reach out to their three main

TABLE 4 NPO Responses to Whether there is a Marketing Plan in Place
Response
Yes
No
Working on it
No response or not applicable

Interviews

Surveys

22
10
6
0

37
42
12
16

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

195

marketing focus areas: clients, volunteers, and donors or funders. A new
nonprofit marketing strategy needs to be developed to assist this sector with
meeting its various missions and long-term and short-term objectives,
including guidelines for all three NPO target markets. While developing new
marketing strategies is difficult task for any business, NPOs lack the
resources and expertise, making the process all the more complicated.
In attracting donors, NPOs’ target marketing tends to be unfocused and
even sporadic. And although individuals are often very specific in choosing
NPOs to which to donate (Bennett, 2003, 2006), even regular donors or
wealthy patrons limit their contributions in hard economic times (Katz,
2005). It is essential that NPOs understand what specifically motivates
individuals to donate to a particular charity or category of charities. Any
nonprofit marketing strategy must therefore address donor motives for
making donations, including the particular incentives which motivate them
to select specific charities.
For many NPOs, volunteers are a crucial part of their successful and
long-term operations. However, it is often difficult to find the right
volunteers for the right tasks at the right organizations. This study highlights
NPOs’ desires to attract and retain volunteers that are passionate about their
missions, but that is often not enough. A volunteer’s passion can cool if he
does not receive the right ‘‘pay back’’—whether it is self-satisfaction or some
other material benefit. Nonprofit marketing strategies must also address the
specific and overall motivations of NPO volunteers.
NPOs tend to have fewer problems finding customers or clients,
although there may be a wide range of users depending on the type of good
or services offered by the NPO. NPOs offering welfare services generally
have little trouble finding people who need their help, but NPOs which are
entertainment-based may have more difficulty in finding people to attend
performances or support artists. Regardless of the size of the NPO or the
goods or services provided, many NPOs struggle with name or brand
recognition. A model nonprofit marketing strategy will have to address the
various types of clients who might utilize NPO goods or services, but also the
wide range of goods and services offered. Particular efforts need to be made
to develop brand equity.
For any nonprofit marketing strategy to be successful, it must be straight
forward, easy to implement and easy to measure. However, the development of such a novel model strategy will not be an easy task, given the wide
variety of individuals that NPOs must attract for a wide variety of purposes
(i.e., funding, services, and time/effort).

Implications for Nonprofit Management
It is clear that NPOs, like their for-profit counterparts, should be making
investments of time and money in their marketing efforts. However, the first

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

196

J. A. Pope et al.

step is for the NPOs to gain a broader understanding of what marketing is
and why marketing is important to all aspects of NPO management. The first
thing that NPOs must recognize is that marketing ? fundraising. Marketing is
a component of NPO fundraising, but it is also a component of attracting
clients and volunteers from multiple sectors. There clearly needs to be more
education about target marketing and brand recognition at the NPO-level, so
that these organizations can reach new clients, more consistent donors and
funders, and dedicated and long-term volunteers.
To address this need to do more marketing, NPOs can take some initial
steps. Since NPOs often lack experience with marketing, this organizational
gap should be addressed in board member selection. Board members, like
most other nonprofit volunteers, are generally selected because of their
passion for the NPO’s cause. This is particularly true with smaller NPOs,
where board members are often warm bodies to help with tasks and
projects, as opposed to an expert that brings a particular skill to the
organization. Although passion for the NPO’s cause is important, by itself it
does not help run an effective organization. It is recommended that NPOs
carefully examine the particular skills needed by their businesses and target
individuals with those skills when recruiting new board members.
NPOs must also invest time and energy in order to find funding for
marketing. Some NPOs have fundraising campaigns specifically for marketing
projects; however, this is not universal. All NPOs—regardless of the size of
their staff and budgets—should develop a marketing plan to reach their
various target markets and include a marketing line-item in their organizational budget. As many of our respondents noted, it may be problematic to ask
funders for money for marketing, but there are those donors who are willing
and able to provide assistance for general NPO operations. It is imperative that
NPOs recognize marketing as such an operational requirement.
Finally, it is important that NPOs—especially small and local NPOs with
limited time and staff—take advantage of the many resources that are
available. In the 21st century, there is no reason why any NPO should not
have a Web site or other online presence. For NPOs without staff expertise
to maintain a Web site, there are several community-based webhosts
designed for NPOs (e.g., I-Serve and the Community Media Center). These
webhosts can help NPOs take better advantage of what the Internet has to
offer. Furthermore, many universities have faculty and staff with expertise in
many areas relevant to NPOs. In some cases, there are majors or focuses in
nonprofit management, most often housed in public administration and
business departments. A growing interest in nonprofit marketing in
particular is signaled in part by recent special issues in marketing journals
that have traditionally focused primarily on for-profit marketing practices,
including the European Journal of Marketing and the Journal of Marketing
Management. Since the academic community appears to be more open to
working with NPOs, NPOs should take advantage of these opportunities.

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

197

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Study Limitations and Future Research
As is common in studies relying on survey data, the response rate for survey
respondents in this study was quite low (3.8%). Although more than 3,000
NPOs were invited to participate in the survey, only 124 NPOs responded.
Of those, 13.7% responded only to say that they would not be participating
in the study. A small number of NPO respondents indicated that they did not
have the capability to access the online survey. Although we sent paper
surveys to the NPOs that contacted us about this problem, it is likely that
there were other NPOs that discarded the letter if they did not have the
technological ability to easily respond to the survey. Another 2.9% of the
total sample never received the invitation to participate in the study, because
the address on file with the Internal Revenue Service was out-of-date.
However, the response rate from NPOs invited to participate in in-person
interviews was very high—almost 90%. We should note, these data were less
random and more centralized to one region in western Michigan, but the indepth responses we received made the interview data very helpful to our
final analysis.
While this study examined the marketing practices of NPOs specifically
in Michigan, to properly develop a new strategy of nonprofit marketing
future studies will need to include NPOs in other states, and perhaps other
countries. While it is anticipated that the results will be similar, NPOs in
different areas of the country or with different cultural settings may provide
additional insights into the motivations of donors, clients and volunteers,
and into the other processes underlying NPO marketing strategy for NPOs.
All of this information will provide the underpinnings for the development
of a new, model nonprofit marketing strategy.

CONCLUSION
This preliminary study examines some of the marketing strategy implications
for NPOs in Michigan. Previous studies have only adapted existing for-profit
strategies to the NPO, and they have discovered that these do not really fit
the needs of NPOs. This study is the first step in developing a new model
strategy of nonprofit marketing.
NPOs must re-evaluate the importance of marketing, and place it higher
on their hierarchy of organizational priorities. Specifically, NPOs should
include marketing as a desired skill set for their board of directors, place
marketing as a line-item on their annual budget, and take advantage of the
resources available to them through local academic institutions and NPO
service organizations. This will allow NPOs to address brand development
and recognition, and any shortfalls they might have in all three NPO market
areas: obtaining funding, reaching out to a diverse clientele, and effectively
utilizing good volunteers.

198

J. A. Pope et al.

This study reveals several marketing and managerial issues for NPOs
that provide a starting point for the development of a new model nonprofit
marketing strategy. NPOs struggle with a general lack of understanding of
the true functions of marketing, difficulties in branding, and an inability to
reach out to all of their target markets. Future studies will have to delve
deeper into these topics in order to develop a functional marketing strategy
that caters specifically to the needs of the NPO.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

REFERENCES
Akchin, D. (2001). Nonprofit marketing: Just how far has it come? Nonprofit World,
19, 33–36.
Andreasen, A. R., & Kotler, P. (2008). Strategic marketing for nonprofit organizations (7th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Arnold, M. J., & Tapp, S. R. (2003). Direct marketing in non-profit services:
Investigating the case of the arts industry. The Journal of Services Marketing, 17,
141–160.
Bennett, R. (2003). Factors underlying the inclination to donate to particular types of
charity. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 8,
12–29.
Bennett, R. (2006). Predicting the lifetime durations of donors to charities. Journal of
Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 15, 45–67.
Bennett, R., & Savani, S. (2004). Managing conflict between marketing and other
functions within charitable organizations. Leadership and Organizational
Development Journal, 25, 180–200.
Bilzor, M. (2007, January). Employment in the US: Non-profits outpaces overall job
growth. The JHU Gazette, 36(16).
Bissell, J. (2003). Opening the doors to ‘‘cause branding.’’ Brandweek, 44(39), 30.
Briggs, E., Landry, T., & Wood, C. (2007). Beyond just being there: An examination
of the impact of attitudes, materialism and self-esteem on the quality of helping
behavior in youth volunteers. Journal of Nonprofits and Public Sector
Marketing, 18(3), 27–45.
Bussell, H., & Forbes, D. (2006). Developing relationship marketing in the voluntary
sector. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 15(1/2), 151–174.
Community Research Institute. (2007). Economic impact of nonprofits in Kent,
Muskegon, Newaygo and Ottawa counties: 2006. Retrieved May 17, 2007, from
http://www.cridata.org/Publications.aspx
Clarke, P., & Mount, P. (2001). Non-profit marketing: The key to marketing’s ‘‘midlife crisis?’’ International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
6, 78–91.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.) (2000). Handbook of qualitative research (2nd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Govekar, P. L., & Govekar, M. A. (2002). Using economic theory and research to
better understand volunteer behavior. Nonprofit Management and Leadership,
13, 33–48.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

199

Gwin, C. F. (2000). The perspective of nonprofit organizations on cause-related
marketing. American Marketing Association Conference Proceedings, 11,
348–349.
Hart, T. R. (2002). ePhilanthropy: Using the internet to build support. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Marketing, 7, 353–360.
Helmig, B., Jergers, M. & Lapsley, I. (2004). Challenges in management of nonprofit
organizations: A research overview. Voluntas: International Journal of
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 15, 101–116.
Hume, M., & Mort, G. S. (2008). Satisfaction in performing arts: The role of value?
European Journal of Marketing, 42, 311–326.
Internal Revenue Service. (2003). SOI tax stats—exempt organizations: IRS master
file data for Michigan. Retrieved January 9, 2007, from http://www.irs.gov/
taxstats/charitablestats/article/0,,id597186,00.html
Izquierdo, C. C., & Samaneigo, M. J. G. (2007). How alternative marketing strategies
impact the performance of Spanish museums. The Journal of Management
Development, 26, 809–831.
Jansen, P. J., & Kilpatrick, A. R. (2005). The dynamic nonprofit board. McKinsey
Quarterly, 2, 72–81.
Katz, R. D. (2005). The not-for-profit sector: No longer about just raising funds.
Journal of Private Equity, 8, 110–113.
Kristoffersen, L., & Singh, L. (2004). Successful application of a customer
relationship management program in a non-profit organization. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, 12(2), 28–42.
MacMillian, K., Money, K., Money, A., & Downing, S. (2005). Relationship marketing
in the not-for-profit sector: An extension and application of the commitmenttrust theory. Journal of Business Research, 58, 806–818.
McCurley, S. (1994). Recruiting and retaining volunteers. In R. D. Herman &
Associates (Eds.), The Jossey-Bass handbook of nonprofit leadership and
management (pp. 511–534). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Michigan Compiled Laws: 450. 2180(3) (2008). Retrieved June 1, 2008 from www.
michiganlegislator.gov
Padanyi, P., & Gainer, B. (2004). Market orientation in the nonprofit sector: Taking
multiple constituencies into consideration. Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 12(2), 43–57.
Peloza, J., & Hassay, D. N. (2007). A typology of charity support behaviors: Toward
a holistic view of helping. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing,
17, 135–151.
Pinho, J. C., & Macedo, I. M. (2006). The benefits and barriers associated with the
use of the internet within the non-profit sector. Journal of Nonprofit and Public
Sector Marketing, 16, 171–193.
Pope, J. (2006). Personal interview with Jan Phillips, former head of the American
Red Cross, Toledo Chapter, October 6.
Sargeant, A., West, D. C., & Ford, J. B. (2004). Does perception matter? An
empirical analysis of donor behavior. The Service Industries Journal, 24(6), 19–
36.
Smith, G., & Saker, J. (1992). Developing marketing strategy for the not-for-profit
sector. Library Management, 13(4), 6–22.

200

J. A. Pope et al.

Waters, R. D. (2003). Nonprofit organizations’ use of the internet: A content analysis
of communication trends on the internet sites of the philanthropy 400.
Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 18, 59–76.
Wenham, K., Stephens, D., & Hardy, R. (2003). The marketing effectiveness of UK
environmental charity websites compared to best practice. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Marketing, 8, 213–223.

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

APPENDIX

Marketing Survey of Not-For-Profit Organizations
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

How important is marketing to your organization?
Please state your organization’s mission.
What services or products does your organization provide?
To whom are these services or products provided?
How many people work for your organization

a. Full-time?
b. Part-time?
6. Does your organization utilize volunteers?
a. How many?
b. How often do they do work for your organization?
c. Approximately how many hours do they work?
7. How is your organization funded?
8. What other funding sources have you pursued?
9. Do you have a current marketing plan?
10. Are there specific marketing goals in your strategic plan?
11. Do you use printed marketing materials?
12. How do you distribute your printed marketing materials?
13. To whom do you distribute your printed marketing materials?
14. Do you distribute different printed marketing materials to different
groups? If yes, please explain.
15. When were your marketing materials last updated?
16. Do you have an organizational Web site?
17. Does your Web site have separate areas for different users?
18. Does your Web site provide more/different information than your
printed materials?
19. When was your Web site last reviewed and updated?
20. Do you have an organizational domain name?
21. Who does the marketing for your organization?

Developing a Nonprofit Marketing Strategy

201

Downloaded by [Fresno Pacific University] at 05:30 15 January 2015

22. How much time is spent doing marketing for your organization?
23. How often do you ask your target markets what they want? _______
24. Have you asked your target market how satisfied they are with your
services in the past 24 months?
25. What are your organization’s core competencies?
26. Who are your competitors?
27. Please identify any limitations to your current marketing efforts.

