Voluntas
DOI 10.1007/s11266-015-9641-8
ORIGINAL PAPER

Nonprofit Brand Strength: What Is It? How Is It
Measured? What Are Its Outcomes?
Walter Wymer1 • Hellen P. Gross2 • Bernd Helmig3

 International Society for Third-Sector Research and The Johns Hopkins University 2015

Abstract Nonprofit brand strength is conceptualized as the degree to which a
nonprofit brand is well known to a target group, is perceived favorably by a target
group, and is perceived to be remarkable by a target group. Hence, the authors
conceptualize nonprofit brand strength as a priori having three dimensions: familiarity, remarkability, and attitude. The authors report the development of a nonprofit
brand strength scale, using a series of charity brands, in three separate studies,
supporting the scale’s reliability and validity. The scale’s ability to differentiate
charities based on their respective nonprofit brand strength levels is demonstrated.
Moreover, nonprofit brand strength is shown to be antecedent to a target group’s
affective dispositions and behavioral intentions toward the nonprofit brand.
Résumé La force de la marque d’une organisation à but non lucratif est considérée
comme le degré de reconnaissance de cette marque par un groupe cible, le degré de
perception favorable et le degré de perception comme étant remarquable par ce

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s11266-015-9641-8)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
& Walter Wymer
walter.wymer@uleth.ca
Hellen P. Gross
hellen.gross@gmail.com
Bernd Helmig
sekretariat.helmig@uni-mannheim.de;
http://helmig.bwl.uni-mannheim.de
1

Faculty of Management, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB T1K 3M4, Canada

2

Horváth & Partners Management Consultants, Stuttgart, Germany

3

Department of Business Administration, Public & Nonprofit Management, University of
Mannheim, L 5, 4 (Castle), 68131 Mannheim, Germany

123

Voluntas

groupe. En conséquence, les auteurs conceptualisent la force de la marque d’une
organisation à but non lucratif comme comprenant a priori trois aspects: familiarité,
caractère distinctif et attitude. Les auteurs décrivent la conception d’une échelle de
force des marques des organisations à but non lucratif grâce à un ensemble de
marques d’associations caritatives, dans trois études distinctes, pour confirmer la
fiabilité et la validité de l’échelle. La capacité de l’échelle à différencier les organisations caritatives en fonction des niveaux de force des marques de leurs organisations à but non lucratif respectives est démontrée. De plus, il est montré que la
force de la marque d’une organisation à but non lucratif précède les dispositions
affectives et les intentions comportementales du groupe cible envers la marque.
Zusammenfassung Die Markenstärke im gemeinnützigen Bereich wird begrifflich erfasst als das Maß, in dem eine gemeinnützige Marke bei einer Zielgruppe
bekannt ist, positiv von einer Zielgruppe wahrgenommen wird und von einer
Zielgruppe als bemerkenswert erachtet wird. Daher konzeptualisieren die Autoren
die Markenstärke im gemeinnützigen Sektor grundsätzlich als einen Bereich mit
drei Dimensionen: Vertrautheit, Besonderheit und Einstellung. Die Autoren
berichten über die Entwicklung einer Skala zur Markenstärke im gemeinnützigen
Bereich unter Hinzuziehung einer Reihe von gemeinnützigen Marken in drei
separaten Studien als Beweis für die Zuverlässigkeit und Gültigkeit der Skala. Es
wird demonstriert, dass die Skala zwischen Wohltätigkeitsorganisationen beruhend
auf ihren jeweiligen Markenstärken unterscheiden kann. Darüber hinaus wird dargelegt, dass die Markenstärke im gemeinnützigen Bereich den affektiven Dispositionen und Verhaltensabsichten einer Zielgruppe gegenüber der gemeinnützigen
Marke vorhergeht.
Resumen La fortaleza de la marca sin ánimo de lucro se conceptualiza como el
grado en el que una marca sin ánimo de lucro es conocida para un grupo objetivo, es
percibida favorablemente por un grupo objetivo, y es percibida como destacable por
un grupo objetivo. De ahı́ que los autores conceptualicen la fortaleza de la marca sin
ánimo de lucro considerando que tiene a priori tres dimensiones: familiaridad,
destacabilidad y actitud. Los autores informan del desarrollo de una escala de
fortaleza de la marca sin ánimo de lucro, utilizando una serie de marcas de organizaciones benéficas, en tres estudios separados, que apoyan la fiabilidad y validez
de la escala. Se demuestra la capacidad de la escala para diferenciar a las organizaciones benéficas basándose en sus respectivos niveles de fortaleza de la marca sin
ánimo de lucro. Asimismo, se muestra que la fortaleza de la marca sin ánimo de
lucro antecede a las disposiciones afectivas de un grupo objetivo y a las intenciones
comportamentales hacia la marca sin ánimo de lucro.
Keywords Brand strength  Scale development  Nonprofit brand management 
Nonprofit marketing

123

Voluntas

Introduction
What does it mean to say that a nonprofit brand is strong? What is nonprofit brand
strength? There has been substantial prior research within the nomological network
concerning nonprofit brands. However, the absence of conceptualizing and
measuring nonprofit brand strength is a substantive gap. While prior nonprofit
research has discussed strong brands in terms of their likely correlates or outcomes,
the field has not conceptualized the nature and dimensionality of the construct.
In this article, we present a conceptualization of nonprofit brand strength and the
development of its scale. We will use the terms nonprofit brand strength and brand
strength interchangeably to refer to the same construct. We review the relevant
literature in both the commercial and nonprofit contexts to inform our conceptualization. The construct definition is then followed by a three-study scale
development project. Additionally, outcome variables are included in our analysis
to provide insights into the potential relationships between nonprofit brand strength
and outcome variables it influences.
Because nonprofit brand strength has positive outcomes, it was surprising to discover
that the conceptualization and measurement of (also ‘‘for-profit’’) brand strength received
little attention, even in articles in which terms like ‘‘brand strength’’ or ‘‘strong brands’’
were used and the importance of strong brands mentioned (Henderson et al. 2003;
Hoeffler and Keller 2003; John et al. 2006; Keller 1993). François and MacLachlan (1995)
‘‘operationally define’’ brand strength by measuring anticipated brand strength outcome
measures. However, defining a construct in terms of its consequents or outcomes is a
flawed approach. Summers (2001) writes, ‘‘One cannot define a construct in terms of its
antecedents or its consequences. Moreover, trying to do so means that the proposed
theoretical linkage between A and B would not be empirically testable (i.e., it could not be
falsified); rather, it would be true by definition’’ (p. 407).
Early brand research focused on the competitiveness of consumer product brands
for managerial effectiveness (Dacin and Smith 1994); hence, the emphasis was not
on understanding the nature of the brand strength construct. The interest in brand
strength appears to be centered on its expected outcomes. Consequently, researchers
used a variety of proxies to ‘‘operationalize’’ brand strength in order to examine
other concepts of greater interest. Biel (1992) argues that marketing scholars have
not articulated the underlying characteristics that make a brand strong. Two decades
later, the brand strength construct still has not been adequately conceptualized,
neither in a for-profit nor in a nonprofit context. MacKenzie (2003) finds that failure
to adequately specify the conceptual meaning of a study’s focal constructs is a
common source of invalid research.

Conceptualizing Brand Strength
According to De Chernatony and Riley (1998, p. 417), there have been a ‘‘plethora’’
of brand definitions. Ironically, Bastos and Levy (2012) criticize these definitions as
undeveloped. Therefore, we will be clear in our use of the term, a necessary
prerequisite for defining the nonprofit brand strength construct.

123

Voluntas

We define a brand image as a target group’s comprehension of the branded object
based on their experiences relating to the branded object and information they have
received pertaining to the branded object. Brand image refers to a cluster of
attributes and associations that consumers connect to the brand name (Biel 1992).
Brand image is the concept of a brand that is held by the consumer (Dobni and
Zinkhan 1990); its intangible, derived meaning (Wood 2000).
Prior marketing research proposed that changes in brand image could lead to
changes in brand equity (Biel 1992). That is, if the attribute mix of a product could
be improved, then one would expect the monetary value of the brand to improve.
Biel (1992) posits that the mechanism through which brand image influences brand
equity is by making the brand stronger. Additionally, Biel notes that one can agree
upon which brands are strong versus weak, but there is no conceptualization of the
brand strength construct in prior literature.
We believe that a certain combination of brand attributes (brand image) is a
necessary but insufficient condition for increasing brand strength. The target
audience must also be sufficiently knowledgeable about the brand object to
understand what brand attributes it contains. Furthermore, from the perspective of
the target audience, the bundle of brand attributes must compare favorably to the
brand’s competitors.
In conceptualizing nonprofit brand strength, we believe that an understanding of
the construct requires identifying its nature and facets. Brand strength has a
comparative quality. If a nonprofit brand is weak or strong, it is perceived to be so
by a comparison with its peer brands. If a brand object has no direct competitors,
target audience members will still evaluate it by comparing it with the nearest
brands to its type from their experiential knowledge base. In the extreme case in
which a brand object is a unique pioneer, the harbinger of its own product class, the
audience members will evaluate the brand object not in comparison with its in-class
or near-class peers, but in comparison with members’ beliefs about how the pioneer
brand object ought to perform (having some basic performance expectations or
standards in mind).
The nature of the brand object (necessity or not) and its competitive environment
influence audience perceptions and, thus, brand strength. For example, car owners
need fuel (gasoline or petrol). They need the fuel and must buy it. However, car
owners may believe that fuel is an undifferentiated commodity and make their
selection purely on costs. If one brand of fuel is consistently lower-priced than other
brands, the consumers may develop a brand preference for that fuel brand, making
the brand the strongest in its class. As another example, individuals may only have
one electric utility from which to get their home electricity. Having no alternatives
for a necessity, consumers have no choice but to buy from that monopoly. This
circumstance does not make the utility a strong brand since consumers’ lack of
brand preference could be demonstrated if alternatives were available.
In the context of charities, which are not necessities (like car fuel or electricity),
if no charities in a given class are strong brands, then individuals may choose not to
donate. In the case in which a charity is a strong brand, in comparison with its peers,
donors may develop a brand preference for the strong brand and choose to channel
their support to that charity.

123

Voluntas

The determining feature is audience member choice. The more choice audience
members have, the more important brand strength is for organizational success. In
the electric utility case, consumers have no choice. Hence, from the perspective of
the monopoly utility, brand strength is managerially irrelevant. In the case of a
charity for which potential donors can choose whether or not to donate and, if they
choose to donate, they have several alternatives to target their support, brand
strength is quite important.
The strength of a brand is based on the perceptions of a target group or audience
of managerial interest to the organization. This view is consistent with that of Dacin
and Smith (1994), who argue that brand strength should be construed from the
perspective of a target audience or group. For a consumer product brand, this might
be the target consumer group. For a nonprofit organization, this might be the general
population or some population subgroup. Based on our review of the branding
literature, we believe that a strong nonprofit brand, compared to a weak nonprofit
brand, has the following properties.
A Strong Nonprofit Brand is Well Known
A nonprofit organization would want its brand to be well known to target groups of
managerial importance. The characteristic of being well known refers to how
familiar a target group is with a branded object. Napoli (2006) argues that the more
well known a charity brand is, the stronger it is.
Prior research in consumer products branding has recognized the importance of
brand familiarity and its probable antecedent relationship to purchase intention,
repeat purchase, brand recall, and other consequent variables. Hoeffler and Keller
(2003) argue that consumer familiarity (based on ownership, prior knowledge, or
brand exposure) has served, in prior research, as a proxy for strong brands.
There is some similarity between brand familiarity and brand awareness. Brand
awareness, however, is a construct with limited applicability and which is subsumed
into brand familiarity. One is either aware of the brand object or not. It is not
descriptive to assess the degree to which one is aware of a brand. For example, what
does it mean to say one is very aware of the brand object or merely somewhat aware
of the brand object? However, brand familiarity incorporates brand awareness and
adds a magnitude facet. For example, if one is not aware of the brand then one is
also not familiar with the brand. If one is aware of the brand, the degree to which
one is familiar with the brand will vary along a familiarity continuum.
Brand familiarity is a necessary but insufficient component of brand strength.
While a strong brand may be one with which an important group is familiar, a
familiar brand may be unpopular or disliked (and therefore, weak). It is possible for
a familiar brand to be perceived as mediocre in comparison to a peer brand,
suggesting the mediocre brand is comparatively weak. Hence, in addition to being a
familiar brand, the brand must also be perceived favorably by the target group of
interest. This leads into the second characteristic of a strong nonprofit brand.

123

Voluntas

A Strong Nonprofit Brand is Favorably Perceived
Being perceived positively relates to the attitude concept. Since attitude has a
valence and a magnitude, attitude is well suited as a means of assessing the degree
of favorability with which the organization or other branded object is perceived by
its target group. Prior research in commercial branding has recognized the
importance of brand attitude and its probable antecedent relationship to outcome
variables indicative of a strong brand, such as brand equity (Faircloth et al. 2001).
Dacin and Smith (1994) argue that the favorability of consumers’ brand
predispositions is important in conceptualizing brand strength.
Like familiarity, a favorable attitude is a necessary but insufficient component of
a strong brand. For example, most well-known charities are perceived favorably by
the public and enjoy a favorable attitude. For a charity to be considered the strongest
brand in its class, however, something additional is required. Among charities
having similar missions and attracting donations and volunteers from the same
population, it is the stand-out, exemplar, and best organization which will attract the
most support, thus indicating an additional characteristic is also a component of
nonprofit brand strength.
A Strong Nonprofit Brand is Exceptional and Extraordinary in Comparison
to Peer Brands
This brand strength characteristic pertains to how exceptional a target group
perceives a brand in comparison with other brands in its class. Brand strength is an
interesting concept in that it has a comparative quality. If a community has three
similar nonprofit organizations, the organization with the greatest brand strength
would be perceived as exceptional in comparison with the other two organizations.
If an organization is viewed as no better than similar organizations, then this
perception of being average would imply a brand of average strength. If an
organization is perceived as being worse than similar organizations, then one would
expect this organization’s brand strength to be below average. Prior literature
strongly supports the argument that a strong brand needs to be perceived as
exceptional and extraordinary. Biel (1992), for example, argues that salience within
a product class is a requirement of being a dominant brand. Simoes and Dibb (2001)
argue that a dominant brand needs to have some aspect of uniqueness and it needs to
be perceived as representing quality. We believe they were referring to the need of a
dominant brand (the strongest brand in its class) to be perceived as differentiated
and superior in comparison with its peer brands.
Brand remarkability, as a dimension of brand strength, helps to overcome a
conceptual error in prior literature that conflated differentiation with superiority. For
example, Aaker (1996) argues that differentiation (being different from competing
brands) was the essential characteristic of a brand that enabled it to command a
price premium. We argue, however, that simply being different is insufficient to
make a brand strong. A brand object can be different, but in a negative manner. A
brand object can be different, but in a manner that does not make it the preferred
choice among peer brands. Hence, remarkability is assessed from the perspective of

123

Voluntas

the target audience or group and refers to the extent to which the brand object stands
out in an exceptional manner from peer brands.
Construct Definitions
Based on the preceding discussion and literature review, we define nonprofit brand
strength as the degree to which a nonprofit brand is well known to a target group, is
perceived favorably by a target group, and is perceived to be remarkable in
comparison to peer brands by a target group. Hence, we conceptualize nonprofit
brand strength as having three dimensions: familiarity, attitude, and remarkability.
Nonprofit brand familiarity refers to the level of knowledge the target audience has
about the brand object. Nonprofit brand attitude refers to the degree to which a
brand object is perceived favorably by a target group. Nonprofit brand remarkability
refers to the degree to which a brand object is perceived by a target group to be
extraordinary.

Developing the Nonprofit Brand Strength Scale
Our general procedure is presented in Fig. 1. We began by generating and purifying
an initial item pool (step 1). Then, we undertook several procedures for refining the
scale (step 2) before we validated our newly developed scale (step 3).
Developing Initial Item Pool
To generate an initial broad set of statements, we solicited responses from 55
marketing students at a German and at a Canadian university. After defining brand

Fig. 1 Scale development process

123

Voluntas

strength, the students were asked to create statements that reflected its meaning. In
total, 377 statements were generated. We then checked the items for quality in terms
of grammar, spelling, and clarity. We deleted some items that were clearly
unsuitable (lacked face validity) or were repeated previously. This resulted in a set
of 58 candidate items.
Expert Review of Candidate Items
Nine doctoral students and a professor were presented with the candidate items.
These individuals were asked to evaluate the item list in terms of face validity,
content validity, writing quality, and redundancy. This process resulted in a refined
set of 29 items.
Substantive Validities of Items
The next step involved assessing the substantive validity of measures in a pretest
CFA procedure developed by Anderson and Gerbing (1991). A sample of 22
individuals participated in an item sorting task. We calculated the proportion of
substantive agreements and the substantive-validity coefficients for all items. This
procedure resulted in the deletion of 5 items, resulting in a refined item pool of 24
items (Reviewer Appendix A) to use in the first developmental study.
Nature of Measurement Model
MacKenzie et al. (2005) recommend considering the relationship between a
construct and its measures. Based on criteria from prior literature (Coltman et al.
2008; Jarvis et al. 2003), we propose that this relationship is reflective.

First Developmental Study
We developed an online questionnaire. The scale items were statements to which
participants indicated their level of agreement in a seven-point Likert format. Brand
strength was measured for two organizations: World Vision (WV) and Operation
Smile (OS). They were selected because prior research found both to be relatively
well known, but WV to be more familiar to our population than OS (Cavill 2011).
Selecting two proximate brands but having evidence to suggest that one is more
familiar to the population allows assessment of the scale’s ability to differentiate the
organizations in the anticipated direction. Moreover, replicating the scale on a
second organization helps to assess the scale’s external validity and reliability.
Separate single-item measures for familiarity, attitude, and remarkability were
included as alternate proxy measures to help assess convergent validity by
comparing their means to those of the multi-item brand strength dimensional scales
(Brackett and Mayer 2003). To help evaluate predictive and nomological validity,
we measured six outcome variables, including conative outcomes (e.g., the intention
to donate) and affective outcomes (e.g., trust) for both WV and OS (Table 3). To

123

Voluntas

test these associations, we estimated multiple linear regression models for each
outcome operationalized as single items following Walsh and Beatty’s (2007)
procedure.
Sample
An email list of 10,000 individuals was rented from First Direct Solutions (division
of Australia Post). This list was chosen because it is updated annually through a
national lifestyle survey, and it contains a 20 % proportion of the Australian
population. There were 643 completed questionnaires (response rate = 6.4 %).
With respect to gender, 34.5 % were male and 64.5 % were female. Ages of
participants ranged from 18 to 87 years, with an average age of approximately
56 years.
Larger samples increase confidence that factor loadings reflect true population
values. Research shows that a sample size of 150 observations should be sufficient
to obtain an accurate solution in exploratory factor analysis as long as intercorrelations are reasonably strong (Guadagnoli and Velicer 1988). The item-toparticipant ratio is 26.8 to 1, exceeding the 5 to 1 recommendation of Gorsuch
(2003). The communalities are all greater than |.40|, exceeding Worthington and
Whittaker’s (2006) recommendation.
Factorability of the Correlation Matrix
We confirmed the factorability of the correlation matrix with a Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin
(KMO) measure of sample adequacy of .963 for the WV data and of .968 for the OS
data, exceeding the .60 cutoff recommended by Tabachnick and Fidell (2001). The
anti-image of the correlation matrix was produced to generate a KMO measure for
individual scale items, which were all well above the .60 threshold, ranging from
.916 to .984. The Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity was significant (correlation–
covariance matrices and sufficient statistics needed to construct summary data
matrices for these samples are available in Reviewer Appendices C and D).
Extraction and Rotation Methods
We followed scale development best practice recommendations and used factor
analysis rather than principal components analysis (Worthington and Whittaker
2006). Principal axis factoring is a robust extraction method (Kamakura and Wedel
2000). Moderate correlations among factors can cause an overestimation of loadings
if orthogonal rotation is used rather than oblique rotation (Loehlin 1998). Therefore,
we used oblique rotation, following best practice recommendations (DeVellis
2011).
Factor analyses for both datasets produced three-factor solutions (Reviewer
Appendix B). The factor eigenvalues from the WV data are 13.5, 4.2, and 1.7, and
from the OS data, they are 16.7, 4.4, and 1.5. Scree tests show three factors above
the elbow, confirming a three-factor solution.

123

Voluntas

According to Worthington and Whittaker (2006, p. 823), ‘‘researchers should
delete items with factor loadings less than .32 or cross-loadings less than .15
difference from an item’s highest factor loading.’’ All of the WV items exceeded
this factor loading threshold. However, three items did not exceed the .15 crossloading cutoff. Furthermore, one additional item only exceeded the cross-loading
cutoff by a trivial amount (cross-loading differential = .153). For OS data, all items
exceeded the factor loading threshold and the difference thresholds from the highest
loading. However, one item exceeded the cross-loading cutoff by a trivial amount
(cross-loading = .158). We evaluated communalities, finding that all items, in both
datasets, exceeded the recommended threshold of |.40| (Worthington and Whittaker
2006). Bagozzi and Yi (2012) recommend reporting composite reliabilities for
multidimensional scales. They were .97 for each dataset.
Item Error Inter-correlations
In factor analysis, error terms are not allowed to correlate. Therefore, confirmatory
factor analysis (CFA) using structural equation modeling (SEM) is useful in
identifying items with high levels of shared error covariance which can negatively
affect the psychometric properties of the scale (Netemeyer et al. 2003). Measurement models for each dataset were estimated, and problematic error covariance was
Table 1 Study 1: revised item pool after 1st study
No.

Item

Familiarity
1

I am informed about [organization’s name]

2

I am knowledgeable about [organization’s name]’s activities

3

I am able to describe [organization’s name] to others

4

I have a good understanding of what [organization’s name] has done in the past

5

I have a good understanding of what [organization’s name] is currently doing

6

I understand the purpose of [organization’s name]

Remarkability
7

[Organization’s name] is extraordinary compared with other nonprofit organizations

8

No organization is better than [organization’s name] at doing what it does

9

[Organization’s name] really stands apart as being exceptional

10

[Organization’s name] stands out in comparison to others

11

[Organization’s name] is memorable

12

[Organization’s name] is distinguished from other organizations

Attitude
13

I have a favorable opinion of [organization’s name]

14

I believe that [organization’s name] is a great organization

15

I feel good about the work [organization’s name] is doing

16

I have positive thoughts when I think of [organization’s name]

17

I like [organization’s name]

18

I have a positive impression about [organization’s name]

123

Voluntas

identified using modification indexes (MIs). Only measurement errors producing
high MIs for both datasets were used to identify problematic items. As a result of the
EFA results and the CFA, six items were deleted (Table 1 presents the resulting 18
items).
Validity Evaluation Process
Convergent and discriminant validities were assessed using a combination method.
A statistical approach recommended by Fornell and Larcker (1981) was applied. To
further assess convergent validity, dimension means from the scale were compared
to the means of single-item proxy measures of the dimensions included for this
purpose. Prior research has found that single-item measures have predictive validity
and, therefore, are appropriately used for our purposes (Bergkvist and Rossiter
2007). We expected the scale to differentiate the two organizations (discriminant
validity). We expected WV’s brand strength to be greater than OS’s brand strength
(predictive validity). To assess predictive validity further, we expected the outcome
variable means to be greater for WV than for OS. In totality, these validity
assessments along with high face validity (Rossiter 2011) help support construct
validity of the scale.
Discriminant Validity
The ability of the scale to differentiate the brand strength of two peer brands was
tested. The mean brand strength score (as well as for each dimension) for WV was
significantly greater than it was for OS. Correlation coefficients were generated for
WV and OS on each of the three dimensions to assess the strength of the association
between these variables. For each of the three dimensions, the coefficient was less
than .3, indicating a weak association (Mimmack et al. 2001, Reviewer Appendices
C–E).
We also evaluated discriminant validity using the Fornell and Larcker (1981)
procedure. Discriminant validity between two factors is shown if the individual
average variance extracted (AVE) of one factor exceeds the squared correlation
between the two factors. The squared correlations range from .12 to .58, and the
AVE ranges from .68 to .97. For all factor pairs, the AVE exceeds the squared
correlation, which provides evidence for discriminant validity (Table 2).
Convergent Validity
Convergent validity was assessed by calculating the average variance extracted
(AVE) for each dimension. The AVE measures the amount of variance captured by
a construct and has recommended values of .5 or higher to provide evidence for
convergent validity (Fornell and Larcker 1981). All dimensions (Table 2) show
AVEs higher than the cutoff. Convergent validity implies that alternative measures
for a construct should be correlated. Thus, the correlations between the brand
strength dimensions and the alternative single-item proxy measures were examined.
The correlation coefficients range from .670 to .899, indicating strong associations

123

Voluntas
Table 2 Study 1: average variance extracted and shared variance estimates
FAM WV

REM WV

AT WV

FAM WV

.82

.12

.18

REM WV

.34

.68

.50

AT WV

.42

.71

.88

FAM OS

REM OS

AT OS

FAM OS

.94

.13

.21

REM OS

.36

.91

.58

AT OS

.45

.76

.97

Correlations are below the diagonal, squared correlations are above the diagonal, and average variance
extracted estimates are presented on the diagonal
AT attitude, FAM familiarity, OS Operation Smile, REM remarkability, WV World Vision

between the measures and evidence of convergent validity (Wanous et al. 1997,
Reviewer Appendix F).
Predictive and Nomological Validity
It is reasonable to expect that the nonprofit brand strength construct is antecedent to
consequent variables in its nomological net. The scale’s ability to demonstrate this
relationship supports its predictive validity. As discussed previously, the brand
strength means were significantly greater for WV than for OS. Likewise, the means
of our outcome variables for WV are significantly greater than those for OS
(Reviewer Appendices G and H).
Following Walsh and Beatty (2007), we calculated composite brand strength
scores (average across all items) for both organizations. In a series of OLS
regressions, one for each of the six outcome variables in which brand strength was
the predictor variable and the outcome variable was the criterion, brand strength was
a positive, substantive (beta values range from .55 to .62), significant predictor
(p \ .001) in each case (Table 3). These results support the predictive and
nomological validity of the scale.
In the first developmental study, the scale demonstrated a three-factor structure,
consistent with our a priori brand strength conceptualization. Six items were
deleted, based on our EFA and CFA. A second developmental study was conducted
to assess the refined scale.

Second Developmental Study
For this study, we chose Guide Dogs of Australia (GD) and World Wildlife Fund
(WWF) as our brand objects. Readers Digest (2007) published survey results of the
Australian population on which charities they most trusted. Guide Dogs of Australia
was rated as the third most trusted charity. WWF was rated as the 45th most trusted

123

Voluntas
Table 3 Study 1: regression analyses of brand strength on outcome variables
Beta

t

R2

Adj
R2

Outcome

Org

I would be more likely to make a donation to […] than to another
organization

WV

.615

18.3*

.379

.377

OS

.556

15.7*

.309

.308

I would be more likely to volunteer for […] than for another
organization

WV

.549

15.4*

.302

.301

OS

.551

15.5*

.303

.302

I would be more likely to tell others about […] rather than other
organizations

WV

.595

17.4*

.354

.353

OS

.580

16.7*

.337

.336

I trust […] more than other organizations

WV

.591

17.2*

.350

.349

OS

.559

15.8*

.313

.312

I am more likely to visit […]’s website than those of other
organizations

WV

.563

16.0*

.317

.315

OS

.551

15.5*

.304

.302

I am more likely to recommend to others to support […] than other
organizations

WV

.584

16.9*

.341

.340

OS

.571

16.3*

.326

.325

* p \ .001, t scores rounded to one decimal place, Brand Strength = Composite score, Adj adjusted,
Org organization, OS Operation Smile, WV World Vision

charity. Given this ranking differential, it is reasonable to expect Guide Dog’s brand
strength to be greater than WWF’s brand strength.
The questionnaire contained the 18 refined scale items from the first developmental study (Table 1). The questionnaire also included the same additional
variable measures from the first study.
A second email list of 10,000 Australians (no duplications from the first email
list) from First Direct Solution resulted in 639 completed questionnaires (N = 639;
response rate = 6.4 %). The item-to-participant ratio in our sample is 35.5 to 1, and
the communalities are all greater than |.40|. Among the sample respondents who
indicated their gender (n = 591), 167 were male (28.3 %) and 424 were female
(71.7 %). Ages of participants ranged from 18 to 87 years, with an average age of
approximately 50 years (for correlation–covariance matrix and sufficient statistics
to construct a summary data matrix see Reviewer Appendices I and J).
Exploratory Factor Analysis
We followed the same factor analytic procedures as in the first study. We verified
the factorability of the correlation matrix with a KMO of .955 for the GD data and
.957 for the WWF data and a significant Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity (GD:
v2 = 12,853, d.f. = 153, p \ .001; WWF: v2 = 15,730, p \ .001).
Our EFA produced a three-factor solution; with eigenvalues based on GD data of
10.6, 2.4, and 1.8; accounting for approximately 84 % of the variance; and with
eigenvalues based on the WWF data of 11.7, 2.2, and 1.6; accounting for
approximately 87 % of the variance. Both scree tests showed three factors above the
elbow, supporting the three-factor solution. All items exceeded a factor loading of

123

Voluntas

.32 and the .15 cross-loading differential cutoffs. All item communalities exceeded
the recommended threshold of .4. The composite reliabilities for the brand strength
scale were .97 (WWF data) and .97 (GD data) (factor loadings are presented in
Reviewer Appendix K).
Item Error Inter-correlations
We again conducted a CFA, with the exception of lowering the threshold for
identifying a problematic item. Because the relationship between the dimensions
and their items is reflective, as previously discussed, (1) the items are assumed to
correlate, and (2) deleting an item does not materially alter the content validity of
the scale (Coltman et al. 2008). Following the method used by Diamantopoulos and
Siguaw (2006), the MIs for error inter-correlations were examined to identify items
contributing to bias. If retention of a problematic item could not be defended on
theoretical grounds (Danes and Mann 1984) and if its removal did not threaten the
scale’s ability to cover the conceptual domain (Bagozzi 1983), then it was deleted.
This process was repeated until reaching an RMSEA cutoff of .05 and a TLI
cutoff of .95 (MacCallum et al. 1996; Reviewer Appendix L). The use of the two
datasets improves the measurement model’s reliability (Anderson and Gerbing
1982). This process resulted in the deletion of nine items, resulting in a nine item (3
items per dimension) scale. The final item set is presented in Table 4.
Discriminant Validity
Following the process described in the first study, we (1) tested the scale’s ability to
differentiate the two brands and (2) examined the AVE using Fornell and Larker’s
(1981) method. The mean brand strength score (as well as for each dimension) for GD
was significantly greater than for WWF (Reviewer Appendix M). The AVE method
resulted in squared correlations ranging from .27 to .39, and AVE ranging from .79 to
.94. For all possible pairs of factors, the AVE exceeds the squared correlation, which
provides evidence for discriminant validity (Reviewer Appendix N).
Convergent Validity
As in the first study, convergent validity was assessed by examining the AVE for
each dimension, all of which exceeded the .50 cutoff (Reviewer Appendix N).
Additionally, the correlations between the brand strength dimensions and the
alternative single-item proxy measures were examined. The correlation coefficients
ranged from .582 to .872, indicating moderate to strong associations between the
measures and evidence of convergent validity (Reviewer Appendix O).
Predictive and Nomological Validity
Following the procedure described in the prior study, we conducted a series of
regressions to determine if brand strength was related to outcome variables one
would expect. The results of the regression analysis resulted in significant

123

Voluntas
Table 4 Study 2: refined item pool after 2nd study
No.

Item

Familiarity
1

I am knowledgeable about [organization’s name]’s activities

2

I am able to describe [organization’s name] to others

3

I have a good understanding of what [organization’s name] has done in the past

Remarkability
4

No organization is better than [organization’s name] at doing what it does

5

[Organization’s name] really stands apart as being exceptional

6

[Organization’s name] stands out in comparison to others

Attitude
7

I have positive thoughts when I think of [organization’s name]

8

I like [organization’s name]

9

I have a positive impression about [organization’s name]

relationships (at p \ .001) between the predictor variable (brand strength) and each
outcome variable (beta coefficients ranged from .24 to .51; R2’s ranged from .06 to
.26) (Reviewer Appendix P).
Because Guide Dogs is a more popular charity than WWF, one would expect that
DG’s brand strength to be greater than WWF’s—which it was as discussed
previously. One would also expect the mean scores for the outcome variables to be
greater for GD than for WWF. Indeed, the means for the GD’s outcome measures
proved to be significantly greater than those for WWF, providing additional support
for the predictive validity and nomological validity of the brand strength scale
(Reviewer Appendix Q).

Study 3: Cross-Validation Study
A third study, using a new sample, was conducted to cross-validate the scale. As in
the prior studies, we used two nonprofit organizations as our brand objects: the
American Red Cross (RC) and Doctors Without Borders (DWB). Thus, both
organizations are relatively well known, yet the RC appears to be slightly more
popular (in the rankings of Charity Navigator (2012), RC is 1st, DWB is 3rd). These
organizations were selected to assess the scale’s ability to differentiate two
organizations that are quite close with respect to popularity out of a large pool.
Hence, the close proximity of these two brand objects serves as a rigorous test of the
scale’s ability to distinguish peer brands.
Sample
A sample from a different country was used to assess the scale’s external validity.
A U.S. sample was obtained using SurveyMonkey, resulting in 523 completed

123

Voluntas

questionnaires (N = 523). Our sample’s average age was approximately 48 years,
and there were 246 (46.9 %) male and 276 (52.7 %) female respondents.
Confirmatory Factor Analysis
Separate CFA was performed on the RC data and the DWB data. We compared the
fit of the measurement model on the two datasets; finding significant and sizable
loadings for items on their respective dimensions (Fig. 2 for loadings and Reviewer
Appendices R and S for data summary tables).
When calculating the estimates for the measurement model using the RC data,
the error variance for the remarkability dimension was negative.
The v2-statistic (CMIN statistic in AMOS) for the model using the RC data was
67.7 (d.f. = 25, p = .000) and was 62.9 (d.f. = 24, p = .000) using the DWB data.
This overall fit statistic is highly sensitive to sample size (Kline 2010). Samples with
more than 200 cases having small differences between the observed and the
reproduced covariance matrices can result in a significant v2 (Schumaker and
Lomax 2004). Because of this and other issues related to SEM fit indices,
researchers have expressed various preferences and recommendations (Byrne 2001).
Therefore, we will include an array of fit indices for both datasets in Reviewer
Appendix T.

Fig. 2 Study 3: confirmatory factor analysis: the three-factor model

123

Voluntas

We primarily rely on the incremental fit indices TLI and CFI to evaluate the
overall goodness-of-fit of our measurement model. We rely primarily on the
RMSEA coefficient as a badness-of-fit indicator (the lower the score, the better the
fit). In a content analysis of CFA articles published in Psychological Methods
between 1998 and 2006, the reported mean RMSEA was .064 (reported in 357
articles), the mean TLI was .904 (reported in 315 articles), and the mean CFI was
.929 (reported in 322 articles) (Jackson et al. 2009). The brand strength
measurement model using the RC data produced an RMSEA of .058, a TLI of
.988, and a CFI of .992. For the DWB data, our model resulted in an RMSEA of
.056, a TLI of .992, and a CFI of .995. These results indicate a good fit for both
datasets and were superior to indices reported by Jackson et al. (2009), exceeding
recommended thresholds (Bagozzi and Yi 1988).
Reliability
The composite reliabilities for the brand strength scale were .98 (DWB data) and .97
(RC data).
Discriminant Validity
We tested the ability of the scale to distinguish between the two brands. We
expected RC to have a higher level of brand strength than DWB because of its
slightly greater popularity (1st and 3rd, respectively, out of 1100 charities). We
followed the procedures used in the prior two studies (Reviewer Appendix U). The
brand strength dimension and composite means are all significantly greater for RC
than for DWB. Further assessment, using the Fornell and Larcker (1981) process,
found that all AVE estimates are greater than all squared correlations, also
supporting the scale’s discriminant validity (Reviewer Appendix V).
Convergent Validity
As in the prior two studies, we used single-item dimension proxy measures to aid in
examining convergent validity. Correlation coefficients range from .613 to .888,
indicating a strong and positive relationship and, therefore, providing support for
convergent validity (Reviewer Appendix W). Moreover, convergent validity was
achieved with all AVE estimates for both datasets (Reviewer Appendix V),
exceeding the .5 threshold, ranging from .79 to .96.
External Validity
The external validity of the scale is also supported. This is the third study in which
the scale has been shown to differentiate a pair of brand objects with the expected
relationship. Hence, the scale has been used to measure our construct for six
organizations (our brand objects), using three samples, from two countries.

123

Voluntas

Nomological Validity
Following prior research for establishing nomological validity (Podsakoff and
MacKenzie 1994; Walsh and Beatty 2007), we examine how well the brand strength
scale relates to other variables. The questionnaire included three antecedent and two
consequent variables for RC brand strength, whose appropriateness of operationalization was tested by a CFA each (items based on prior research and results CFAs,
Table 5). There were three brand strength antecedents: (1) an individual’s value

Table 5 Study 3: antecedent and consequent variables of brand strength
Coefficients of determination
(from CFA) and composite
reliabilities
Antecedents
Individual’s value concordance/harmony with organizationa

AVE = .75, cr = .90

I care about what the Red Cross represents

.87

I share the Red Cross’s concern for people

.87

I feel that the Red Cross represents some values that are
important to me

.86

Exposure to organizational communicationb

AVE = .46, cr = .63

The Red Cross has sent me mail or email

.66

The Red Cross appears to advertise on a regular basis

.70

Personal experiencec

AVE = .62, cr = .83

I have had personal experience with the Red Cross

.67

I know people who have supported or been helped by the Red
Cross

.84

I have witnessed how the Red Cross can make a positive
difference

.83

Consequences
Intention for behavioral supportd

AVE = .65, cr = .85

I am likely to donate to the Red Cross in the future

.81

I am likely to volunteer for the Red Cross in the future

.71

I am likely to recommend to others to support the Red Cross

.90

Affective response to organization

e

AVE = .52, cr = .75

I could be a loyal supporter of the Red Cross

.88

I trust the Red Cross

.77

I would not like hearing or reading something critical about the
Red Cross

.46

AVE average variance extracted, cr composite reliability
a

Developed after Aaker et al. (2004), Bendapudi et al. (1996), and Mael and Ashforth (1992)

b

Developed after Bendapudi et al. (1996) and Yoo et al. (2000)

c

Developed after Bendapudi et al. (1996) and Delgado-Ballester (2004)

d

Developed after Samu and Wymer (2009) and Venable et al. (2005)

e

Developed after Walsh and Beatty (2007)

123

Voluntas

concordance with the charity’s mission, (2) exposure to communications from the
charity, and (3) personal experiences with the charity. There were two brand
strength consequent variables: (1) intention for behavioral support, and (2) affective
response to the organization. The appropriateness of the variable operationalizations
was supported with composite reliability coefficients (ranging from .63 to .90,
Table 5). These measures are expected to be positively associated with brand
strength.
Given the predicted positive association between the antecedent variables and
brand strength, and between brand strength and the consequent variables,
correlations were examined to assess nomological validity (Walsh and Beatty
2007). All correlations were significant at p \ .01, supporting nomological validity
(Reviewer Appendix X).

Discussion
Marketing managers desire a strong brand in order to achieve its expected benefits.
We conceptualized nonprofit brand strength as a three-dimensional construct
(familiarity, attitude, and remarkability). The three-dimensional conceptualization
was supported in the initial EFA’s factor structure, prior to any item changes. It was
supported again in the EFA of the second study, and then confirmed in the third
study’s CFA. The final nonprofit brand strength scale is parsimonious, consisting of
nine items. Psychometrically, the scale is internally consistent and reliable across
samples and brand objects. The items have a high level of face validity resulting
from the rigorous initial item pool generation and refinement process employed.
The scale, in three separate studies, was able to discriminate between peer brands
in the expected direction. Furthermore, this discrimination was also replicated at the
dimension level in each case, supporting both the discriminant validity of the scale
and the conceptualization of the construct. The Fornell and Larcker (1981) average
variance extracted (AVE) procedure also supported the discriminant and convergent
validity of the scale in each study.
The scale’s convergent validity was supported not only by the AVE procedure,
but also by comparing the scale’s measurements with those of single-item proxy
measures having high face validity. In each study, this comparison resulted in
significant correlations with strong associations at both the dimension level and at
the composite level.
The scale’s nomological validity was supported by examining the associations
between the scale and variables with which nonprofit brand strength should be
related. In the cross-validation study, variables which one would expect to be
antecedents of nonprofit brand strength and consequents of nonprofit brand strength
were examined. In all cases, the correlations were significant, and the strength of the
associations was strong. Hence, the findings support the conceptualization of the
nonprofit brand strength construct and the construct validity of the nonprofit brand
strength scale.

123

Voluntas

Research Implications
Our research advances prior research on nonprofit brand strength by providing a
thorough conceptualization of the construct and by developing a scale for its
measurement. Our literature review revealed that prior research in the brand area
was often conducted with an intentional or inadvertent bias in that researchers often
assumed the brand object was a consumer product, the target group was consumers,
and the marketing organization was a corporation. Given the marketing discipline’s
origins and history, this contextual assumption is understandable, but can produce
weak scientific results. We avoided this biasing effect by conceptualizing nonprofit
brand strength in a manner that would be appropriate for an array of objects. In the
scale development program, we chose to use nonprofit organizations as our brand
objects. However, the scale items can be adapted for other brand objects.
One important measurement issue deals with the relative influence of each
dimension on the brand strength composite score. It is reasonable to believe that the
influence of each dimension on brand strength is unequal. That is, the influence of
familiarity, remarkability, and attitude on brand strength may be different. In our
study, we have treated the dimensions and construct as an aggregate model (Law
et al. 1998).
Hence, if a manager uses the brand strength scale and calculates brand strength
using a simple summing and averaging of dimensions, without respect to differential
weighting, does this reduce the practical utility of the scale? We will now discuss
this issue.
We have not weighted the dimensions based on theoretical considerations. We do
not have a theoretical foundation to support the assignment of weights to the various
dimensions. Thus, we are left with a data-driven approach to calculating
dimensional weights (Decancq and Lugo 2013). Weights derived from one or a
small number of samples are unlikely to be stable across a large number of samples
(Grice and Harris 1998).
The appropriate data-driven way to develop appropriate dimension weights is to
conduct a meta-analysis of prior studies that measured brand strength, then to
calculate an average loading score for each dimension across an array of samples.
Dimension loadings in large samples could be given greater weight than loadings in
small samples (Lipsey and Wilson 2001). This would result in more reliable weights
that are more stable across samples (Grice and Harris 1998). Since we are
developing an original scale, it will be some time before data-driven weights
derived from a meta-analysis are possible.
Our findings will enable research scholars to more fully investigate phenomena
within the brand nomological net. It appears that nonprofit brand strength may serve
an important role. It serves a mediation role between marketing activities and
desired outcomes. Nonprofit brand strength may also be a leading indicator of
change for desired marketing outcomes. It may be the case that nonprofit marketing
managers would be more likely to achieve brand success by focusing their efforts at
increasing brand strength. If nonprofit brand strength is antecedent to desired
outcome variables, then its periodic measurement using our scale would provide a
more time-sensitive and predictive means of evaluative feedback of marketing

123

Voluntas

planning. Hence, ineffective tactics could be corrected and effective tactics more
strongly emphasized in a timelier manner, which would provide a better use of
marketing resources and improve the probability of success. These are all issues
which could be the subject of future research.
Managerial Implications
The managerial implications of nonprofit brand strength are derived from the
nomological net position of brand strength as a consequent of marketing activities
and as an antecedent of marketing outcomes. Managerially, then, nonprofit brand
strength is an important construct to understand, measure, and monitor. Nonprofit
brand strength may be a fulcrum through which marketing tactics are leveraged to
achieve desirable objectives. Hence, the ability to have a simple means of
measuring brand strength provides nonprofit managers with the ability of more
precisely assessing the effects of their marketing tactics. Also, brand strength may
be found to be a leading indicator of marketing outcomes specific to the nonprofit
organization and also in relation to peer brands.
We believe that the brand strength scale has practical importance for managers
even if a more simplistic unweighted average of the dimensions is used for its
calculation. We anticipate that the three main purposes for which managers would
use the brand strength scale are
•
•
•

To differentiate one organization’s brand strength from another organization’s
brand strength,
To use in periodic brand strength measurement for trend analysis, and
To predict changes in outcome variables from changes in brand strength.

Nonprofit managers may also find brand strength to be diagnostically beneficial
for feedback and control purposes. For example, if the brand strength score was low,
one could assume that audience members cannot meaningfully evaluate the brand
object. Hence, the manager should communicate more to target audiences to
increase brand familiarity. If brand familiarity is high, but brand remarkability and
brand attitude are low, the manager is probably safe in assuming that the audience
believes the brand object has lower quality, lower value, or performs worse than it
should. If brand familiarity is high, brand attitude is high, but brand remarkability is
low, this could be indicative of a well-known charity that is perceived to be no
better than average in fulfilling its mission (yet the charity evokes a favorable
attitude because of the selfless nature of its work). If brand familiarity is high, brand
remarkability is moderate, and brand attitude is low, this could be indicative of a
well-known brand that is exceptionally bad (think of an oil company that had a
catastrophic oil spill). In sum, the dimension scores provide information in addition
to contributing to the brand strength score that may offer managers some insights (or
direct their attention for the need of further information).
Nonprofit managers may find that emphasizing specific brand strength dimensions in their marketing activities will depend upon their competitive positioning.
Managers may find that emphasizing the remarkability of their nonprofit brand may
lack verisimilitude if their brand is not well known. Managers of the strongest

123

Voluntas

nonprofit brands, however, might achieve the greatest return from their marketing
communications by emphasizing the remarkability of their brands. Finally, and
perhaps most important, our findings emphasize the need for nonprofit managers to
look for innovative ways to make their brand objects truly excellent, exceptional,
exemplary; that is, remarkable; and then find effective ways of communicating that
remarkability to important audiences.
Acknowledgments The authors thank the Julius Paul Stiegler Memorial Foundation and the Friends
Association of the Center for Public & Nonprofit Management at the University of Mannheim for the
financial support of this research. They also thank the University of Lethbridge for financially supporting
the data collection portion of this research project.

References
Aaker, D. (1996). Measuring brand equity across products and markets. California Management Review,
38(3), 103–120.
Aaker, J., Fournier, S., & Brasel, S. A. (2004). When good brands do bad. Journal of Consumer Research,
31(1), 1–16.
Anderson, J., & Gerbing, D. (1982). Some methods for respecifying measurement models to obtain
unidimensional construct measurement. Journal of Marketing Research, 14(4), 453–460.
Anderson, J., & Gerbing, D. (1991). Predicting the performance of measures in a confirmatory factor
analysis with a pretest assessment of their substantive validities. Journal of Applied Psychology,
76(5), 732–740.
Bagozzi, R. (1983). Issues in the application of covariance structure analysis: A further comment. Journal
of Consumer Research, 9(4), 449–450.
Bagozzi, R., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Academy of Marketing
Science, 16(1), 74–94.
Bagozzi, R., & Yi, Y. (2012). Specification, evaluation, and interpretation of structural equation models.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 40(1), 1–27.
Bastos, W., & Levy, S. (2012). A history of the concept of branding: Practice and theory. Journal of
Historical Research in Marketing, 4(3), 347–368.
Bendapudi, N., Surendra, S., & Bendapudi, V. (1996). Enhancing helping behavior: An integrative
framework for promotion planning. Journal of Marketing, 60(3), 33–50.
Bergkvist, L., & Rossiter, J. (2007). The predictive validity of multiple-item versus single-item measures
of the same constructs. Journal of Marketing Research, 44(2), 175–184.
Biel, A. (1992). How brand image drives brand equity. Journal of Advertising Research, 32(6), 6–12.
Brackett, M., & Mayer, J. (2003). Convergent, discriminant, and incremental validity of competing
measures of emotional intelligence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(9), 1147–1158.
Byrne, B. (2001). Structural equation modeling with AMOS, EQS, and LISREL: Comparative approaches
to testing for the factorial validity of a measuring instrument. International Journal of Testing, 1(1),
55–86.
Cavill, H. (2011). Australia’s most trusted charity. Retrieved from http://www.cavill.com.au/cms/images/
10013/trust.pdf.
Charity Navigator. (2012). 10 all-time most popular charity ratings. Retrieved from http://www.
charitynavigator.org/index.cfm?bay=topten.detail&listid=147.
Coltman, T., Devinney, T., Midgley, D., & Venaik, S. (2008). Formative versus reflective measurement
models: Two applications of formative measurement. Journal of Business Research, 61(12),
1250–1262.
Dacin, P., & Smith, D. (1994). The effect of brand portfolio characteristics on consumer evaluations of
brand extensions. Journal of Marketing Research, 31(2), 229–242.
Danes, J., & Mann, O. (1984). Unidimensional measurement and structural equation models with latent
variables. Journal of Business Research, 12(3), 337–351.

123

Voluntas
De Chernatony, L., & Riley, F. (1998). Defining a ‘‘brand’’: Beyond the literature with experts’
interpretations. Journal of Marketing Management, 14(5), 417–443.
Decancq, K., & Lugo, M. (2013). Weights in multidimensional indices of wellbeing: An overview.
Econometric Reviews, 32(1), 7–34.
Delgado-Ballester, E. (2004). Applicability of a brand trust scale across product categories: A multigroup
invariance analysis. European Journal of Marketing, 38(5/6), 573–592.
DeVellis, R. (2011). Scale development: Theory and applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Diamantopoulos, A., & Siguaw, J. (2006). Formative versus reflective indicators in organizational
measure development: A comparison and empirical illustration. British Journal of Management,
17(4), 263–282.
Dobni, D., & Zinkhan, G. M. (1990). In search of brand image: A foundation analysis. Advances in
Consumer Research, 17(1), 110–119.
Faircloth, J., Capella, L., & Alford, B. (2001). The effect of brand attitude and brand image on brand
equity. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 9(3), 61–75.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(2), 39–50.
François, P., & MacLachlan, D. (1995). Ecological validation of alternative customer-based brand
strength measures. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12(4), 321–332.
Gorsuch, R. (2003). Factor analysis. In J. A. Schinka & W. F. Velicer (Eds.), Handbook of psychology:
Research methods in psychology (pp. 143–164). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Grice, J., & Harris, R. (1998). A comparison of regression and loading weights for the computation of
factor scores. Multivariate Bahavioral Research, 33(2), 221–247.
Guadagnoli, E., & Velicer, W. (1988). Relation of sample size to the stability of component patterns.
Psychological Bulletin, 103(2), 265–275.
Henderson, P., Cote, J., Leong, S., & Schmitt, B. (2003). Building strong brands in Asia: Selecting the
visual components of image to maximize brand strength. International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 20(4), 297–313.
Hoeffler, S., & Keller, K. (2003). The marketing advantages of strong brands. Journal of Brand
Management, 10(6), 421–445.
Jackson, D., Gillaspy, A., & Purc-Stephenson, R. (2009). Reporting practices in confirmatory factor
analysis: An overview and some recommendations. Psychological Methods, 14(1), 6–23.
Jarvis, C., MacKenzie, B., & Podsakoff, P. (2003). A critical review of construct indicators and
measurement model misspecification in marketing and consumer research. Journal of Consumer
Research, 30(2), 199–218.
John, D., Loken, B., Kim, K., & Monga, A. (2006). Brand concept maps: A methodology for identifying
brand association networks. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(4), 549–563.
Kamakura, W., & Wedel, M. (2000). Factor analysis and missing data. Journal of Marketing Research,
37(11), 490–498.
Keller, K. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of
Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Kline, R. B., (2010). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling (3rd ed). London: The
Guilford Press.
Law, K., Wong, C., & Mobley, W. (1998). Toward a taxonomy of multidimensional constructs. Academy
of Management, 23(4), 741–755.
Lipsey, M., & Wilson, D. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Loehlin, J. (1998). Latent variable models: An introduction to factor, path, and structural analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
MacCallum, R. C., Browne, M. W., & Sugawara, H. M. (1996). Power analysis and determination of
sample size for covariance structure modeling. Psychological Methods, 1(2), 130–149.
MacKenzie, S. (2003). The dangers of poor construct conceptualization. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 31(3), 323–326.
MacKenzie, S., Podsakoff, P., & Jarvis, C. (2005). The problem of measurement model misspecification
in behavioral and organizational research and some recommended solutions. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 90(4), 710–730.
Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the reformulated model of
organizational identification. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13(2), 103–123.

123

Voluntas
Mimmack, G., Manas, G., & Meyer, D. (2001). Introductory statistics for business: The analysis of
business data. Cape Town: Pearson South Africa.
Napoli, J. (2006). The impact of nonprofit brand orientation on organisational performance. Journal of
Marketing Management, 22(7–8), 673–694.
Netemeyer, R., Bearden, W., & Sharma, S. (2003). Scaling procedures: Issues and applications.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Podsakoff, P., & MacKenzie, S. (1994). An examination of the psychometric properties and nomological
validity of some revised and reduced substitutes for leadership scales. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 79(5), 702–713.
Readers Digest. (2007). Australia’s most trusted charities 2007. Retrieved from http://www.readersdigest.
com.au/australias-most-trusted-charities-2007.
Rossiter, J. (2011). Marketing measurement revolution: The C-OAR-SE method and why it must replace
psychometrics. European Journal of Marketing, 45(11/12), 1561–1588.
Samu, S., & Wymer, W. (2009). The effect of fit and dominance in cause marketing communications.
Journal of Business Research, 62(4), 432–440.
Schumaker, R., & Lomax, R. (2004). A beginner’s guide to structural equation modelling. Mahwa, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Simoes, C., & Dibb, D. (2001). Rethinking the brand concept: New brand orientation. Corporate
Communications: An International Journal, 6(4), 217–224.
Summers, J. (2001). Guidelines for conducting research and publishing in marketing: From conceptualization through the review process. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 29(4), 405–415.
Tabachnick, B., & Fidell, L. (2001). Using multivariate statistics. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Venable, B., Rose, G., Bush, V., & Gilbert, F. (2005). The role of brand personality in charitable giving—
An assessment and validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33(3), 295–312.
Walsh, G., & Beatty, S. (2007). Customer-based corporate reputation of a service firm: Scale
development and validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35(1), 127–143.
Wanous, J., Reichers, A., & Hudy, M. (1997). Overall job satisfaction: How good are single-item
measures? Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(2), 247–252.
Wood, L. (2000). Brands and brand equity: Definition and management. Management Decision, 38(9),
662–669.
Worthington, R., & Whittaker, T. (2006). Scale development research. The Counseling Psychologist,
34(6), 806–838.
Yoo, B., Naveen, D., & Lee, S. (2000). An examination of selected marketing mix elements and brand
equity. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(2), 195–211.

123

