Journal of Marketing Communications

ISSN: 1352-7266 (Print) 1466-4445 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjmc20

Brand ‘infrastructure’ in nonprofit organizations:
Challenges to successful brand building?

Chris Chapleo

To cite this article: Chris Chapleo (2015) Brand ‘infrastructure’ in nonprofit organizations:
Challenges to successful brand building?, Journal of Marketing Communications, 21:3, 199-209,
DOI: 10.1080/13527266.2012.741609

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2012.741609

Published online: 06 Feb 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2512

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjmc20

Journal of Marketing Communications, 2015
Vol. 21, No. 3, 199–209, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2012.741609

Brand ‘infrastructure’ in nonproﬁt organizations: Challenges to
successful brand building?

Chris Chapleo*

The Business School, Bournemouth University, 89 Holdenhurst Road, Bournemouth BH8 8EB, UK

The particular purpose of this study was to examine and explore the factors necessary
within nonproﬁt organizations (NPOs) for successful branding, and challenges in their
implementation. The approach was an appropriate inductive qualitative one, conducted
through depth interviews with opinion formers. Although there has been some research
into the variables necessary to successfully build brands, only limited work considers
anything other than commercial branding contexts. The originality is that through this
work both theory and practice of branding in NPOs will be better informed so that
structures to support branding can be better managed. Factors considered important to
branding were identiﬁed, particularly leadership, employee understanding and clear
vision. It was interesting that respondents generally agreed that limited marketing
budgets were not necessarily a major problem. The research also identiﬁed variables
that contribute to a conceptual model of nonproﬁt brand management, experiential and
emotional branding in particular being notable as offering possible platforms for
differentiation. The work is exploratory in nature and therefore informs understanding
of brand management in a nonproﬁt context and forms a basis for wider empirical
testing.

Keywords: nonproﬁt organizations; nonproﬁt branding; public sector branding;
nonproﬁt brands; university brands

Introduction

There is an acceptance that organizations need to develop strong brands as part of their
strategy (Keller 2001; Kay 2006) and an organization’s success depends heavily on its
brand’s success. Ten years ago little scholarly research had been devoted to branding in the
nonproﬁt sector (Hankinson 2001) but more recently interest in this ﬁeld as part of
marketing has grown rapidly (Bennett, Kerrigan, and O’Reilly 2010).

If brands are key to all organizations, then brand management is important to
implement branding in both nonproﬁt and commercial sectors (Aaker and Joachimsthaler
2000; Sargeant 2009). Traditional brand management draws upon the resource-based view
of organizations (Mahoney and Pandian 1992) and elements of the marketing concept
(Bridson and Evans 2004; Aaker 1996; Keller 2001) and the degree and manner in which
brand management is implemented relates to brand orientation (Bridson and Evans 2004).
There are two broad ways of viewing brand orientation: the philosophical foundation and
the behavioral foundation. The philosophical foundation sees brand orientation as
embedded in the organization’s values and beliefs, whereas the behavioral foundation
understands it in terms of implemented behaviors and activities (Bridson and Evans 2004).
The research in this paper explores the factors necessary to, and challenges inherent

*Email: cchapleo@bournemouth.ac.uk

q 2013 Taylor & Francis

200

C. Chapleo

within, implementing brands in nonproﬁt organizations (NPOs) and therefore has its
conceptual framework rooted in these foundations of brand orientation, in particular
exploring ‘implemented behaviors and activities’ in the NPO context. Ewing and Napoli
(2005) support this focus on implemented activities when they deﬁne nonproﬁt brand
orientation as ‘reﬂecting an organization’s focus on the internal and external activities
necessary to build and sustain strong brands’.

Internal factors that allow brands to be constructed communicated, and managed
logically include variables such as vision, support, leadership, available budgets and
experience (Bridson and Evans 2004; Napoli 2006). In this study, these factors are termed
the ‘brand infrastructure’, although this is far from a deﬁnitive list and the research
encouraged additions to these.

However, existing frameworks developed with commercial organizations in mind to
explore branding activities do not wholly ﬁt the particular context and challenges of NPOs
(Chapleo 2010; O’Cass and Voola 2011) as nonproﬁt brands need to address a variety of
additional organizational objectives (Stride and Lee 2007).

This study therefore adds to knowledge by examining branding in NPOs and the
variables that comprise the brand infrastructure, as well
the challenges to their
implementation. It is intended that through this work, theory and practice of branding in
NPOs will be informed so that structures to support branding can be better managed and a
platform for further empirical work can be built.

Brand success factors

A branding strategy and basic principles must be deﬁned in order to create a strategic
direction for the use of brands and the ‘ﬁrm-based characteristics’ that support branding
are an important part of this (Douglas, Craig, and Nijssen 2001).

Key authors discuss the elements that underpin successful brands such as Keller (2001)
who offers six steps: performance, imagery, salience, judgments, feeling and resonance.
Krake’s (2005) paper presents guidelines for the creation of a strong brand which explore
internal factors important to brand success to a greater extent, however. He suggests that
an organization should focus on a small number of brands in order to create clear brand
associations. Secondly, there must be an integrated mix of brand elements that fully
support both brand awareness and brand image. Thirdly, an organization should be logical
in its policy and consistent in its communications. Fourthly, there should be a clear link
between the character of the company and the brand, and ﬁnally there should be a passion
for the brand within the company.

It may be argued, therefore, that for a successful brand to be built and managed,
a number of factors or variables need be in place within a brand-orientated organization
(Ewing and Napoli 2005). These internal factors are, for the purpose of this research,
referred to as the ‘brand infrastructure’ and it is these that this paper explores.

Brand infrastructure: Internal success factors

Harris and de Chernatony (2001) suggest that a sustainable competitive advantage through
brands can better be achieved in terms of unique emotional elements than functional
characteristics and Aaker (1996) supports this to some extent when he talks of the
importance of the emotional aspects of a brand. These emotional values are communicated
not
interactions with different
stakeholders (Harris and de Chernatony 2001). Employees have to communicate the

just by advertising but also through employees’

Journal of Marketing Communications

201

brand’s promise across all contact points, whereas such behavior can become a
competitive advantage if they deeply believe in the brand’s values (Vallaster and de
information technology and
Chernatony 2005). In the service sector, employees,
operations as well as service culture have also an inﬂuence in service branding
(Kimpakorn and Tocquer 2009). Everybody in a ﬁrm can be seen as a service provider and
should be encouraged to live a company’s values and attitudes (Ghose 2009). Brumann
and Zeplin (2004) argue that the strength of a brand depends on the consistency of the
customers’ brand experiences along all customer –brand touch-points determined by the
brand’s identity. Consequently, the brand’s identity must be consistent with employee’s
values and behavior (Harris and de Chernatony 2001). Internal brand building is therefore
crucial in developing a successful service brand (Vallaster and de Chernatony 2005) and
the importance of the ‘brand infrastructure’ is evident.

The work of Morgan (2012), Napoli (2006), and O’Cass and Voola (2011) is also
helpful in exploring current understanding of internal capabilities supporting branding,
and a number of factors are evident in extant literature, several of which are particularly
worthy of discussion.

Organizational culture

The culture of an organization is important and must be comprehended by all employees,
since it offers the frame for staff interactions and external representation of the company
(Balmer and Greyser 2006). Moreover, the cultural context has an inﬂuence in knowledge
creation and how staff implement brand values through social processes (Vallaster and de
Chernatony 2005). A company faces a challenge to introduce and realize its culture in a
multinational environment, since other cultures interpret brand messages differently (Kay
2006).

Effective internal communication

Effective communication is important on both a team and organizational level (Harris and
de Chernatony 2001). In order that all employees understand and live a brand’s values and
to achieve a consistent
identity, good internal communication is very important
understanding and to reduce confusion about brand positioning (Aurand, Gorchels, and
Bishop 2005). Vallaster and de Chernatony (2005) differentiate verbal and nonverbal
communication. Verbal communication channels include Internet platforms, email, face-
to-face, meetings, and written memos and the same messages, and values have to be
communicated not just to customers and business partners but also internally (Shocker,
Srivastana, and Ruekert 1994). Nonverbal communication includes showing commitment
living brand values, and trusting and enabling staff (Vallaster and de Chernatony 2005).
Finally, Asif and Sargeant (2000) identify six key outcomes of effective internal
communication. These are shared vision, job/personal satisfaction, development of a
service focus, empowerment, commitment and loyalty.

Leadership

It seems self-evident that leadership is important in internal communication. A leader’s
task is to take on the brand’s promises and translate them into action (Vallaster and de
Chernatony 2005). Leaders support internal brand building and the relation of resources
for brand-related information, knowledge and networking (Vallaster and de Chernatony

202

C. Chapleo

2006) and inﬂuence internal brand management with clear responsibilities (Burmann and
Zeplin 2004). Likewise, employees striving for a high level of leader –employee exchange
achieve higher levels of performance in return for higher rewards from their leaders
(Henry 1994). Consequently,
leadership can motivate employees (Vallaster and de
Chernatony 2005).

In addition, a leadership task is to generate shared understanding of brand values

(Vallaster and de Chernatony 2005).

Human resources

In addition to marketers who deﬁne a brand and its promises and values, and leaders who
have to communicate and translate these promises and interact with employees, human
resource (HR) departments are also pivotal. HR is important since they may recruit people
who buy the brand promise themselves in the ﬁrst place (Aurand, Gorcheis, and Bishop
2005). Furthermore, training is important to ensure that all staff comprehend, live and
communicate the brand promise (Harris and de Chernatony 2001). In addition, the role of
both HR and leaders is to motivate staff (Aurand, Gorcheis, and Bishop 2005).

It is evident from the literature that to communicate a successful brand outside the
organization requires a number of variables to be managed internally, and the relationship
between external brand and internal ‘brand support and structures’ is critical. This is
evidenced through elements of brand orientation; particularly behaviors and activities
necessary to build and sustain strong brands (Bridson and Evans 2004; Ewing and Napoli
2005). Extant literature discusses these in varying degrees but little work explores
speciﬁcs in the context of an NPO, a sector where branding has rapidly advanced.

Relevance of nonproﬁt branding

Branding is important to NPOs as there is a clear link to competitive advantage (Aaker
1996; Keller 2001) and effective use of resources (O’Cass and Voola 2011).

NPOs have much to gain by adopting some practices of commercial branding (Ewing
and Napoli 2005) but a number of key differences make branding challenging; NPOs
generally have a larger number of customer groups and need an openly recognizable and
consistent position to beneﬁciaries, supporters, stakeholders and regulators (Bruce 1998).
These groups often have disparate communications needs (Stride and Lee 2007).

Philosophy is an important element of marketing activity in NPOs (Bruce 1998) that
should run through all brand communications. It is not that proﬁt organizations do not have
philosophies and values, but rather it is the nonnegotiability of these values in NPOs that
marks them as distinct (Stride and Lee 2007). Therefore, in terms of branding, values are
key and an NPO’s values should be cherished, although these can make it difﬁcult to
develop a single coherent philosophical position across the entire organization (Stride and
Lee 2007).

Branding has a role to play in managing these particular challenges and improving
NPO performance (O’Cass and Voola 2011). However, although at a superﬁcial level the
branding concept is now well advanced in NPOs (Stride and Lee 2007), existing branding
frameworks arguably do not allow for the speciﬁcs of the NPO context and associated
brand management execution may be lacking or difﬁcult. It is in exploring the factors
underpinning successful NPO branding and challenges in their implementation that the
essence of this paper’s contribution lays.

Journal of Marketing Communications

203

Methodology

The principal focus of this work was to seek a deeper understanding of factors (Chisnall
2001) important to support branding of the UK NPOs. The broad approach was therefore a
phenomenon-driven inductive one that sought to understand a particular area through
exploring the interpretation of that ‘world’ by its participants (Bryman and Bell 2003). The
sample size was appropriate for an exploratory qualitative study (Christy and Wood 1999;
de Chernatony, Dall’Olmo Riley, and Harris 1998) as it offers generalizations that put
ﬂesh on the bones of general constructs (Miles and Huberman 1994).

Twenty interviews were conducted among Heads of Marketing for the UK NPOs
comprising charities, universities and miscellaneous public sector organizations, over a
4-month period in 2010– 2011 (comprising eight charities, seven universities and ﬁve
local government/political organizations). These were selected by a random sampling
technique. Future research will examine each subgroup (e.g. charities and education)
separately as it is expected that ﬁndings will not be homogenous, but the intention in this
early exploratory work was to examine NPOs in general. Senior marketing and external
relations personnel were selected as they represented experts with a breadth of experience
who can draw on their specialist knowledge to deﬁne the fundamental characteristics of
relevant matters (Tremblay 1982; de Chernatony and Segal-Horn 2003).

Semi-structured interviews were employed and average duration of each interview was
17 minutes. The broad issues discussed related to identifying factors that were considered
necessary for successful NPO branding and their relative importance, challenges to NPO
branding and current issues, although within each of these headings, points were explored
and discussed (sometimes at length) in line with the strengths of exploratory work.

Interviews were recorded (Goodman 1999) and transcribed. The analysis was
informed by Miles and Huberman (1994) using coding that identiﬁes any commonalities in
responses, and the particular qualitative approach of Schilling (2006) in structuring the
content analysis by attaching each statement or phrase to one of the deﬁned dimensions.
After initial content analysis, the results were checked by an independent research
assistant as providing an accurate summary. Conclusions were then discussed and drawn
from viewing the ﬁndings in the context of research objectives (Flick 2006).

The anonymity requested by some participants made the attribution of direct quotes
challenging. Nevertheless, a number of pertinent quotes were assigned by organization
category in an attempt to partly address this issue.

Findings
The elements of NPO brand ‘infrastructure’

Respondents’ views on internal factors necessary to support branding capabilities in NPOs
were explored. Broadly the results supported factors suggested by Napoli (2006), O’Cass
and Voola (2011) and Morgan (2012), but content analysis suggested the particular
importance of several speciﬁc factors.

Firstly, the support of senior management; without this, it was argued, branding can
too easily become ‘all about the logo’ (university marketer) and there is the danger of
‘branding in a vacuum’ (charity marketer).

Secondly, understanding of branding and valuing branding was also thought
important. It was argued that there may be ‘confusion about what the brand is among most
people’ (charity marketer) and most respondents mentioned some form of brand training
or education to try and build what was termed ‘buy in’. It was conceded that this was

204

C. Chapleo

sometimes easier said than done but nevertheless a consensus that it was necessary was
evident. There were positive examples such as that from a university marketer who talked
of continually feeding out snippets of information and presenting aspects of the brand to
staff and that when the actual branding program was launched it was consequently no
problem to engender a reasonable level of support. It was suggested that this idea of brand
‘buy in’ was also important among other stakeholder groups and effort should be made to
inform and educate them. It appears that the importance of brand ‘buy in’ is similar to that
required in most service brands whether for proﬁt or nonproﬁt.

An appropriate marketing structure in the organization was the third factor; this may be
seemingly obvious, but it was argued, something that NPOs may struggle to implement.
Finally, good internal communications and a clear vision or missions were also
speciﬁcally mentioned.

These points largely support the existing literature on factors necessary for brand
building (Harris and de Chernatony 2001), but it was the subtle differences suggested that
embrace the beneﬁts of exploratory work. The internal communications point
is
particularly worth expanding as it was suggested that, for branding in the fullest sense to
take place for NPOs, effective internal communication is critical. This most frequently
seems to take the form of intranet, staff brieﬁngs, consultations and consistent messages,
which are perhaps the more obvious elements. A supportive and consistent organizational
culture was considered to sometimes be particularly elusive in NPOs but respondents
reinforced its importance to branding.

The relative importance of brand infrastructure variables to NPO brands

A number of internal factors important to branding in organizations of all types were
identiﬁed from the literature (Napoli 2006; Keller 2001; Krake 2005; Harris and de
Chernatony 2001; Chapleo 2010) before the research. These are included in Table 1.

The list of factors was offered to respondents, who were asked to rate these in terms of
importance to brand management in an NPO on a four-point scale, the intention with such
a small sample not being to offer any empirical measurement but to begin to highlight the
elements considered more important. An important point is that these factors were
purposefully quite broad, including a degree of synthesis of elements suggested in the
above literature. This was to utilize the exploratory approach and give respondents the
opportunity to add to and expand upon their answers.

The factors (or variables) were, in descending order of perceived importance: support
of leadership, clear mission and vision, employee buy in, effective internal verbal
communications, organizational culture, management capabilities in marketing,
capabilities in marketing communications, effective internal branding communications,
information technology systems, marketing budgets and research capabilities.

A number of points were apparent; some of these reinforce previous for proﬁt branding
literature (but in the NPO context), but other elements suggest insights that inform future
empirical testing. Leadership and a corresponding clear mission/vision were considered
the most important factors, and this corresponds with the literature. However, arguably a
more interesting point was the low importance placed by respondents on budgets; this
might initially seem surprising as traditionally consumer brands have utilized sizeable
marketing budgets. Although NPO marketers have long had to work with limited budgets
(in comparison to many commercial counterparts), they considered that they had learned
to embrace this and employ branding in its ‘fullest sense’ (NB: Not simply visual identity).

Table 1. NPO broad internal factors suggested as necessary for branding.

Journal of Marketing Communications

205

Support of leadership
Clear mission and vision
Employee ‘buy in’
Effective internal communications
Supportive organizational culture
Marketing capability of managers
Marketing communications capabilities
Internal branding programs
Information technology systems
Appropriate budgets
Marketing research capabilities

NB: The above summary responses are based on asking respondents to rate the following factors (derived from
the literature) for perceived importance:

Employee ‘buy in’ in terms of internal acceptance of branding as a concept and an activity; IT systems that
allow and support branding activity; Organizational culture that is supportive of branding as a concept and an
activity; Effective internal verbal communications that support branding as a concept and an activity;
Effective internal written communications that support branding a concept and an activity; Leadership that
understands and is supportive of branding as a concept and an activity; Clear organizational vision/mission
that guides and supports branding; Budgets – marketing budgets that allow brand-related activity to be carried
out; Managers that understand marketing and branding; Marketing communications programs that are
effective in communicating the brand; Others (please specify).

This, it was argued, had led NPO marketers to be creative and approach branding
activity through a number of routes. Speciﬁcally suggested were branding through
‘experience’, ‘reputation management’, ‘internal cultural branding’ and ‘press and
publicity’. Although these techniques are not necessarily new or innovative (Schmitt
1999) their identiﬁcation as particularly applicable to NPOs may be. Substantial spend on
marketing communications was not deemed as critical as it might be argued to be in
commercial organizations, although this is something of an over simpliﬁcation, as further
the phrase ‘re-evaluation of marketing communications’
questioning suggested that
(charity marketer) might be a more appropriate summary.

There was a suggested wish among respondents to fully embrace e-marketing through
current channels such as Facebook and Twitter, web search optimization and virtual
marketing in general. This appeared to be closely tied in with the wish to integrate the
emotional side of branding through online communities with the whole brand experience.
Marketing communications such as print were still felt to be an important part of brand
building, but the view that it was necessary and desirable to decrease reliance on these to
utilize online marketing was clear. There was also talk of perceived cost-effectiveness of
new media marketing communications although clearly this is a rather simplistic view.

Harris and de Chernatony’s (2001) argument that sustainable competitive advantage
can best be achieved through emotional elements of branding resonates with the idea of
experiential branding in NPOs that seemed to crop up quite frequently in interviews;
indeed some UK NPOs such as universities had a speciﬁc ‘head of experience’ job role but
the challenge that many respondents talked of was actually translating this to clear
programs of action that they could roll out to the whole organization.

This in itself may not be a departure from the conceptual framework based on
commercial organizations, but it was suggested by many that NPOs were well placed to
have strong experiential brands due to their emotional resonance (particularly evident in
charities and education). There are existing conceptual frameworks that may offer a basis
to explore this speciﬁc element to a greater extent in the NPO context; Keller (2001)
‘judgments’ element of his Customer-Based Brand Equity model, which includes

206

C. Chapleo

emotional reactions and feelings, is one such model, but of particular relevance is
Schmitt’s (1999) suggestion of experiential brands that engage with feelings and emotions
as well as appealing to the intellectual aspects of lifestyle and desire for self-improvement.
In the context of this question some other more predictable factors were offered,
including the importance of medium/longer term ‘consistency of approach’ and ‘continuing
support and real understanding’ from management (university marketer) and these
correspond to a reasonable extent with the extant literature. It seems, therefore, that factors
that support successful branding in NPOs are (with some exceptions) similar to those in
commercial organizations, but it is in their implementation that challenges are apparent.

The greatest challenges to successful brand management in NPOs

Exploratory work allows related topics to be examined as they evolve and this was the case
here where respondents seemed keen to elaborate and some went into considerable depth.
A key challenge that may be particularly applicable to NPOs was creating real
understanding of branding within the organizations, and it was argued that the leadership
element already identiﬁed as important was key in this respect.

As mentioned before, although the concept of the ‘brand experience’ may offer
possibilities for brand differentiation in NPOs, it was felt that this was not fully understood
and valued. It may be argued that thinking about holistic experiences rather than a product-
beneﬁt focus (Schmitt 1999) has resonance with many NPO service offerings and that this
approach allows both the emotional and rational drivers of consumption to be recognized.
Also, particular to the university sector was doubt among some marketers that a clear
brand that summarizes what the university does in one statement could really be achieved.
As one university marketer argued ‘creating our brand is more challenging than for a can
of coke because our product is inherently complex and we are offering multiple things for
multiple audiences’. This is arguably true for most NPOs and respondents again talked of
the need to brand the experience and the need to ﬁnd the effective channels and tools to
communicate this. The evolving marketing communication tools mix in NPOs is
seemingly a vein for further investigation.

Suggested for public sector organizations in general was the perceived ‘cynicism of
staff that impedes community and cohesion when trying to build a brand’ (public sector
marketer); whether this is more pronounced than in for proﬁt organizations is open to
debate, but this was termed the ‘cultural issue challenge’ of branding by one public sector
marketer.

It was also felt, particularly in the charity sector, that the sector has staff with strong
internal motivations but that the external brands do not always fully communicate this.
There was felt to be a great potential for brands in the charity sector in particular as donors
often had ‘their’ charity that they identiﬁed with or that ‘engaged with their lives’ (charity
marketer). The challenge was argued to be tapping into and communicating this. Charities
in particular felt that they were already competent at doing this, but that was not
necessarily reﬂected across the NPO sector overall. The need to communicate ‘emotional
resonance’ was a phrase that encapsulated the views of many, referring to the need to
actually communicate values that have relevance and emotional connection to the
intended stakeholders’ lives. The evolving paradigm of online marketing communications
for NPOs was thought to offer opportunities to do this, something which currently receives
limited discussion in the literature.

Finally,

the budgeting systems were also identiﬁed as a challenge by a few
respondents, with talk of ‘locked down systems’ where parts of the organizations had their

Journal of Marketing Communications

207

own discrete budgets that led to inﬂexibility. Although this is clearly not unique to
universities and public sector organizations, it was respondents from these sectors who
expressed concern about this point. In fact, it may be argued that for proﬁt organizations
also face many of the challenges discussed here, but respondents did suggest that a number
of these (such as cultural acceptance and ‘buy in’) were particularly pronounced for NPOs.
The changing pace of the external environment was argued to be a challenge by most
to market
respondents, with organizations increasingly having to adapt and react
conditions at a faster pace than they have culturally been equipped to do. On a positive
note, however, it was felt by some that this changing environment was forcing a cultural
change internally which led to more competitive branding strategies in NPOs.

Conclusions

A number of conclusions may be drawn from this research which are worthy of discussion.
Many ﬁndings reﬂect the existing branding literature (such as leadership being considered
a key element of the brand infrastructure), but there are areas where this is not wholly the
case, however. It is through highlighting particular insights that exploratory research adds
value, and two such areas were evident. These were that a consensus that limited budgets,
while a challenge, were not critical, and that experiential brands may offer a basis for
differentiation. The challenges and opportunities of experiential branding and how to fully
implement this as part of an integrated communications strategy are, it was felt, yet to be
fully deﬁned, but Schmitt (1999) offers a strategic framework for managing experiences
that may offer a conceptual framework worthy of exploration in the NPO context.

The feeling that NPOs were largely practicing effective marketing on limited budgets
is also noteworthy as the obvious next step is to examine and assess this claim. It seemed
that NPO marketers have embraced branding in its broadest sense and have found creative
alternative branding approaches. Some examples of these were outlined in the ﬁndings but
clearly this is something that would beneﬁt from deeper investigation to inform both
theory and best practice.

It is suggested that although the factors necessary for successful NPO brands are
broadly similar to commercial organizations, it is in challenges in their execution and
management that insights are apparent.

In particular, respondents considered that elements of brand orientation such as
understanding of branding by management (and often employees in general) were still a
signiﬁcant challenge and it was suggested that real understanding demonstrated through
ongoing actions that supported brand building rather than superﬁcial ‘lip service’ was
sometimes lacking.

Overall, although ﬁndings do often support the existing literature, it is argued that they
build upon it and actually that although factors necessary for branding only differ to a degree
(experiential branding and low-cost effective marketing communications being two such
areas), it is in the challenges in implementation that a speciﬁc conceptual framework for
NPO branding could add real value. Although there was a clear perception of the importance
of branding and what needed to be done among respondents, the challenges were very
evident and a degree of concern about the support to get the job done could be discerned.

Implications and agenda for future research

Clearly this research is of an exploratory nature, and therefore offers a number of areas
worthy of further exploration, in terms of both practical approaches and academic

208

C. Chapleo

research. The suggestion that marketing budgets, while important, are not critical to
successfully branding NPOs is interesting and strongly infers that there are alterative ways
to build brand. NPO brand guardians need to understand branding in its fullest
interpretation and to design and execute strategies that employ all elements of branding.
Some of these factors are suggested in the ﬁndings and clearly this is already happening to
some degree, but it seems that there is an opportunity for best practice to be shared and for
researchers to formalize this knowledge and further research in this area is appropriate.
In terms of speciﬁcs, cultural issue aspects of brand orientation were identiﬁed as
challenging for NPOs and how a consistent brand culture could practically be achieved
could perhaps form a case study in its own right?

More broadly, this study suggests a need for innovative new strategies that embrace
experiential and internal branding, and utilize online and social media marketing (as well
as traditional marketing communication) to effectively communicate these and build
brands. This is not an easy matter but the call to the challenge is evident in this work.

Overall, what is called for is a conceptual framework that embraces experiential and
internal branding to effectively build and manage NPO brands, in the context of sector-
speciﬁc challenges to execution. There is extant literature that may inform this process;
perhaps what Schmitt (1999) terms as a ‘spirit that pervades the entire organization’. This is
something that it seems many NPOs should be well placed to engender and it will be
interesting to see the degree to which this develops though practice and literature in the future.

Notes on contributor
Dr Chris Chapleo’s research interests are in marketing and branding in the non-proﬁt sector. He has
published and spoken widely on aspects of higher education branding. Prior to academia he held
senior marketing roles in the publishing and leisure sectors, as well as higher education, where his
interest in nonproﬁt branding began.

References
Aaker, D. A. 1996. Building Strong Brands. New York: Free Press.
Aaker, D. A., and E. Joachimsthaler. 2000. “The Brand Relationship Spectrum: The Key to the

Brand Architecture Challenge.” California Management Review 42 (4): 8 – 23.

Asif, S., and A. Sargeant. 2000. “Modeling Internal Communications in the Financial Service

Sector.” European Journal of Marketing 34: 299– 317.

Aurand, T. W., L. Gorchels, and T. R. Bishop. 2005. “Human Resource Management’s Role in
Internal Branding: An Opportunity for Cross-Functional Brand Message Synergy.” Journal of
Product & Brand Management 14: 163– 169.

Balmer, J. M. T., and S. A. Greyser. 2006. “Corporate Marketing – Integrating Corporate Identity,
Corporate Branding, Corporate Communications, Corporate Image and Corporate Reputation.”
European Journal of Marketing 40: 730– 41.

Bennett, R., F. Kerrigan, and D. O’Reilly. 2010. “Editorial.” Journal of Marketing Management 26:

589– 592.

Bridson, K., and J. Evans. 2004. “The Secret to a Fashion Advantage is Brand Orientation.”

International Journal of Retail and Distribution Management 32 (8): 403– 11.

Bruce, I. 1998. Successful Charity Marketing. Europe: ICSA Publishing with Prentice Hall.
Brumann, C., and S. Zeplin. 2004. “Building Brand Commitment: A Behavioral Approach to

Internal Brand Management.” Brand Management 12: 279–300.

Bryman, A., and E. Bell. 2003. Business Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chapleo, C. 2010. “What Deﬁnes ‘Successful’ University Brands?.”International Journal of Public

Sector Management 23 (2): 169– 183.

Chisnall, P. 2001. Marketing Research. Maidenhead: McGraw Hill.

Journal of Marketing Communications

209

Christy, R., and M. Wood. 1999. “Researching Possibilities in Marketing.” Qualitative Market

Research: An international Journal 2: 189– 196.

de Chernatony, L., and S. Segal-Horn. 2003. “Successful Service Brands.” European Journal of

Marketing 37: 7/8.

de Chernatony, L., F. Dall’Olmo Riley, and F. Harris. 1998. “Criteria to Assess Brand Success.”

Journal of Marketing Management 14: 765– 781.

Douglas, S. P., C. S. Craig, and E. J. Nijssen. 2001. “Executive Insights: Integrating Branding
Strategy Across Markets: Building International Brand Architecture.” Journal of International
Marketing 9: 97 – 144.

Ewing, M. T., and J. Napoli. 2005. “Developing and Validating a Multidimensional Nonproﬁt Brand

Orientation Scale.” Journal of Business Research 58: 841– 853.

Flick, U. 2006. An Introduction to Qualitative Research. 3rd ed. London: Sage Publications.
Ghose, K. 2009. “Internal Brand Equity Deﬁnes Customer Experience.” Direct Marketing: An

International Journal 3: 177– 185.

Goodman, M. R. V. 1999. “The Pursuit of Value Through Qualitative Market Research.” Qualitative

Market Research: An International Journal 2: 111– 120.

Hankinson, P. 2001. “Brand Orientation in the Charity Sector: A Framework for Discussion and
Research.” International Journal of Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Marketing 6: 231– 242.
Harris, F., and L. de Chernatony. 2001. “Corporate Branding and Corporate Brand Performance.”

European Journal of Marketing 35: 441– 456.

Henry, J. W. 1994. “The Service Employee’s Pivotal Role in Organizational Success.” Journal of

Service Marketing 8 (4): 25 – 35.

Kay, M. J. 2006. “Strong Brands and Corporate Brands.” European Journal of Marketing 40: 742–760.
Keller, K. L. 2001. “Building Customer-Based Brand Equity.” Marketing Management 10: 14 – 19.
Kimpakorn, N., and G. Tocquer. 2009. “Service Brand Equity and Employee Brand Commitment.”

Journal of Service Marketing 24: 378– 388.

Krake, F. B. G. J. M. 2005. “Successful Brand Management in SMEs: A New Theory and Practical

Hints.” Journal of Product and Brand Management 14: 228– 238.

Mahoney, J. T., and J. R. Pandian. 1992. “The Resource Based View within the Conversation of

Strategic Management.” Strategic Management Journal 15 (5): 363– 380.

Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook.

Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Morgan, N. 2012. “Marketing and Business Performance.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing

Science 40: 102– 119.

Napoli, J. 2006. “The Impact of Nonproﬁt Brand Orientation on Organisational Performance.”

Journal of Marketing Management 22: 673– 694.

O’Cass, A., and R. Voola. 2011. “Explications of Political Market Orientation and Political Brand
Orientation Using the Resource Based View of the Political Party.” Journal of Marketing
Management 27 (5 –6): 627– 645.

Sargeant, A. 2009. Marketing Management for Nonproﬁt Organizations. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Schilling, J. 2006. “On the Pragmatics of Qualitative Assessment: Designing the Process for Content

Analysis.” European Journal of Psychological Assessment 22 (1): 28 – 37.

Schmitt, B. 1999. “Experiential Marketing.” Journal of Marketing Management 15: 53 – 67.
Shocker, A. D., R. K. Srivastana, and R. W. Ruekert. 1994. “Challenges and Opportunities Facing
Brand Management: An Introduction to the Special Issue.” Journal of Marketing Research 31
(2): 149– 158.

Stride, H., and S. Lee. 2007. “No logo? No way. Branding in the Non-Proﬁt Sector.” Journal of

Marketing Management 23 (1– 2): 107– 122.

Tremblay, M. 1982. “The key informant technique.” In “Field Research: A Sourcebook and Field

Manual.” ed. R. Burgess. London: Allen and Unwin.

Vallaster, C., and L. de Chernatony. 2005. “Internationalization of Services Brands: The Role of
Leadership During the Internal Brand Building Process.” Journal of Marketing Management 21:
181– 203.

Vallaster, C., and L. de Chernatony. 2006. “Internal Brand Building and Structuration: The Role of

Leadership.” European Journal of Marketing 40: 761– 784.