599

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

The Austrian Donations Tax Act 2008 for
Foundations and Comparable Entities
Christoph Kerres* and Florian Proell1

Abstract
This article considers the recent tax amendments
for Austrian private foundations and foreign
foundations and trusts. After the abolition of the
gifts and inheritance tax the Austrian legislature
adhered to the taxation of donations to private
foundations and comparable foreign foundations
and entities. The transfer of assets to foundations
or trusts in countries whose tax regimes facilitate
tax evasion will be subject to surtax. The impact of
this new law on domestic tax law and European
law principles is discussed in detail.

Introduction
Until recently, the Austrian Gifts and Inheritance Tax
Act provided the basic legal framework for the taxation of natural persons as well as donations to private
foundations in Austria. Gratuitous donations between
natural persons were taxed at between two per cent
and 60 per cent of the amount donated, depending on
the degree of kinship; while donations to Austrian
private foundations regularly triggered a flat rate
equal to five per cent of the asset contributed. As a
consequence of this advantageous tax rate, contributions to beneficiaries of a private foundation were,
in addition, subject to capital gains tax at a flat rate

of 25 per cent. The establishment of a private foundation enabled the avoidance of the regular gifts and
inheritance tax rates and foundations which retained
profits rather than distributed assets enjoyed largescale tax privileges. In 2007 the Austrian Supreme
Court having jurisdiction over constitutional cases
repealed the Gifts and Inheritance Tax Act of 1955
on the basis that valuation regulations did not apply
equally to real estate assets and set a deadline for
revision of the law by 1 August 2008.2
The Austrian legislature decided to dispense with
the gifts and inheritance tax for natural persons, but
to continue taxing donations to foundations under a
new law which is supplementary to the general regulations on the taxation of private foundations. The
Donations Tax Act came into force on 1 August 2008
and regularises the taxation of donations to Austrian
private foundations in compliance with the Austrian
Private Foundations Act 1993 and in particular,
the taxation of donations to foreign foundations
and trusts.3 In future, contributions of capital to
Austrian private foundations and donations to foreign
foundations and trusts which are ‘comparable’ to an
Austrian private foundation will be taxed at a flat tax of
two and a half per cent instead of five per cent.
Donations to non-comparable foreign foundations
and trusts will be taxed at a penalty rate of 25 per
cent in order to prevent tax evasion. These punitive
measures are primarily aimed at donations to

*Christoph Kerres, Attorney at Law, Schubertring 2, 1010 Vienna, Austria. Tel: þ43 1 51660. Fax: þ43 1 51660 60. Email: christoph.kerres@kerres.at.
www.kerres.at.
1. Dr Christoph Kerres, LL.M (Georgetown) is an attorney at law admitted to the Vienna Bar and the New York Bar; Head of the Viennese law firm Kerres
Partners, Austria. Mag Florian Proell is an associate at Kerres Partners.
2. Austrian Supreme Court for constitutional cases G 54/06 of 7 March 2007 and G 23/07 of 15 June 2007 to no. 1 and 2 of art. 1 sec. 1 Austrian Gifts and
Inheritance Tax Act 1955.
3. Austrian Federal Law Gazette No. 85/2008, issued on 26 June 2008.
ß The Author (2008). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/tandt/ttn103

600

Articles

foundations and trusts in Liechtenstein and
Switzerland.4 Trusts which are established under
British law may also trigger these anti-avoidance measures if they do not fulfill the legal requirements provided for Austrian private foundations.

Scope of application and tax
exemptions
The Donations Tax Act 2008 for private foundations
was passed as chapter VI of the Gifts Report Tax Act
2008.5 In terms of the new provisions, both gratuitous
donations by testamentary disposition and inter vivos
contributions by the grantor—provided that either
the grantor is resident or the receiving foundation is
based in Austria—will be taxed. As a result, the transfer of domestic property is not compulsorily subject
to donations tax. The provisions of the Donations
Tax Act 2008 are also applicable to transactions
resulting in an attribution of assets to foreign foundations and trusts.6 A pre-condition for the tax is the
transfer of property from the founder to the foundation or trust. If the foreign entity is not deemed to be
discretionary and consequently, not recognised as an
independent tax subject, for example due to decisionmaking powers vested in the founder, then an attribution to such an entity will not trigger a tax liability. On
the other hand, the income of such a foreign entity will,
in general, be attributed to the underlying founder.7
The Donations Tax Act 2008 provides that inter
vivos donations by the founder to non-profit organisations and church organisations are tax-exempt.
Donations on the basis of a testamentary disposition
are exempt from taxation if shares equal to less than
one per cent of the nominal capital of a capital

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

company are transferred to the foundation.
Donations of capital assets which are subject to capital gains tax are also tax-exempt. In the past, the
Austrian Gift and Inheritance Tax Act provided for
an advantageous fiscal regime for the granting of a
usufruct. The reservation of such a usufruct on the
part of the founder reduced the tax basis of the
donated asset. On the other hand, the cancellation
of the usufruct after the death of the founder did
not affect the basis for gift and inheritance tax.8 The
Donations Tax Act does not provide any such tax
privileges for usufructs.

Tax rates
The tax rate for donations to foundations has been
reduced from five per cent to two and a half per cent
due to the abolition of the gifts and inheritance tax.
This tax rate applies to attributions to Austrian private foundations and comparable foreign foundations
and entities. A pre-condition for comparable treatment is the provision by the foreign foundation or
entity of the same criteria for the exercise of discretionary powers as an Austrian private foundation. As
a result, criteria such as the non-existence of proprietors or shares or the existence of any other authority
aside from the board of directors of the foundation
will be taken into account by the tax authorities.9 A
distinctive advantage is that comparable foreign foundations and entities will enjoy equal tax treatment
with Austrian private foundations on the level of
the capital gains of the foundation and contributions
to beneficiaries. Another significant change is that the
tax rate for gratuitous donations to foundations and
comparable entities will increase from two and a half

4. Cp. Kerres/Proell F., The new tax regulations concerning the Donations Tax Act 2008, ecolex 2008, 567. Proell F., The fiscal implications of the Gifts Report
Tax Act 2008, ZfSt 2008.
5. The Gifts Report Tax Act 2008 provides that natural persons have to report gratuitous donations once certain thresholds have been exceeded in order to avoid
tax evasion.
6. In addition to Austrian private foundations and comparable foreign entities, foundations pursuant to the Federal Foundations and Endowments Funds Act as
well as foundations based on Austrian Federal State Laws also fall within the scope of the Initial Endowment Act 2008. Foundations instituted under public law and
foundations of the Catholic Church are excluded; cp. Arnold/Ludwig, Amendments of the initial endowment tax for private foundations, taxlex 2007, 191.
7. Information from the Austrian Department of Treasury of 23 April 2008: I.e. foundations established under the laws of Liechtenstein are considered to be
‘transparent’ unless the founder is able to refute this general assumption of transparency.
8. Art. 3 sec. 2 Gifts and Inheritance Tax Act (until 31 July 2008).
9. The Austrian tax authorities in particular consider criteria such as the legal personality of the foundation, presentation of donated goods, legally permissible
purpose, compulsory bodies such as a board of directors and auditor, designation of beneficiaries and limited liability of the foundation as essential.

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

per cent to 25 per cent where: (i) the deed of foundation and other related documents are not disclosed to
the tax authorities within a certain period of time;
(ii) the foreign foundation or entity is not comparable
with an Austrian private foundation; or (iii) no bilateral or multilateral treaty on mutual assistance in tax
matters has been concluded between Austria and the
state in which the receiving foundation is registered.10
The increased tax rate of 25 per cent will prevent
Austrian citizens from transferring assets to foundations or trusts in countries whose tax regimes facilitate tax evasion.

Non-disclosure of the foundation’s
documents
Donations to private foundations or comparable foreign foundations or entities are subject to an
increased tax rate of 25 per cent if all updated documents reflecting the current administration and application of funds of such a foreign foundation or entity
are not disclosed to the tax authorities. Therefore, the
documents of the foundation must be disclosed no
later than when the payment of the tax is due.11 The
purpose of this regulation is to facilitate the assessment of foreign legal entities and to permit comparisons and equality of treatment with an Austrian
private foundation. As a result, it is advisable to
check whether all relevant documents which are
required by the tax authorities will be available by
the due-date. The Austrian Corporate Income Tax
Act provides for a similar provision in Article 13 concerning the disclosure of documents in respect of a
private foundation. Contrary to the punitive purpose
of the provisions relating to the non-disclosure of
documents in the event of a donation, Article 13
only disapplies the right to choose a reduced tax
rate which, in certain cases, can be advantageous for
foundations. In addition, the disclosure of the

Articles

601

foundation’s documents is not subject to as rigorous
a time limit as applies to donations pursuant to the
Donations Tax Act.

Austrian and foreign foundations
In the past, Austrian tax provisions concerning foundations affected only Austrian private foundations.
Donations to foreign legal entities were subject to
gifts and inheritance tax at a rate of up to 60 per
cent. Subsequent contributions to beneficiaries residing in Austria were taxed at a progressive income tax
rate of up to 50 per cent. Thus, payments to beneficiaries through a foreign entity automatically caused a
loss in value of up to 80 per cent of the amount
originally donated. The new provisions provide for
a tax rate of two and a half per cent for donations
to foreign foundations and entities which are comparable to an Austrian private foundation. Subsequent
distributions to Austrian beneficiaries are subject to
a tax rate of 25 per cent, which corresponds with the
Austrian capital gains tax rate.12 The reduced flat rate
of two and a half per cent for foreign entities will only
apply if the foreign entity is comparable to an
Austrian private foundation and if the country of
establishment of the foreign foundation has entered
into a treaty of mutual assistance in tax matters with
Austria.
An increased tax rate of 25 per cent is applicable if
the foundation or other foreign entity is not comparable to an Austrian private foundation. An Austrian
private foundation pursuant, to the Austrian Private
Foundation Act 1993, is characterised by an independent board of directors vested with discretionary
powers and its own legal personality. Furthermore,
an Austrian private foundation cannot be divided
into shares and therefore may not have shareholders.
The private foundation must also be dedicated to
a certain purpose and must have beneficiaries who

10. Art 1 and Art 3 Donations Tax Act.
11. The due date for donations tax is the 15th of the second-month after the donation to the foundation or comparable foundation or asset has been made.
12. In a decision of the Austrian Tribunal for Tax Matters (UFS RV 1689-W/05 of 11.10.2006) the tribunal found that the application of the reduced flat tax rate
(which is the flat rate for capital gains tax) for domestic foundations only violates the basic principle of equality and the principle of free movement of capital
within the EC.

602

Articles

are clearly determined or at least determinable.
Foundations which are controlled by the founder
and non-transparent trusts which have no legal personality, as measured by the direct liability of the
founder from a civil and tax law point of view, are
not comparable to an Austrian private foundation
and are, therefore, subject to the increased tax rate
of 25 per cent.13 It remains to be seen whether
the final legal interpretation of this standard of comparison lies within the power of the Austrian tax
authorities.14 In order to compare the domestic and
foreign facts of a case and laws between countries
within the European Union, a common base technically has to be formed. The Austrian Donations
Tax Act seems to exclude the formation of such a
common base. It is likely to be the case that, at
some point, an EU member will consider its foundation or trust vehicle as comparable and the matter
may, as a result, come before the European Court
of Justice or the Court of the European Free Trade
Association to adjudicate on the legal requirements
for the comparison of foreign foundations and
trusts within the EEA.

Non-existence of a treaty on mutual
assistance in matters of direct taxation
The third case in which a donation to a foundation
or any other comparable entity will be taxed at a rate
of 25 per cent refers to foundations established
and registered in countries which have not entered
into a treaty of mutual assistance in tax matters
with Austria. Within the European Union, Council
Directive 77/799/EEC of 19 December 1977 on

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

mutual assistance in tax matters provides for the
mutual exchange of information between the tax
authorities of the EU Member States. Member
States’ competent authorities are therefore required
to exchange any information which appears relevant
for the correct assessment of taxes on capital income
and the assessment of indirect taxes in general.15
EFTA Member States, such as Iceland and Liechtenstein and non-EU countries, which have not entered
into a separate agreement on mutual assistance in tax
matters, are generally not obliged to guarantee similar cross-national administrative assistance.16 As
potential founders in Austria have traditionally preferred to transfer assets to Liechtenstein than to
other tax-friendly jurisdictions, this increased tax
rate particularly affects donations to foundations,
establishments and trusts established under Liechtenstein law,. In fact, this provision is primarily aimed
at donations to foundations and other entities in
Liechtenstein17 though common law trusts established under US, Australian or New Zealand law
are nevertheless subject to the same penalty taxation
in default of any ratified bilateral or multilateral
treaty on mutual assistance in tax matters with
Austria.
This raises the question whether these penalty taxes
are permissible in the light of the European law principle of free movement of capital.18 The principle of
free movement of capital comprises movements
within the European Union as well as capital transfers
to third countries. In a Recommendation dated 19
December 2006 relating to exit taxation and the
coordination of Member States’ tax policies, the
European Commission stated that Member States

13. Contrary to controlled foundations, the board of a discretionary foundation may decide independently on the current administration, whereas the founder
may reserve to itself the right to address ‘‘letters of wishes’’ to the board of the foundation in administration matters. The board of a discretionary foundation may
make payments to beneficiaries in accordance with the foundation’s purpose independently and at its own discretion.
14. Cp. Proell F., European Law aspects in relation to punitive measures in the Donations Tax Act 2008, taxlex 2008, 239.
15. Last amended by EC Directive 2004/56/EC of 21 April 2004: Taxes on income and on capital are deemed to include all taxes, irrespective of the manner in
which they are levied, imposed on total income, on total capital, or on elements of income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the disposal of movable or
immovable property, taxes on the amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital appreciation.
16. The only EFTA Member State which has ratified an agreement on mutual assistance in tax matters is presently Norway.
17. Financial Times, Liechtenstein lays plans to move away from position as tax haven (15 August 2008): Liechtenstein’s head of government Othmar Hasler,
announced that one measure being considered in the face of tax evasion was the idea of giving governments information about people with undeclared accounts,
provided that they did not suffer excessive penalties’.
18. Art 56 and 58 EC; pursuant to Appendix 1 of the EC Directive 88/361 EEC, donations and endowments to foundations fall within the scope of application of
the EU-principle of free movement of capital.

Articles

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

may take necessary measures to prevent tax evasion.19
The European Commission holds the view that
Member States may legally guard against tax evasion
if they have to deal with countries which have not
entered into bilateral agreements on mutual assistance
in tax matters. The explanatory remarks to the
Donations Tax Act 2008 justify the tax penalty by
citing the fact that data is difficult to collect in such
countries. In light of these punitive measures, the
European Court of Justice has so far differentiated
between points of contact with third countries
which have not entered into bilateral agreements
and points of contact with EFTA countries which
have not ratified such an agreement.20 Consequently,
the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice does
not explicitly cover cross-boarder penalty tax measures to the disadvantage of EFTA Member States,
such as Liechtenstein.

Donations to sub-foundations
In the past, donations from one foundation to another
were subject to a reduced tax rate of two and a half per
cent. With regard to foreign foundations, the Austrian
tax authorities did not uniformly apply this reduced
tax rate for donations to Austrian sub-foundations.21
If beneficiaries with unrestricted tax liability in Austria
collected benefits from a foreign foundation, such
capital gains were regularly subject to income tax at
a progressive rate of up to 50 per cent. In the case of a
payment to an Austrian beneficiary, typical tax planning involved transferring assets from a foreign foundation to an Austrian sub-foundation. The foreign
donation to the Austrian sub-foundation was taxed
at a tax rate of five per cent. A subsequent distribution

603

to an Austrian beneficiary was subject to capital gains
tax at a flat rate of 25 per cent. In order to avoid such
structuring the new legal provisions provide for more
comprehensive taxation of donations to subfoundations.
In future, each donation of a foundation or comparable foundation or entity to a sub-foundation
will be subject to Austrian capital gains tax provided
that the payment does not comprise assets which
are assigned to the founder. Capital gains tax can be
avoided if the founder verifies all amounts which originate from its funds by means of a special account.22
A tax-neutral payment cannot be made until the special account proves the origin of funds and it is clear
that such funds are not to be regarded as profit of the
foundation. The special account must at least comply
with the formal accounting requirements laid down
by the Austrian Commercial Code. It can be assumed
that many foreign foundations or discretionary trusts
will not be able to avoid capital gains tax liability
in the event of a donation to an Austrian subfoundation. Gains and appreciations in value of the
foundation’s assets are, in any case, subject to capital
gains tax.

Revocation of foundation
According to Austrian law, the founder may revoke
the private foundation in his lifetime if he has
reserved such a right in the deed of foundation.23 In
the event of such revocation before 31 July 2008, the
founder was able to claim a refund of any donations
paid. The new legal provisions no longer allow for
such refunding. The provisions regarding the taxation
of capital gains have been largely retained. Since all

19. COM(2006) 825 (19 December.2006): Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament and the European Economic and
Social Committee about exit taxation and the need for coordination of Member States’ tax policies; according to this recommendation the EEA/EFTA countries
constitute a special case, as they are bound by EU provisions on free movement but not on tax legislation. The Commission considers, in order to ensure that
revenue can accrue to the country being left, that tax may be demanded on exit unless bilateral agreements provide for other solutions.
20. ECJ 18 December 2007, No. C-101/05, A.
21. A statutory notice from the Austrian Tax authorities dated 14 November 1999 provided for the equality of Austrian private foundations and foundations
established under Liechtenstein law. The later tax administration did not comply uniformly with that statutory notice and applied the regular tax rate of five per
cent for Liechtenstein foundations.
22. The keeping of a special account reflecting all donated and distributed assets is a mandatory requirement for Austrian private foundations after 1 August
2008. Austrian private foundations established before this date and foreign foundations may prove a payment of the original assets against production of the
balance sheets.
23. Art 34 Private Foundation Act 1993; legal entities may not reserve such right.

604

Articles

distributions by the foundation are, in the ordinary
course, subject to capital gains tax, the founder may
apply for the amount of his donated funds to be taken
into consideration. A pre-condition for such consideration is proof of the value of the donated funds at
the time of donation to the foundation.24 In the past,
all other payments by an Austrian private foundation,
whether of regular payments to beneficiaries or other
contributions in the course of a cancellation beyond a
revocation, for example to a final beneficiary, were
subject to capital gains tax.25
This disadvantage has been described as the fiscal
‘mousetrap-effect’ of the private foundation.26
Donated funds were automatically subject to capital
gains tax at a flat rate of 25 per cent in the event of
distributions to beneficiaries made before 31 July
2008. This ‘mousetrap-effect’ was justified by the
advantageous taxation of retained profits. The cancellation of gifts and inheritance tax in Austria required
substantial changes to remedy this ‘mousetrap-effect’.
The new provisions render distributions by foundations tax neutral—including distributions to beneficiaries and final beneficiaries—if the assets originate
from the assets of the founder and can be verified as
such. As previously mentioned, a pre-condition for
the tax-neutral refunding of assets is the keeping of a
special account reflecting all donations which originate from the founder. However, such tax-neutral
payments are subject to the following qualifications.
Where generally the executive board of a corporate
entity may render such a tax-neutral payment at its
own discretion, the board of a foundation may not
choose whether a payment of the foundation is to be
regarded as a tax-neutral distribution of funds originally donated or a taxable capital gains distribution.

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008

In addition, though gratuitous donations, in the
ordinary course, do not lead to the disclosure of
hidden reserves,27 Austrian law requires that hidden
reserves are disclosed and taxed if funds are distributed to beneficiaries or refunded to the founder.

Conclusion
Despite the abolition of gifts and inheritance tax, the
Austrian legislature adhered to the principle of taxation of donations to and distributions by private
foundations. In the event of a donation to a private
foundation, tax at a rate of two and a half per cent of
the amount donated must be paid. A further distribution to beneficiaries is subject to capital gains tax of
25 per cent. In the past, the economic attractiveness of
an Austrian private foundation was linked to the tax
rates of the gifts and inheritance tax, as 40 per cent of
the private foundations in Austria were established for
tax reasons. Although natural persons may donate the
majority of their assets without any tax burden in the
future, donations to private foundations remain subject to donations and capital gains tax. Donations by
Austrian founders to foreign foundations or comparable foundations and entities may be subject to a 25
per cent penalty tax if the foreign foundation or similar entity is not comparable to an Austrian private
foundation or failing a treaty of mutual assistance
in tax matters. These punitive measures are not presently justified by judicial precedent of the ECJ and
may violate the principle of free capital movement
within the EEA. It seems certain, at present, that the
new provisions on the taxation of foundations in
Austria will not enhance the attractiveness of the
Austrian private foundation.

24. The assessment of the respective amounts depends on the classification of goods (e.g. business property, buildings or private property); Art 6 and Art 16
Income Tax Act (In general, assets may be valued at book value, real acquisition costs or part value).
25. Proell F., The ‘mousetrap-effect’ and the new provisions on the tax-neutral refunding of initial contributions of private foundations, ZfSt 2008.
26. Doralt W., Tax Law 2007 (8), recital 226.
27. Hidden reserves occur when assets are valued with the book value but have a higher current market price. According to civil law principles the distribution of
funds of a foundation is regarded as gratutious.

