How Do Brands Q

Bate Value?
Value emerges
through a unique
chain of events.
By Kevin Lane Keller
and Donald R. Lehmann

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ n e of the most valuable assets for any
firm is the intangible asset represented by its brands.
Therefore, it's important to properly manage brands
to maximize their value—or brand equity—to the
firm. Profitable brand management requires successfully designing and implementing a brand equity
measurement system. Crucial to developing such a
system is an understanding of how brand value gets
created. Toward that goal, we believe a model of
brand value creation that we call "the brand value
chain" can help marketers trace the value creation
process for their brands and better understand the
financial impact of marketing expenditures and
investments. It offers a holistic, integrated approach
to capturing the value created by brands.
The brand value chain makes it clear that
numerous individuals within an organization affect
brand equity and should be cognizant of relevant
branding effects. Different individuals, however,
make different brand-related decisions and need different types of information. Accordingly, the brand
value chain provides insight to support brand and
category marketing managers, chief marketing officers, and managing directors or CEOs.
This model is based on several basic premises.
Fundamentally, it assumes that the value of a brand
ultimately resides with customers. Based on this
insight, the model assumes that the brand value creation process begins when the firm invests in a marketing program targeting actual or potential customers. The marketing activity associated with the
program then influences the customer "mindset"
with respect to the brand—what they know and feel
about the brand. This mindset, across a broad group
of customers, then results in certain outcomes for the

MM

May/June

2003

| 27

F X F P I I T I V F

''"^^ '"'^"^ ^^'"^ ^^^'" °^^^^^ ^ holistic, integrated approach to understanding the
value created by brands. According to the model, brand value creation begins with the

U I IC I M I

firm's marketing activity. This influences customers who, in turn, affect how the brand

performs in the marketplace and is ultimately valued by the financial community. Three important multipliers moderate
the extent of transfer between these value stages: the program quality multiplier, the marketplace conditions multiplier,
and the investor sentiment multiplier.

brand in terms of how it performs in the marketplace—the
aggregate of individual customer actions regarding quantity purchased and the price tliat they pay. Finally, tlie investment community considers brand performance and other factors, such as
replacement cost and purchase price in acquisitions, in terms of
their future prospects (growth rate) to arrive at iin assessment of
shareholder value in general and brand value in particular.
The model also assumes that a number of factors intervene
between these stages, (See Exhibit 1.) Tliese linking factors
determine how value created at one stage transfers or "multiplies" to the next stage. Three sets of multipliers moderate the
transfer between the marketing program and the subsequent
three value stages—the program quality multiplier, the marketplace conditions multiplier, and the investor sentiment
multiplier. In this discussion, we provide examples of both
positive and negative multiplier effects and draw some branding implications.

Marketing Program Investment
Any marketing program investment that potentially can
affect brand value development, either intentionally or not,
falls into this category. Some of the bigger marketing expenditures relate to product research, development, and design;
trade or intermediary support; marketing communications
(e.g., advertising, promotion, sponsorship, direct and interactive marketing, personal selling, publicity, and public relations); and employee selection, training, and support.

Program Quality Multiplier
The amount of financial investment committed to the marketing program does not guarantee success in terms of brand
vdlut' creation. The ability of that investment to transfer or
multiply further down the chain will depend on qualitative
aspects of the marketing program via the program quality
multiplier. Tliere are 3 number of different means to judge the
quality of a marketing program. First is the clarity evident in
the marketing program. Will consumers properly interpret
and evaluate the meaning conveyed by brand marketing?
Second is the relevance of the marketing program to customers. Will consumers feel that the brand is one that should
receive serious consideration? Third is the uniqueness of the
marketing program, as compared to those of competitors.
How creative or differentiating is the marketing program?
28 I M M M a y / J u n e

2003

Fourth is the consistency and integration in the marketing
program. Do all aspects of the marketing program combine to
create the biggest impact with customers? Does the marketing
program relate effectively to past marketing programs and
properly balance continuity and change, evolving the brand
forward in the right direction?
Not surprisingly, a well-integrated marketing program that
has been carefully designed and implemented to be highly relevant and unique to customers is likely to achieve a greater
return on investment from marketing program expenditures.
For example, despite being out-spent by such beverage brand
giants as Coca-Cola, Pepsi, and Budweiser, the California Milk
Processor Board was able to reverse a decades-long decline in
consumption of milk in California partly through their welldesigned "Got Milk?" campaign. On the other hand, numerous marketers have found that expensive marketing programs
do not necessarily transfer to sales. For example, in the beverage category, brands such as Michelob, Miller Lite, and 7 UP
have seen their sales decline despite sizable marketing support, arguably because of poorly targeted and delivered marketing campaigns. More broadly, numerous dot-coms succeeded in burning a great deal of cash through ill-advised marketing programs that failed to attract many customers.

Customer Mindset
The customer mindset includes everything that exists in
the minds of customers with respect to a brand (e.g., thoughts,
feelings, experiences, images, perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes). Marketing program investments result in a number of
such different customer-related outcomes. In what ways have
customers been changed as a result of the marketing program? How have those changes manifested themselves in
what we call the customer mindset?
Five key dimensions have emerged from prior research as
particularly important measures of the customer mindset. Tlie
first is brand awareness and the extent to which customers
recall and recognize the brand and can identify the products
and services associated with it. The second dimension is
brand associations, which include the strength, favorability,
and uniqueness of perceived attributes and benefits for the
brand. Brand associations often represent key sources of brand
value, as they are the means by which consumers feel brands
satisfy their needs. The third dimension is brand attitudes and

• Exhibit 1
Brand value chain
Value Stages

Marketing
Program
Investment

Customer
Mindset

Brand
Performance

Shareholder
Value

Price premiums

Stock price

Communications

• Associations

Price elasticities

P/E ratio

Trade

• Attitudes

Market share

Market cap

Employee

• Attachment

Other

- Activity

Expansion
success

Product

Cost structure
Profitability

Multipliers /

Program

\

Clarity
Relevance
Distinctiveness
Consistency

Competitive
reactions

Market
dynamics

Channel support
• Customer size
& profile

Growth potential
Risk profile
Brand
contributions

overall evaluations of the brand in terms of its quality and the
satisfaction it generates. The fourth dimension is brand attachment, or how loyal the customer feels toward the brand. A
strong form of attachment refers to the resistance to change
and the ability of a brand to withstand bad news (e.g., a product or service failure). In the extreme, attachment can even
become addiction. Finally, the fifth dimension is brand activity, the extent to which customers use the brand, talk to others
about it, and seek out brand information, promotions, and
events. A good example of brand activity is the development
of clubs (e.g., Harley-Davidson) and online brand communities (e.g., Saab).
There is an obvious hierarchy in the dimensions of value:
Awareness supports associations, which drive attitudes that
lead to attachment and activity. Brand value is created at this
stage when customers have a high level of awareness; strong,
favorable, and unique brand associations; positive brand attitudes; intense brand attachment and loyalty; and a high
degree of brand activity. The right customer mindset can be
crucial to realizing brand equity benefits and value. For example, AMD and Cyrix found that achieving product performance parity with Intel's microprocessors did not reap immediate benefits in 1998 when OEMs were reluctant to adopt their
new chips because they lacked brand image and reputation.

Marketplace Conditions Multiplier
Success with consumers or customers may not translate to
success in the marketplace, however, unless other conditions
also prevail. The ability of the customer mindset to create

value at the next stage depends on various contextual market
factors external to the customer. Three such factors are competitive superiority (i.e., how effective the quantity and quality of the marketing investment are vs. those of other competing brands); channel and other intermediary support (i.e., how
much brand reinforcement and selling effort is put forth by
various marketing partners); and customer size and profile
(i.e., how many and what types of customers are attracted to
the brand).
The value created in the minds of customers translates to
favorable brand performance when competitors provide no
significant threat, when channel members and other intermediaries provide strong support, and when a sizable number of
profitable customers are attracted to the brand. The competitive context faced by a brand can have a profound effect on its
fortxmes. For example, McDonald's benefited in the 1990s
from the marketing woes of its main rival. Burger King. On
the other hand, MasterCard has had to contend for the past
decade with two strong, well-marketed brands in Visa and
American Express and consequently has faced an uphill battle
gaining market share. As another example, Clorox found its
initially successful entry into the detergent market thwarted
by competitive response once major players such as Procter &:
Gamble countered. Similarly, Arm &: Hammer's expansive
brand exter\sion program met major resist^ice in categories
such as deodorants when existing competitors fought back.

Brand Performance

|

The customer mindset and marketplace multipliers affect
how customers react or respond in the marketplace to the
brand in a variety of ways. There are six key aspects or dimensions of that response. The first two (related) dimensions are
price premiums and price elasticities. How much extra are
customers willing to pay for a comparable product because of
its brand? And how much does their demand for the brand
increase or decrease when the price rises or falls? A third
dimension, market share, measures the success of the marketing program in driving brand unit sales. Taken together, the
first three dimensions determine the direct revenue stream
attributable to the brand over time. Brand value is created
with higher market shares and greater price premiums, which
result partly from more elastic responses to price decreases
and inelastic responses to price increases.
The fourth dimension is the success of the brand in supportijig line and category extensions and new product launches into related categories. This dimension captures brand
expansion potential and the ability to add enhancements to
the revenue stream. The fifth dimension is cost structure or,
more specifically, the ability to reduce marketing program
expenditures for the brand because of the prevailing customer
mindset. In other words, because customers already have
favorable opinions and knowledge about a brand, any aspect
of the marketing program is likely to be more effective for the
same expenditure level. Alternatively, the same level of effec-

MM

May/June

2003

I 29

tiveness can be achieved at a lower cost because ads are more
memorable and sales calls are more productive. When combined, these five factors lead to brand profitability, the sixth
dimension. In short, brand value is manifested at this stage by
profitable sales volumes.

Investor Sentiment Multiplier
How much the value manifested in the performance of a
brand translates to shareholder value again depends on external factors reflected in the investor sentiment multiplier.
Financial analysts and investors consider a host of factors in
arriving at their brand valuations and investment decisions.
First, what are the dynamics of the financial markets as a
whole (e.g., interest rates, investor sentiment, or supply of
capital)? Second, what's the growth potential or what are the
prospects for the brand and its industry? For example, how
helpful are the facilitating factors and how inhibiting are the
hindering external factors that make up the firm's economic,
social, physical, and legal environment? Third, what is the risk
profile for the category in general and the brand in particular?
How vulnerable is the brand likely to be to various facilitating
and inhibiting factors? Fourth, how important is the brand as
part of the firm's brand portfolio and all the brands it has?
Said differently, big volume and flagship brands have more
impact than small, mature ones.
An important component of the investment multiplier
relates to the option value of potential brand expansion. This
component depends, in addition to factors such as competition and economic growth, on the ease with which the firm
can expand into other categories. The ease of expansion, in
turn, depends on the customer mindset, which determines
what markets the brand has the customer's permission and
support to expand into. For example, in spite of having the
name "electric" in its name, GE customers thought it was also
appropriate for the company to make gas ranges—and even
thought that they did—before the company began to do so.
The value created for the brand is most likely to be reflected in greater shareholder value when the firm is operating in
a healthy and growing industry without serious environmental hindrances or barriers and when the brand contributes a
significant portion of the firm's revenues and appears to have
bright prospects. An extreme example of brands that benefited
from a strong investor sentiment multiplier—at least for a
while—were the numerous dot-com brands such as Priceline
and eToys. The huge premium placed on (basically negative)
brand performance, however, quickly dissipated. On the other
hand, many firms have lamented what they perceive as
under-valuation by the market. For example, repositioned
companies such as Coming found it difficult to realize what
they viewed as their true market value due to lingering
investor perceptions from their past (i.e., dishes vs. optical
fiber). Of course, they were also subject to the recent general
devaluation of the tech sector.

30 I M M M a y / J u n e

2003

• Exhibit 2
Brand value chain measurement approaches
Customer Mindset

Product Market

Financial Market

Awareness

Repeat rate

Stock price

Associations

Market share

EVA

Attitude

Price premium

Residual in valuation

Attachment

Revenue premium

Value in a sale

Activity

Marketing mix elasticities

Satisfaction

Brand extension success

Generic

Brand reiationship
Commercial
Young & Rubicam's

Interbrand

Brand Asset Valuator

Interbrand
Stern-Stewart

Millward Brown's BrandZ
Research International's
Equity Engine
Primary User
Brand/product managers

Brand/product managers

CFOs

CMOS

CEOs

COOs

Shareholder Value
Based on available information about a brand, as well as
many other considerations, the financial marketplace formulates opinions and makes various assessments that have
direct financial implications for the brand value. Three particularly important indicators are the stock price, the
price/earnings multiple, and ultimately overall market capitalization for the firm. Other measures such as economic
value added are also useful. These may be fairly insensitive
indicators, however, for a brand that accounts for only a
small portion of the value to a firm.

Tracking Value Creation
Marketers create value first through shrewd investments in
their marketing program and by maximizing, as much as possible, the program quality, marketplace conditior^s, and
investor sentiment multipliers that translate those initial
expenditures into bottom-line financial benefits. The brand
value chain thus provides a structured means for managers to
understand where and how value is created and suggests
where to look to improve that process. Certain stages, however, will be of greater interest to different members of the
organization.
1. Brand and category marketing managers are likely to be
more interested in the customer mindset and the impact
of the marketing program on customers.
2. Chief marketing officers are likely to be more interested
in brand performance and the impact of customer mindset on actual marketplace behaviors.

3. A managing director, CEO, or CFO is likely to be more
interested in shareholder value and the impact of brand
performance on investment decisions and market capitalization.
The brand value chain provides a detailed road map for
tracking value creation that should facilitate marketing
research and intelligence efforts to inform each of these three
different constituents. As defined, each of the stages and multipliers has a set of assessment measures (Exhibit 2), although
customer mindset measures by far are the most commonly
available in the marketing function. In general, there are three
main sources of information for understanding the brand
value chain, and each source of information taps into one
value stage and one multiplier. The first stage, the marketing
program investment, is straightforward and can come from
the marketing plan and budget. Customer mindset and the
program quality multiplier can both be assessed by customer
surveys. Brand performance and the marketplace conditions
multiplier can both be captured through market scans (e.g.,
via IRl and Nielsen scanner data) and internal accounting
records. Finally, shareholder value and the investor sentiment
multiplier can be estimated through stock price and P/E
ratios, investor analysis, and interviews with analysts.

What It Takes
A number of implications arise from the brand value chain.
First, value creation begins with marketing program investment. Therefore, a necessary—^but not sufficient condition—
for value creation is a well-funded, designed, and implemented marketing program. It's rare that marketers "get something
for nothing." Nevertheless, value creation involves more than
the initial marketing investment. Each of the three different
multipliers can increase or decrease market value as it moves
from stage to stage.
Unfortunately, in some cases, factors that can potentially
inhibit value creation may be largely out of the hands of the
marketer. Recognizing the uncontrollable nature of these factors is important to help put in perspective the relative success
or failure of a marketing program. Just as in sports where
coaches should not be (but often are) held accountable for
unforeseen circumstances^—^such as injuries to key players or
financial hardships that make it difficult to attract top talent—
marketers cannot logically be held accountable for certain
market forces and dynamics with their brands. Specifically,
the farther to the right along the brand value chain marketers
get, the less control they have over brand value creation. So
it's critical to generate momentum with the marketing program at the beginning of the brand value chain so value will
carry through the rest of the chain.
That said, each multiplier in the brand value chain must be
maximized to the greatest extent possible to ensure that the
initial value created by the marketing program has the best
opportunity to affect stock price. Beyond designing a highquality marketing program to maximize the program qualit}'

multiplier, it's critical to enhance the marketplace conditions
and investor sentiment multipliers. Improving these multipliers involves a myriad of different activities. But perhaps one
of the most important is to communicate the amount and
nature of brand value that's been created at the previous stage
to all relevant parties in the next stage and make them fully
aware of the potential benefits that could accrue from maintaining and potentially enhancing that brand value.
For example, increasing the marketplace conditions multiplier could involve making sure that retailers and other intermediaries are aware of the brand value that has been potentially created by the marketing program (e.g., via improved
store traffic or category profits) and how they can share in that
value creation through supporting activities. Enhancing the
investment community multiplier involves ensuring that
investor relations and other such activities appreciate the
value that has been created in the marketplace as well as
future growth plans. For example, attempts to convey the
value at this stage may include name changes—such as when
American Home Products changed their name to Wyeth—in
order to signal to the investment community the category in
which a company intends to compete.
Several possible enhancements to the brand value chain
could expand its relevance and applicability. First, a number
of feedback loops are possible. For example, stock prices can
have an important effect on employee morale and motivation
and hence on the program quality multiplier. Second, in some
cases, value creation may not occur sequentially. For example,
stock analysts may react directly to an ad campaign for the
brand—either personally or in recognition of public acceptance—and factor those reactions directly into their investment
assessments. Third, some marketing activity may have effects
that are only manifested over the long term. For example,
cause-related or social responsibility marketing activity might
affect customer or investor sentiment slowly over time.
Fourth, both the mean and variance of some of the measures
of the brand value chain could matter. For example, in terms
of the customer mindset, a niche brand may receive very high
marks but only across a very narrow range of customers.
Nevertheless, such a brand may be much more valuable at
least potentially than a bigger brand that had some low or
average position.
In spite of such caveats, however, the brand value chain
shows consideriible promise both at the conceptual level to
organize managerial decisions and as a basis for measuring
and assessing marketing performance. •
About the Authors
Kevin Lane Keller is professor of marketing, Amos Tuck
School of Business, Dartmouth College. He may be reached at
kevin.l.keller@dartmouth.edu. Donald R. Lehmann is executive director of the Marketing Science Institute and George E,
Warren Professor of Business at Columbia Graduate School of
Business. He may be reached at dlehmann@msi.org.

MM

May/June

2003

I 31

