sustainability
Article

Donate Time or Money? The Determinants of
Donation Intention in Online Crowdfunding
Yuangao Chen , Ruyi Dai, Jianrong Yao and Yixiao Li *
School of Information, Zhejiang University of Finance and Economics, Xiasha Higher Education Zone,
Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China
* Correspondence: yxli@zufe.edu.cn
Received: 15 June 2019; Accepted: 4 August 2019; Published: 7 August 2019




Abstract: Compared with traditional charities, donation-based crowdfunding has many novel
characteristics. Among the variety of factors that influence potential donors before they develop
a donation intention, which are the main ones influencing the intention to donate online? The purpose
of this paper is to investigate the key potential determinants of both time and money donations.
This study attempts to combine the theory of planned behavior and norm activation theory with social
presence theory to conceptualize and develop an integration framework to measure the donation
intention. The results of the structural equation modeling, based on 350 valid questionnaire responses
received from November 19 to December 19, 2018, suggest that the dependent variable of time
donations is significantly affected by social presence, trust, and perceived behavioral control. As for
the dependent variable of money donations, only subjective norm has an insignificant effect. The study
results offer practical guidelines about the unique aspects of donation to managers of crowdfunding
platform and fundraisers.
Keywords: donation-based crowdfunding; social presence; norm activation; trust; money donations;
time donations

1. Introduction
Individuals urgently need to understand how to adopt pro-socially and pro-environmental
behaviors regarding the global concerns surrounding the issue of sustainable development [1]. Of late,
crowdfunding has emerged as a valuable alternative source of funding for entrepreneurs seeking
external financing [2]. It is different from traditional financing methods because it lets fundraisers
present their projects on a platform. These platforms, which do not have the standard financial
intermediaries, allow individuals to directly fund projects through the Internet, even if the amounts
involved are relatively small. The connection between fundraisers and backers takes place in cyberspace.
The funding seekers post all their projects on the platform. Visitors can browse through many projects
when they log into the homepage of the crowdfunding website. If they are interested in a particular
project or want to know more about a project, they can click on it to view the project details page
and even get updates on this project. Some crowdfunding platforms also provide a channel for
borrowers and visitors to communicate, thereby providing potential donors with a comprehensive
description of the project. According to a report from zhongchoujia.com [3], the total financing for
successful donation-based crowdfunding projects was approximately 186 million yuan in the first half
of 2018, an increase of 16.8% compared with the same period last year. From this, we can conclude
that donation-based crowdfunding is an important new channel of public welfare activities, showing
a better development trend.
Donation-based crowdfunding has emerged from the broader field of crowdsourcing, which refers
to a public appeal, initiated through the medium of web-enabled information systems, to make donations
Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269; doi:10.3390/su11164269

www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

2 of 21

over a fixed time limit [4]. The differences between donation-based crowdfunding and traditional
donation environment challenge the interpretation of donation behavior in traditional charity-giving.
First, many of the donation-based crowdfunding sites are based on anonymous donations, which means
that individuals’ concern for their social image is rare [5]. Second, although geography and social
networks have been shown to predict crowdfunding donations, most funders donate to recipients who
have little social contact with them. The above two points challenge reciprocity-based explanations
of giving. Third, charitable donors on crowdfunding websites proactively seek the target donation
projects without waiting for donation requests. Finally, the platform of donation-based crowdfunding
also allows for communication between participants besides updating the real-time progress of each
project. Thus, potential funders can learn the level of support from other funders and the time left
before making a donation decision [6].
Although donation-based crowdfunding’s popularity is growing, there are many charity projects
that fail to achieve their financing goals within a stipulated period. In order to effectively increase
the success of the project, extant research focuses on a variety of factors that influence potential
backers’ donation behavior. Previous literatures have investigated donation-based crowdfunding
from several perspectives, namely donor’s conformity behavior [7] and social networks [8]. However,
crowdfunding in China is different from its counterpart in the West [9]. Scholars have studied
donation-based crowdfunding from the following aspects: technological characteristics (website
quality and transaction convenience), project attributes (such as initiator reputation, project popularity,
and project content quality), and the influence of agenda-setting on public policy [10,11]. However,
there are a few studies that compare traditional charity with the factors affecting donation-based
crowdfunding. Thus, it is necessary to establish a theoretical model to systematically synthesize
individual donation intention in donation-based crowdfunding to get a panoramic overview. Further,
given the paucity of existing studies on the three parties (fundraisers, crowdfunding platforms,
and backers), the question about the factors influencing people’s donating behavior has not been
fully answered.
In academia, extant studies explain behavior intention, such as purchasing intention or
entrepreneurial intention, by using the theory of planned behavior (TPB) [12–14]. TPB posits that
individual behavior is driven by behavioral intentions. Further, these intentions are jointly influenced
by three aspects: an individual0 s attitude toward the behavior, the subjective norms surrounding the
performance of the behavior, and the individual’s perception of the degree of ease with which the
behavior can be performed (behavioral control). The norm activation theory (NAT) explains altruistic
and environment-friendly behavior [15,16]. In social-virtual environments, social presence theory (SPT)
is adopted to study users’ behaviors [17,18]. To highlight the characteristics of online donation-based
crowdfunding behavior, this paper integrates social presence and trust from SPT; attitude, subjective
norms, and perceived behavioral control from TPB; and personal norms from NAT to ascertain factors
influencing the intention to donate in the crowdfunding context.
This study expands the research on factors that affect the backers’ intention to donate in
crowdfunding projects in two ways. First, it seeks to be one of the first to introduce the combination
of TPB, SPT, and NAT to the donation-based crowdfunding literature, which is an emerging field of
research. Because of this, the theories and theoretical models in the literature studying the field of
crowdfunding are in the initial stage. Second, this paper divides the intention to donate into time
donations and money donations. To overcome the excessive unilateral focus on the intention to donate,
we consider time donations, which can complement money donations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review of the
current research in donation-based crowdfunding. Section 3 proposes the research model and outlines
the hypotheses. Section 4 states the research methodologies and elaborate processes. The data analysis
and findings are presented in Section 5. Section 6 discusses the implications and the limits. Finally,
the conclusions of this paper are summarized in Section 7.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

3 of 21

2. Literature Review
Crowdfunding can be divided into four main types: reward-based, lending-based, equity-based,
and donation-based [19]. In the donation-based crowdfunding context, the investors in the
crowdfunding activities differ from those in the other three types of crowdfunding. Philanthropy has
been framed from three competing perspectives: altruism, self-interest, and reciprocity [20]. Altruism
refers to behaviors that mainly consider the needs of others rather than one’s own. Self-interest is
defined as an unusual economic exchange behavior. Reciprocity views the giving as a social exchange
act. The backers donate their money and time in the crowdfunding because of altruistic factors
instead of a desire for rewards. In recent years, rapid development of donation-based crowdfunding
has gradually become an effective way for an individual recipient or a non-profit organization to
raise donations.
From the perspective of backers, Meer [21] described that both an increased donation price
and intensified competition reduces the success likelihood of a crowdfunding campaign. Sasaki [7]
discovered the relationship between donors’ multiple previous donations and subsequent contribution
behavior on the crowdfunding platform JapanGiving. Liu et al. [10] verified that the quality attributes
of crowdfunding websites in terms of security, navigability, visual appeal, and transaction convenience
are key factors influencing individuals’ empathy for donation-based crowdfunding campaigns. As for
the fundraisers, they pay attention to the presence of rational and credible appeals in the message.
Majumdar and Bose [22] concluded that the extent of rational, emotional, and credibility appeal affects
the likelihood of a project being funded and the mere existence of negative appeal cannot do so. As we
can see from existing academic studies, most prior researchers tried to find underlying factors associated
with the success of crowdfunding. Donation-based crowdfunding might be considered, a priori,
to have caught on relatively less than the other crowdfunding models studied. It is interesting to point
out that donation-based crowdfunding adds an online condition, which traditional crowdfunding does
not. However, there are few studies on these factors.
Donations to charities can be divided into different forms, such as donations of time, money,
or in-kind goods and services [23]. Money donation decisions are argued to be more rational than
emotional, and vice versa for time donations [24]. Researchers found time donations activate goals
related to emotional health, whereas money donations motivate goals related to economic utility [25].
Feldman [26] established an econometric model to show that time donations and money donations are
substitutes. Even when donating time instead of earning money leads to a large loss, subjects display
a stronger willingness to donate time than donate money [27]. Drawing on the differences between
time and money donations, scholars demonstrated that in the case of time donations, more human and
social capitals are needed than money donations [28]. Based on the fundamental difference between
time and money giving, this study discovers funders’ donation intentions from two independent
aspects, time donation intentions and money donation intentions. The purpose of this research is to
make a beneficial comparison between these two donation intentions.
Backers participate in a donation-based crowdfunding campaign out of kindness and without
expectation of rewards, which differs from the other three crowdfunding modes. Furthermore,
the process complexity and risk are both low in the donation-based context. Considering the
distinctness of donors’ willingness to donate time or money, the framework of this study is presented
from two primary aspects. First, traditional philanthropists are mostly individuals or foundations.
They make regular and large-scale donations to individual businesses or poor groups through
non-profit organizations or foundations. The information exchange of this mode is limited and
one-way, while donors in donation-based crowdfunding are individuals in the network. They can
bypass the foundation0 s donations to individuals or even a variety of individual entities or other forms
of existence. Furthermore, donation-based crowdfunding has been welcomed by the public due to its
advantages of greater transparency, diversified projects, and freedom from time and space constraints.
These characteristics of donation-based crowdfunding make up for the shortcomings of traditional
charity. Therefore, this paper focuses on the differences between traditional charity and donation-based

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

4 of 21

crowdfunding. On the basis of previous studies focusing on the factors affecting traditional donation
behavior (i.e., attitude, subjective norm, perceived behavioral control, and personal norm), the new
characteristics of donation-based crowdfunding were considered. In this scenario, the theoretical
model that we adopt to explore donation intentions is an integrated model of SPT, TPB, and NAT.
Second, in order to more fully understand the backer’s intention to donate, two novel dimensions
(time donations and money donations) are introduced. In addition, the relationship between the two
different intentions and the corresponding determinants are verified. As donation-based crowdfunding
is in an emerging field, there is little research in this area. Therefore, it is very necessary to carry out
this research.
3. Research Model and Hypotheses
3.1. Social Presence Theory
Social media network is a social virtual environment where individuals or groups communicate
and share experiences. One of the greatest challenges faced when making donations in cyberspace
is the imitation of social abilities that create a feeling of empathy, which is common in traditional
offline donations. Social presence describes how the use of the media is influenced by the social
environment [29]. Furthermore, social presence refers to the extent to which the media allows users to
establish personal contact with other users [30,31]. According to the study of Schroeder [32], social
presence additionally indicated the psychological feelings of interacting with others in an intermediary
environment. Animesh et al. [33] defined social presence as “the perceived sense of personal, warm,
intimate, sociable, or sensitive about the social interactions in the virtual context.” Thus, following
Heijden [34], this paper defines the social presence of a website as “the extent to which a website allows
users to psychologically experience others.”
Based on the social psychological theories of interpersonal communication and symbolic
interactionism, SPT as a theory to describe intermediary communication also stretches to the
study of social media to explain the social presence concept [35,36]. SPT evolves from the use
of telecommunications. It outlines how individuals use social media because individuals view it as
a behavioral or sensory experience that projects an intellectual and social acceptance [37]. According
to SPT, media users should test the degree of social presence required by the task and combine it
with the social presence level of the media to understand the extent to which the medium enables
communicators to experience the psychological existence of communicative partners [29].
3.1.1. Social Presence
Researches have shown the important influence of social presence on a website on the attitude of
online shoppers. Gefen and Straub [38] found social presence has an effect on purchasing intentions in
e-product and e-service settings. Choi [39] showed that social presence increases social networking
service (SNS) continuance intention. Two concepts associated with the social presence are “intimacy”
and “immediacy.” Intimacy refers to the closeness individuals feel to similar users, and immediacy
refers to the psychological distance among similar users [40]. It is important to help target users feel
the warmth and sociality of human beings and generate a sense of social presence, which is positively
related to trust and intention [39].
However, social presence, as a potential factor influencing donating intention in online
crowdfunding, has not been studied much. In this study, we study the effects of social presence on
donation-based crowdfunding. In fact, in order to present a high sense of social presence, many
websites add “social touch” to their interactions. This involves using a consumer’s name to welcome
him or her on entering the site, as well as subsequently providing personalized websites and email
exchanges [39]. Creating an interactive atmosphere can help individuals in making decisions about
a donation. Thus, social presence plays an antecedent role in a user’s attitude toward donation

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

5 of 21

decision-making [41]. Studies on intention and trust among online users show that social presence
influences intention by affecting the trust of users [42,43]. Therefore, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1 (H1a). Social presence positively affects a donor’s intention toward time donations.
Hypothesis 1 (H1b). Social presence positively affects a donor’s intention toward money donations.
3.1.2. Trust
Adding features that evoke a sense of social presence on a website may increasing donation
intention by increasing a crowdfunder’s trust [41]. The association between social presence and trust
has been examined in various studies. For example, Gefen and Straub [41] have suggested that high
social presence might increase user trust because social presence serves as a cue that potential funders’
perceptions of project trust will increase as social presentation increases.
Trust, defined in the study as the credibility of a crowdfunding project as per the judgment
of potential funders, has been extensively studied in the context of online transactions [42,43].
Trust conceptualized as a one-dimensional construct results in certain behavioral intentions on the part
of consumers in e-commerce [44,45]. Social presence can build trust by creating a sense of personal
connection with other users and sensitive interpersonal contact through the website [46]. Although
most of the information posted on crowdfunding platforms is trustworthy, it is not unusual for such
platforms to spread misinformation and indulge in fraud. In addition, donation-based crowdfunding
is a transaction between strangers taking place through the crowdfunding platform. Information
acquisition, decision-making, and judgment, as well as capital transfer, are all conducted through
the virtual network, which not only improves the financing efficiency, but also greatly increases the
probability of information asymmetry and fraud for all parties involved in the transaction. Hence,
when reviewing crowdfunding projects, potential donors often depend on the sense of trust provided
by the platforms and fundraisers to decide whether to donate their resources to a certain project.
Typically, consumers are willing to buy goods from unknown sellers within an e-marketplace,
despite the obvious risks, because of the premise of mutual trust. There are extensive studies that verify
the significant influence of trust on behavioral intention. Sullivan and Kim [47] found that trust is the
main predictor of online repurchase intention. A study on individual donation behavior found that
trust is related to donation intention and that it will increase the intention to donate [10]. Thus, one of
the main factors influencing intentions to donate is trust, which is expected to have a positive impact
on the intention to donate. Hence, we apply this conclusion to verify whether trust has the same effect
on separate two donation behaviors, time donations, and money donations. Based on this, we propose
the following assumptions:
Hypothesis 2 (H2). Social presence positively affects a donor’s trust in donation-based crowdfunding.
Hypothesis 3 (H3a). Trust positively affects a donor’s intention toward making time donations.
Hypothesis 3 (H3b). Trust positively affects a donor’s intention toward making money donations.
3.2. Theory of Planned Behavior
In the context of TPB, the intention of individuals is considered to be the willingness to perform
a certain action, which directly affects the actual conduct of providing services. The most direct
determinant of behavior in TPB is intention. Intention, in turn, is influenced by combining the
three independent measures: “attitude,” “subjective norm,” and “perceived behavioral control” [48].
Attitude refers to an individual’s positive or negative evaluation of behavior. It is a kind of psychological
emotion generated by consumer evaluation and, if it is positive, behavior intention tends to be more
positive [49]. A subjective norm refers to the perception of whether social pressures would be enforced,

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

6 of 21

that is, the support of family or society to donate. Perceived behavioral control, noted as performing
an action, is simple or complex due to whether it combines past donations that relate to hindrance and
predictable obstacle [48,50]. Webb et al. [51] is the first study to apply TPB in the area of charity-giving.
3.2.1. Attitude
The most important factor of behavior intention in TPB is attitude [52]. Attitude toward the
behavior refers to the “degree to which a person has a favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the
behavior in question” [48]. In fact, Saha and Chandra [53] verified that intention is positively influenced
by attitude. Attitude to a behavior is predicted by two beliefs: the possible consequences of the behavior
and the assessments of those consequences [54]. Depending on circumstances, an individual can hold
multiple contradictory attitudes with no cognitive dissonance [55]. Hence, it is hypothesized that:
Hypothesis 4 (H4a). Attitude positively affects a donor’s intention toward making time donations.
Hypothesis 4 (H4b). Attitude positively affects a donor’s intention toward making money donations.
3.2.2. Subjective Norm
In the TPB model, the second factor that determines the behavioral intention is the subjective norm.
The definition of the subjective norm refers to the perception of social pressure and the intention to
perform or not perform a behavior [48]. A subjective norm is based on the influence of others, such as
“friends,” “family,” and “colleagues,” who are close or significant to the person. A subjective norm
captures an individual feeling about the social pressure from a behavior. Moreover, consumers having
positive subjective norms toward a given behavior are more likely to be a positive revisit intention [56].
In individual behavioral intention context, many studies have documented subjective norms as an
important determinant of intention. These include studies on organic food purchase intention [57,58],
green hotel revisit intention [49,59], and blood donors’ intention [51]. All of them show a positive
relationship between subjective norm and behavior intention. Therefore, the following hypotheses
are proposed:
Hypothesis 5 (H5a). Subjective norms are positively related to time donations.
Hypothesis 5 (H5b). Subjective norms are positively related to money donations.
3.2.3. Perceived Behavioral Control (PBC)
Among the three factors in TPB, PBC is the most important when the user’s behavior is partially
under the control of the will [50]. The term “perceived behavioral control” is conceptualized as the
perceived ease or difficulty of performing the behavior and reflects past experiences and expected
obstacles [48,50]. When potential donors perceive that their behaviors are beneficial, they are more
likely to adopt these behaviors.
Many literatures showed that PBC is positively correlated with intentions in various fields, such as
conservation [60], green hotel [49,59], and blood donors’ intention [53]. Thus, the following hypotheses
are proposed:
Hypothesis 6 (H6a). Perceived behavioral control is positively related to time donations.
Hypothesis 6 (H6b). Perceived behavioral control is positively related to money donations.
3.3. Norm Activation Theory (NAT)
The concept of a personal norm is deleted from TPB as it does not have the ability to improve the
prediction of intention, and it is an alternative measure for behavior intention [61]. The current research

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

7 of 21

is based on our hypothesis that personal norms may increase our understanding of donation behavior.
NAT focuses on sacrificing one’s own interests for the happiness of others [62]. Thus, it focuses on
altruistic behavior (e.g., energy-saving behavior and recycling behavior) [63,64]. Donation behavior is
a combination of prosocial concerns and altruism [65]. The model includes three variables: awareness
of consequences, attribution of responsibility, and personal norms. The definition of awareness of
consequences is that when a person is aware of negative consequences, he does not employ prosocial
behavior, and these consequences will negatively affect others or things he values. Attribution of
responsibility refers to people that are responsible for the negative effects of not implementing prosocial
behavior [66]. Among these, the personal norm is the core variable of NAT. NAT assumes that
individual behavior is predicted by personal norms (i.e., internal standards for specific behaviors)
rather than by subjective norms that impose rules externally [67].
Fishbein [68] first formulated a theory, which comprised one attitudinal and two normative
components. Specifically, these two normative components include one personal and one social
Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW
of 21
attribute. The influence
of a personal norm component on behavioral intention is 7thought
to depend
0
on the individual
s motivation
to comply
with
these
norms.
In Schwartz’s
a personal norm
awareness
of consequences
is that when
a person
is aware
of negative
consequences,theory,
he does not
employ prosocial behavior, and these consequences will negatively affect others or things he values.
refers to the moral
act of performing a particular act or failing to do so [69]. Based on the consistency
Attribution of responsibility refers to people that are responsible for the negative effects of not
of a person’s behavior
with
his orbehavior
her personal
norms,
the
person
may
senseofofNAT.
pride or guilt [70].
implementing
prosocial
[66]. Among
these, the
personal
norm
is thefeel
coreavariable
NAT assumes
that individual
is predicted bythe
personal
norms (i.e., internal
standards
for found that the
Consumer behavior
researchers,
whobehavior
have considered
motivations
of donors,
have
specific behaviors) rather than by subjective norms that impose rules externally [67].
perceived benefitsFishbein
of donation
of self-esteem,
acceptance,
and satisfaction in
[68] first include
formulatedaa sense
theory, which
comprised onepublic
attitudinal
and two normative
components.
Specifically,
two normative
include
one personal
and one
social
expressing gratitude
for one’s
own these
well-being,
and components
a reduction
in feelings
of guilt
and
obligation [71,72].
attribute. The influence of a personal norm component on behavioral intention is thought to depend
Parker et al. [73]onstudied
the personal norm variable by using the TPB model to predict the intentions
the individual′s motivation to comply with these norms. In Schwartz’s theory, a personal norm
regarding threerefers
types
of traffic
other domains,
norms
to have an influence
to the
moral actviolation.
of performingIn
a particular
act or failingpersonal
to do so [69].
Based onappear
the consistency
of a person’s behavior with his or her personal norms, the person may feel a sense of pride or guilt
on behavior intention
too. Wang et al. [64] found that personal norms have a significant impact on
[70]. Consumer behavior researchers, who have considered the motivations of donors, have found
the habitual energy-saving
urbaninclude
residents.
hallmark
of acceptance,
altruismand
is that it requires
that the perceivedbehavior
benefits of of
donation
a sense The
of self-esteem,
public
in expressing
gratitude
for one’s
own
well-being,
a reduction
in feelings of guiltreward
and
individuals to satisfaction
give extra
time and
make
more
effort
butand
does
not immediately
them [63].
obligation [71, 72]. Parker et al. [73] studied the personal norm variable by using the TPB model to
Altruistic behaviors
are
about
caring
for
others.
Hence,
donating
is
a
type
of
altruistic
behavior.
predict the intentions regarding three types of traffic violation. In other domains, personal norms
appear
to
have
an
influence
on
behavior
intention
too.
Wang
et
al.
[64]
found
that
personal
norms
The specific assumptions are as follows:
have a significant impact on the habitual energy-saving behavior of urban residents. The hallmark of
altruism is that it requires individuals to give extra time and make more effort but does not
Hypothesis 7 (H7a).
Personal
are
positively
related
to time
donations.
immediately
reward norms
them [63].
Altruistic
behaviors
are about
caring
for others. Hence, donating is a
type of altruistic behavior. The specific assumptions are as follows:

Hypothesis 7 (H7b).
Personal
norms
arerelated
positively
related to money donations.
H7a. Personal
norms are
positively
to time donations.
H7b. Personal norms are positively related to money donations.
Figure 1 depicts
our research model and shows the factors determining the intention to donate
(both time donations
and1 depicts
money
aretheaffected
by attitude,
subjective
norms, perceived
Figure
ourdonations),
research modelwhich
and shows
factors determining
the intention
to donate
(both time donations and money donations), which are affected by attitude, subjective norms,
behavioral control, personal norms, trust, and social presence.
perceived behavioral control, personal norms, trust, and social presence.

Figure 1. Research model.
Figure
1. Research model.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

8 of 21

4. Research Method
4.1. Measurement
Based on the previous assumptions, we used a questionnaire to investigate the validity of
the proposed model. The research model included six independent and two dependent variables.
Constructs of attitude, subjective norms, and personal norms were measured using four items adopted
from Wang et al. [63]. Perceived behavioral control was measured using four items adopted from
Mittelman and Rojas-Méndez [74]. Social presence was measured using five items adopted from Gefen
and Straub [38]. Trust was measured using three items adopted from Lee [75]. Time donations and
money donations were measured using three items adopted from Liu et al. [10]. The questionnaire had
31 items that were rated by respondents on a seven-point Likert scale (a score of 1 represented “strongly
disagree,” while a score of 7 represented “strongly agree”). All the items were based on existing
measurements and literatures. The sources of all items are listed in Appendix A. As these items were
written in English, the questionnaire items were first translated into Chinese. We made minor changes
to suit the specific context. After the questionnaire was drafted, we invited some experienced users
and experts to review the questionnaire. Based on their feedback, we made further modifications to
ensure an accurate reflection of behavior determinants in the context of donation-based crowdfunding.
After the pretest, minor revisions were made to the questionnaire.
The final questionnaire comprised two parts. The first part covered demographic information of
the respondents. The second part had construct items that measured respondents’ identification with
the questionnaire items.
4.2. Sample Collection
To test our hypotheses, we followed two approaches to collect data from November 19 to December
19, 2018. First, an online questionnaire link was created on an online survey website (www.sojump.com)
and a paid sample collection service was employed to guarantee the quality of data. According to
the paid service, the survey website charged a certain percentage of the sample service fee from
it, and the remaining funds were all given to the respondents. The website had over 2.6 million
members, and, on average, over 1 million people filled out questionnaires on the site daily. This survey
website randomly invited some of them to join the sample database. The survey website placed the
questionnaire links on the sample pool, and the survey respondents filled out the surveys according
to their own choices. The website was not manually controlled. This guaranteed the randomness
of the questionnaire object. The second way of collecting data targeted users of social networks,
such as WeChat and QQ. Considering that donation-based crowdfunding is an emerging phenomenon,
a brief introduction and two pictures (the first one was a screenshot of the www.zhongchu.cn/gongyi
homepage and the other was a screenshot of donation-based crowdfunding project forwarded to
moments) were posted at the beginning of the questionnaire. Respondents were asked to recall the
latest donation-based crowdfunding project about which they had read (regardless of whether they had
donated money) and were then asked to fill out the questionnaire. The total number of questionnaires
collected was 520. After eliminating 170 invalid responses from users who never joined in these
projects and all unreasonable questionnaires (finishing the survey in an unrealistically short period
or providing the same answers to all the questions), 350 valid responses were collected in a month.
The effective questionnaire accounted for 67.3% of the total. Table 1 lists the demographic information
of the respondents.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

9 of 21

Table 1. Sample demographics.
Measure

Item

Number (N = 350)

Percentage (%)

Gender

Male
Female

131
219

37.43
62.57

Age

<18 years
18–30 years
31–50 years
>50years

9
231
103
7

2.57
66
29.43
2

Education level

Junior high school or below
Senior high school
Two-year college
Four-year college
Graduate school or above

9
31
47
224
39

2.57
8.68
13.43
64
11.14

Donation experience

<1 year
1–2 years
3–5 years
6–10 years
>10 years

64
171
71
27
17

18.29
48.86
20.29
7.71
4.86

Annual income level (RMB)

<30 thousand
30–60 thousand
60–120 thousand
120–200 thousand
>200 thousand

123
69
117
27
14

35.14
19.71
33.43
7.71
4

5. Data Analysis and Results
Compared to the covariance-based structural equation modeling (SEM), the component-based
partial least squares (PLS) has no strict requirements about the sample size and distribution [76].
In fact, the PLS method is suitable for predicting the validity of models. This paper used PLS to
analyze the data because of its advantage in allowing researchers to use small samples to examine
a complex model. This paper adopted a two-step method to analyze the model. The first step was to
analyze the measurement model, including the test of reliability and validity. The second step was
to test the structural model and evaluate the structural relationship between the potential constructs
and hypotheses.
5.1. Measurement Model
PLS was used to test convergent validity and discriminant validity [77]. Convergent validity
was assessed using factor loading, composite reliability (CR), Cronbach’s alpha, and average variance
extracted (AVE) [78]. As shown in Table 2, factor loadings for all items ranged from 0.558 to 0.915,
which exceeded the recommended level of 0.5. Cronbach’s alpha for each construct ranged from 0.763
to 0.888, which exceeded the recommended level of 0.7. CR for each construct ranged from 0.849 to
0.93, which exceeded the recommended level of 0.7. The AVE for each construct ranged from 0.589 to
0.817, which exceeded the recommended level of 0.5. Table 3 shows that the square root of the AVE
for each construct exceeded the correlations between it and other constructs. The AVE value of each
construct was greater than the shared variation value among constructs, showing that the square root
value of the mean variance sampling quantity of the potential variables of the construct in this study
was greater than the value of the correlation value, with “discriminant validity.” To further examine
the discriminant validity, the cross-loading matrix was used and is listed in Appendix B. Each item’s
loading on one factor was stronger than its loadings on other factors, thereby presenting a clear loading
matrix. Thus, convergent validity and discriminant validity were supported. The goodness-of-fit
(GOF) is as an index for validating a PLS path model globally [79,80]. The GOF index of this model was

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

10 of 21

0.588, which exceeded the threshold of GOF (>0.36) suggested by previous studies [81,82]. Thus, it was
verified that the research model fit the data well.
Table 2. Item reliability analysis.
Variable

Item

Standard Loading

Cronbach’s Alpha

Composite Reliability

AVE

Attitude
(AT)

AT1
AT2
AT3
AT4

0.811
0.603
0.84
0.829

0.78

0.857

0.603

Subjective Norms
(SN)

SN1
SN2
SN3
SN4

0.824
0.854
0.809
0.608

0.78

0.859

0.608

Personal Norms
(PN)

PN1
PN2
PN3
PN4

0.811
0.773
0.799
0.742

0.788

0.862

0.611

Perceived
Behavioral Control
(PBC)

PBC1
PBC2
PBC3
PBC4

0.857
0.558
0.828
0.791

0.763

0.849

0.589

Social Presence
(SP)

SP1
SP2
SP3
SP4
SP5

0.793
0.767
0.776
0.773
0.727

0.826

0.878

0.59

Trust
(TR)

TR1
TR2
TR3

0.915
0.893
0.871

0.873

0.922

0.798

Time Donations
(TD)

TD1
TD2
TD3

0.891
0.892
0.889

0.87

0.92

0.794

Money Donations
(MD)

MD1
MD2
MD3

0.914
0.889
0.908

0.888

0.93

0.817

Table 3. Inter-construct correlations.

AT
MD
PBC
PN
SN
SP
TD
TR

AT

MD

PBC

PN

SN

SP

TD

TR

0.777
0.624
0.571
0.745
0.69
0.56
0.494
0.562

0.904
0.653
0.67
0.593
0.685
0.72
0.63

0.767
0.638
0.597
0.663
0.658
0.579

0.782
0.654
0.64
0.544
0.624

0.780
0.597
0.503
0.592

0.768
0.632
0.635

0.891
0.558

0.893

Note: Diagonal elements in bold are the square roots of AVE. In order to obtain sufficient discriminant validity,
these values should exceed the inter-context correlation. AT—Attitude; MD—Money donations; PBC—Perceived
behavioral control; PN—Personal norm; SN—Subjective norm; SP—Social presence; TD—Time donations; TR—Trust.

5.2. Structural Model
As the measurement model was confirmed with satisfactory results, we next studied the structural
model, whose results included path loading, corresponding t-values, and R2 . The final test results are
shown as in Figure 2. Nine out of thirteen hypotheses were supported (p < 0.05), while the remaining

Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW

11 of 21

the variance
Sustainability
2019,in
11,trust.
4269 Consequently, H2 was supported empirically. In addition, trust was associated
11 of 21
positively with time donations (β = 0.144, p < 0.001) and money donations (β = 0.16, p < 0.001).
Therefore, H3a and H3b were supported. Second, findings on the impacts of attitude, subjective
four
were and
insignificant.
First, social
had positive
effects on
donations
(β = to
0.262,
p < 0.001)
norms,
personal norms
werepresence
more complicated.
Attitude
wastime
positively
related
the money
donations
(β = 0.145, p(β<=0.001),
H4b. supporting
However, the
relationship
between
attitude
and
time
and
money donations
0.26, confirming
p < 0.001), thus
hypothesis
H1a
and H1b.
Social
presence
donations
was
insignificant.
norms showed
notrust
significant
influence 40.4%
on timeofdonations
and in
(β =
0.635, p <
0.001)
exhibitedSubjective
strong positive
effects on
and explained
the variance
money
donations; thus,
H5asupported
and H5b were
not supported.
Perceived
behavioral
controlpositively
significantly
trust.
Consequently,
H2 was
empirically.
In addition,
trust
was associated
with
and
positively(βaffected
donations
= 0.363,
p < 0.001)(βand
money
(β = 0.189,H3a
p < 0.001),
time
donations
= 0.144,time
p < 0.001)
and (β
money
donations
= 0.16,
p <donations
0.001). Therefore,
and H3b
validating
hypotheses
and H6b.
The
path from
personalsubjective
norms to norms,
the money
(β =
were
supported.
Second,H6a
findings
on the
impacts
of attitude,
anddonations
personal norms
0.262,
p
<
0.001)
was
significant
and
positive,
while
personal
norms
showed
no
significant
influence
were more complicated. Attitude was positively related to the money donations (β = 0.145, p < 0.001),
on time donations.
Consequently,
H7b was supported
and H7aand
wastime
not. donations was insignificant.
confirming
H4b. However,
the relationship
between attitude
The R2 for trust was 40.4%. The proposed model explained 51.8% of the variance of time
Subjective norms showed no significant influence on time donations and money donations; thus, H5a
donations, and 61.4% of the variance of money donations. This indicates that our proposed model
and H5b were not supported. Perceived behavioral control significantly and positively affected time
offers a reasonable explanation of the variance of backers’ intention to donate online.
donations (β = 0.363, p < 0.001) and money donations (β = 0.189, p < 0.001), validating hypotheses H6a
The proposed hypotheses and data analysis results are summarized in Table 4. In summary, the
and H6b. The path from personal norms to the money donations (β = 0.262, p < 0.001) was significant
majority of hypotheses were verified and supported, except for the influence of attitude on time
and positive, while personal norms showed no significant influence on time donations. Consequently,
donations, the impact of the subjective norms on intention to donate (both time donations and money
H7b
was supported
H7a
not.
donations),
and theand
effect
of was
the personal
norms on time donations in donation-based crowdfunding.

Figure
Structuralmodel.
model.Note:
Note: ** p <
< 0.05;
Figure
2. 2.
Structural
0.05;****pp<<0.01;
0.01;******p <p 0.001.
< 0.001.

The R2 for trust was 40.4%. The proposed model explained 51.8% of the variance of time
donations, and 61.4% of the variance of money donations. This indicates that our proposed model
offers a reasonable explanation of the variance of backers’ intention to donate online.
The proposed hypotheses and data analysis results are summarized in Table 4. In summary,
the majority of hypotheses were verified and supported, except for the influence of attitude on time
donations, the impact of the subjective norms on intention to donate (both time donations and money
donations), and the effect of the personal norms on time donations in donation-based crowdfunding.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

12 of 21

Table 4. Summary of the structural model.
Dependent Variables

Hypothesis

Description

Results

Trust

H2

Social presence positively affects a donor’s
trust in donation-based crowdfunding.

Yes

H1a

Social presence positively affects a donor’s
intention toward making time donations.

Yes

H3a

Trust positively affects a donor’s intention
toward making time donations.

Yes

H4a

The attitude positively affects a donor’s
intention toward making time donations.

No

H5a

Subjective norms are positively related to
time donations.

No

H6a

Perceived behavioral control is positively
related to time donations.

Yes

H7a

Personal norms are positively related to
time donations.

No

H1b

Social presence positively affects a donor’s
intention toward making money donations

Yes

H3b

Trust positively affects a donor’s intention
toward making money donations.

Yes

H4b

Attitude positively affects a donor’s
intention toward making money donations.

Yes

H5b

Subjective norms are positively related to
money donations.

No

H6b

Perceived behavioral control is positively
related to money donations.

Yes

H7b

Personal norms are positively related to
money donations.

Yes

Time donations

Money donations

6. Discussions
6.1. Theoretical Implications
The hypothesis about the effect of attitude toward intention to donate was found to be statistically
significant by Bird et al. [83] and Saha and Chandra [53]; however, it was not supported in our analysis.
In our study, the significant effect of attitude on money donations matched that of previous studies.
Contrary to our expectations, attitude did not have a significant influence on time donations. There are
two possible explanations for this diverging result. First, Metzger [84] suggested that users are more
confident about network information from experts and are more willing to accept their recommended
content. Because the forwarders’ judgments on the credibility and authority of website information
may be superficial and subjective, they do not want to help in the dissemination of false information.
According to the open nature of the cyberspace, certain information can be instantly transmitted,
and the explosive spread through the social network will come about quickly, which leads to a certain
social impact. Therefore, the forwarder is responsible for the authenticity of the forwarded information.
Second, our research focused on millennials, who pay more attention to efficiency, so they decide to
give time or money based on the evaluation of lower donation cost. Thus, it is likely that when the
volunteer’s time price rises, the time donation will be replaced by the money donation [85]. Our study
extends the applicability of attitude to donation-based crowdfunding setting and suggests that money
donations are the primary factor affected by attitude.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

13 of 21

It is noteworthy that subjective norm has no significant impact on the intention to donate (for both
time and money donations), which differs from the findings of other studies. For instance, existing
studies report that subjective norms significantly affects backers’ donation intentions.
Saha and Chandra [53] found that subjective norms are one of the drivers of blood donors’ intention
to donate voluntarily. However, social presence has a significant influence on the intention to donate
(for both time and money donations). Although, at first glance, the result seems surprising, it explains
well the difference between donation-based crowdfunding and conventional charity. One possible
explanation may be that the characteristics of virtual cyberspace and network community are such that
most individuals are weakly influenced by the pressures that stem from physical social relationships
and surroundings. This further highlights the importance of a website providing social presence.
The perception of trust is especially important when it comes to new services or funds-linked
services. The main difference between donation-based crowdfunding activities and traditional charity
is the online character of the former; others include the acquisition of project information, the browsing
of projects, the willingness to donate, and the donation of funds. A significant influence of trust
on behavior intention was verified in previous studies [10,86]. In this context, social presence has
a significant impact on trust, which supports the results of the studies conducted by Choi [39]
and Lu et al. [87].
The research findings indicate that personal norms have an insignificant influence on time
donations, but a significant impact on money donations. An insignificant effect of this variable on
time donations can be justified by the fact that personal norm does not hinder the intention of backers
to donate. It essentially relates personal norms to intrinsic motivation, which refers to the overall
level of public goods generated by an organization. Bauer et al. [85] indicated that those who did not
have jobs were more likely to donate time, while those who worked more than 45 h were more likely
to donate money. Because the majority of the subjects of this study were highly educated, they had
their own jobs. Therefore, they mainly took part in money donations to make up for the lack of
time donations. Findings from the SEM analysis, which provide the path coefficient and significance
levels, show that personal norms exert the strongest influence on money donations, followed by
social presence, perceived behavioral control, trust, and attitude. From this, we can infer that when
individuals participate in money donations, it is mainly personal norms that play a major role. Higher
personal norms will generate a stronger intention to donate money.
Remarkably, the path coefficient from perceived behavioral control to time donations was the
largest among all path coefficients. It indicates the donor’s ability to perceive time donations.
As mentioned above, our survey focused on millennials; because most of them were highly educated,
they were busy with school or work. Therefore, it can be inferred that they were particularly sensitive
about time. The current study revealed that perceived behavioral control had a significant influence on
the intention to donate (for both time and money donations).
6.2. Managerial Implications
The results of the study can be useful for fundraisers and platforms. With the rapid development
of the Internet and the popularity of mobile phones, donation-based crowdfunding has been popular
among the public because it has the advantages of greater transparency, diversified projects, and freedom
from time and space constraints. All these will definitely change the operation mechanism of traditional
public welfare activities and public undertakings.
First, new donation-based crowdfunding platforms are being created often, such as DonorsChoose,
FirstGiving, Crowdrise, and so on. Our results may serve to support crowdfunding platforms’ managers
in their decisions on whether and how to utilize backers’ positive attitudes. It could be a good idea that
multiple crowdfunding platforms develop mutual cooperation in the project design and implementation
to create a better service environment. By this means, it will help backers obtain more information
about certain campaign and build a positive attitude. Additionally, simultaneous crowdfunding
projects based on multiple platforms will increase the success rate of fundraising.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

14 of 21

Second, the persuasiveness of the project itself is the main condition for the success of
donation-based crowdfunding. The fundraisers should attach great importance to the design of
the implementation plan and the scheme of the project promotion plan. The target audience of
crowdfunding projects consists of young people who like to focus on creative projects. Therefore,
when describing the key features of the project, it is necessary to attract donors through the novelty of
project design. Our results indicate that enhancing social presence helps potential backers to generate
a greater intention to donate.
Third, trust is obtained by establishing a connection between trustors (a person creating trust
and acting in a specific manner under the environmental conditions) and trustees [88]. Funding
seekers should make use of real pictures, videos, and sincere words to actively attract visitors to
seek information about the projects. Presenting pictures and videos will help backers to improve
the perceived trust, which results in enhancing a backer’s intention to donate. The crowdfunding
platform should focus on building the different aspects of its own credibility. However, the current
role of a platform is as a simple intermediary with the process of hosting the project, and collecting
and distributing funds. To implement a crowdfunding campaign, it is possible to cooperate with
the government and the public to supervise the project, besides allocating project funds in phases
according to the actual progress of the project. In addition to updating the donor community during
the entire campaign process, it is necessary for the fundraiser to communicate factual information
about the usage of donations with backers after the fundraising event ends [89].
Fourth, our research demonstrates that personal norms significantly predicted the intention to
donate. Therefore, soft policies, such as publicity and education, can be adopted to promote the
awareness of altruism and philanthropy. Engagements of individual donors are essential to the
campaign and the individual’s donating experience should be captured in the story developed by the
fundraiser [89]. Gradually these activities can enlighten more people to participate in donation-based
crowdfunding campaigns.
6.3. Limitations
As in other empirical studies, there are a few limitations that need to be acknowledged before
summarizing our conclusions. First, a major theme of the current paper is offering a description of
the underlying dynamics of the potential backer’s donation intention for crowdfunding. Benabou
and Tirole [90] pointed out that people can get three different types of utility from donation: intrinsic
motivation, self-image, and social esteem. Self-image and social esteem are also potential factors
that affect backers’ intention to donate. Further research, thus, can explain donation intention by
including self-image and social esteem. We also summarized the factors influencing the intention
to donate in other literature reviews in Table 5. Second, complex social mechanisms also play a role
in donation-based crowdfunding, which is not the same as with traditional charity. In traditional
philanthropy, charitable activities are often carried out between friends, relatives, and colleagues in
real-life relationships. Mollick [91] found that Facebook friends of fundraisers had a certain relationship
with the success of the crowdfunding effort, which provides a possible perspective on the size of the
social network. Future research can shed light on the role of social networks, such as Facebook, in the
context of donation-crowdfunding. Finally, our questionnaires were all filled in by Chinese nationals,
and this research may be seen as more of an in-depth study of the Chinese charity landscape. Therefore,
there is still doubt about whether its results are generalizable to other cultural backgrounds. Future
scholars can study the factors influencing donation intention in charity crowdfunding, compared with
those in traditional charity, in different cultural contexts.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

15 of 21

Table 5. Influencing factors of donation intentions.
Author

Year

Factors

Xu [92]

2018

Video, picture, description text, category

Gleasure and Feller [65]

2016

Fundraising target, rate of donation, level of disclosure,
campaign imagery, campaign dialogue

Liu, Suh, and Wagner [10]

2018

Website quality, transaction convenience, initiator reputation,
project popularity, project content quality

Majumdar and Bose [22]

2018

Money-related discussion, negative emotions, female references,
authenticity, comment received, request popularity, account age
of charity seeker, past participation of charity seeker, text length,
presence of image

Meer [21]

2014

Efficiency price, competition on giving

7. Conclusions
Considering a lack of underlying theories and theoretical models in the current crowdfunding
literature, we seek to fill the gap by investigating the issues of donation-based crowdfunding from
a specific theoretical perspective. Compared with the extant literature, this is a confirmatory study,
based on a solid theoretical foundation, to test the role of several factors in the donation intentions
of funders. First, a categorical analysis of philanthropic acts reveals significant differences in the
determinants and relationships between time and money donations. The present paper finds that
trust, social presence, and perceived behavioral control are positively and significantly related to time
donations. For the dependent variable of money donations, subjective norms alone had an insignificant
effect among the six variables.
Second, this paper is also one of the first to apply SPT in the donation-based crowdfunding context.
In prior literature, researchers have already verified the influence of social presence in the online
trading context. We extend the prior literature to a donation-based crowdfunding context. Taking social
presence as the key factor influencing a backer’s intention to donate will prominently highlight the
unique feature of online crowdfunding and significantly distinguish it from traditional philanthropy.
Further, most previous articles on charitable donations adopted TPB, whereas this paper adopted
SPT and NAT as the complementary theoretical concepts. The present study may also illustrate the
differences between traditional charity and donation-based crowdfunding from the perspective of the
TPB model. We contribute toward the study of factors that influence a backer’s intention to donate by
comparing donation crowdfunding with traditional charity, and combining TPB, SPT, and NAT.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.C.; Methodology, R.D.; Project administration, J.Y. and Y.L.;
Writing–original draft, R.D.; Writing–review and editing, Y.C. and Y.L.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Social Science Foundation of China, grant number 17BGL197.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers of this journal.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

16 of 21

Appendix A
Table A1. Scales and items.
Construct

Items

Source

Donating can make me feel happy.
It’s good to donate.
I would like to do my best to donate.
I would like to encourage people around me to donate.

Wang et al.
(2018) [64]

Subjective Norms

Most of the people who have important influence on me will donate.
My family encourages me to donate.
My friends around me encourage me to donate.
The government actively advocates and implements help others in need.

Wang et al.
(2018) [64]

Personal Norms

I think I have the consciousness of taking pleasure in helping people.
I think I have a sense of benevolence.
I think I can contribute to helping people through donating.
I think I have the duty to donate.

Wang et al.
(2018) [64]

Perceived
behavioral control

If I wanted to, I could easily donate money and time to donation-based
crowdfunding.
It is mostly up to me whether I donate money or time to donation-based
crowdfunding.
I am confident that I will be able to donate money and time to
donation-based crowdfunding.
Donating money and time to donation-based crowdfunding is easy for
me to do.

Social Presence

There is a sense of human contact in the donation-based
crowdfunding platforms.
There is a sense of personalness in the donation-based
crowdfunding platforms.
There is a sense of sociability in the donation-based
crowdfunding platforms.
There is a sense of human warmth in the donation-based
crowdfunding platforms.
There is a sense of human sensitivity in the donation-based
crowdfunding platforms.

Attitude

Trust

The donation-based crowdfunding is trustworthy.
The donation-based crowdfunding keeps its promise.
The donation-based crowdfunding is convincing.

Mittelman and
Rojas-Méndez
(2018) [74]

Gefen and
Straub
(2004) [38]

Lee (2005) [75]

Time Donations

The probability that I would donate time (including the forwarding of
crowdfunding information) to the crowdfunding project is high.
My willingness to donate time (including the forwarding of
crowdfunding information) to the crowdfunding project is high.
The likelihood of my donating time (including the forwarding of
crowdfunding information) to the crowdfunding project is high.

Liu et al.
(2018) [10]

Money Donations

The probability that I would donate money to the crowdfunding project
is high.
My willingness to donate money to the crowdfunding project is high.
The likelihood of my donating money to the crowdfunding project is high.

Liu et al.
(2018) [10]

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

17 of 21

Appendix B
Table A2. Loadings and cross-loadings.
Factor

AT

MD

PBC

PN

SN

SP

TD

TR

AT1
AT2
AT3
AT4
MD1
MD2
MD3
PBC1
PBC2
PBC3
PBC4
PN1
PN2
PN3
PN4
SN1
SN2
SN3
SN4
SP1
SP2
SP3
SP4
SP5
TD1
TD2
TD3
TR1
TR2
TR3

0.811
0.603
0.84
0.829
0.566
0.557
0.569
0.501
0.328
0.503
0.394
0.615
0.527
0.6
0.577
0.563
0.572
0.526
0.499
0.396
0.417
0.424
0.464
0.448
0.415
0.459
0.445
0.56
0.478
0.464

0.54
0.312
0.52
0.522
0.914
0.889
0.908
0.546
0.342
0.584
0.494
0.516
0.462
0.554
0.55
0.483
0.529
0.452
0.374
0.51
0.487
0.458
0.6
0.563
0.626
0.656
0.64
0.604
0.554
0.526

0.499
0.246
0.476
0.492
0.596
0.586
0.589
0.857
0.558
0.828
0.791
0.513
0.455
0.494
0.523
0.508
0.486
0.513
0.335
0.557
0.555
0.527
0.485
0.421
0.591
0.587
0.582
0.567
0.504
0.476

0.609
0.498
0.628
0.585
0.624
0.597
0.596
0.529
0.427
0.559
0.446
0.81
0.773
0.799
0.742
0.547
0.533
0.489
0.481
0.445
0.432
0.468
0.56
0.552
0.441
0.503
0.508
0.614
0.531
0.523

0.553
0.358
0.598
0.591
0.568
0.522
0.52
0.527
0.29
0.492
0.484
0.513
0.449
0.516
0.553
0.824
0.854
0.809
0.608
0.479
0.45
0.458
0.496
0.404
0.469
0.437
0.44
0.566
0.517
0.501

0.477
0.33
0.439
0.475
0.614
0.62
0.621
0.548
0.425
0.563
0.5
0.534
0.492
0.526
0.452
0.514
0.468
0.426
0.474
0.794
0.767
0.776
0.773
0.727
0.566
0.572
0.552
0.616
0.551
0.53

0.421
0.187
0.408
0.454
0.651
0.663
0.637
0.596
0.251
0.607
0.478
0.448
0.357
0.397
0.481
0.446
0.441
0.408
0.242
0.528
0.493
0.483
0.497
0.423
0.891
0.892
0.889
0.53
0.495
0.469

0.446
0.294
0.465
0.507
0.561
0.593
0.555
0.532
0.34
0.489
0.395
0.469
0.417
0.5
0.549
0.524
0.487
0.431
0.403
0.53
0.474
0.443
0.52
0.463
0.475
0.521
0.496
0.915
0.893
0.871

Note: AT = Attitude; MD = Money donation; PBC = Perceived behavioral control; PN = Personal norms;
SN = Subjective norms; SP = Social presence; TD = Time donation; TR = Trust.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.

Vlaholias, E.; Thompson, K.; Every, D.; Dawson, D. Charity Starts . . . at Work? Conceptual Foundations for
Research with Businesses that Donate to Food Redistribution Organisations. Sustainability 2015, 7, 7997–8021.
[CrossRef]
Bi, S.; Liu, Z.; Usman, K. The influence of online information on investing decisions of reward-based
crowdfunding. J. Bus. Res. 2017, 71, 10–18. [CrossRef]
Zhongchoujia.com. Available online: http://www.zhongchoujia.com/data/31205.html (accessed on
9 June 2019).
Belleflamme, P.; Lambert, T.; Schwienbacher, A. Crowdfunding: Tapping the right crowd. CORE Discuss.
Pap. 2011, 29, 585–609.
Ariely, D.; Bracha, A.; Meier, S. Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Motivation and Monetary Incentives in
Behaving Prosocially. Am. Econ. Rev. 2009, 99, 544–555. [CrossRef]
Kuppuswamy, V.; Bayus, B.L. Crowdfunding Creative Ideas: The Dynamics of Project Backers.
In The Economics of Crowdfunding: Startups, Portals and Investor Behavior, 1st ed.; Cumming, D., Hornuf, L., Eds.;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 151–182.
Sasaki, S. Majority size and conformity behavior in charitable giving: Field evidence from a donation-based
crowdfunding platform in Japan. J. Econ. Psychol. 2019, 70, 36–51. [CrossRef]
Agrawal, A.; Catalini, C.; Goldfarb, A. Crowdfunding: Geography, Social Networks, and the Timing of
Investment Decisions. J. Econ. Manag. Strat. 2015, 24, 253–274. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

18 of 21

Funk, A.S. Crowdfunding in China: A New Institutional Economics Approach; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2019.
Liu, L.; Suh, A.; Wagner, C. Empathy or perceived credibility? An empirical study on individual donation
behavior in charitable crowdfunding. Internet Res. 2018, 28, 623–651. [CrossRef]
Tsai, K.S.; Wang, Q. Charitable Crowdfunding in China: An Emrgent Channel for Setting Policy Agendas?
China Q. 2019, 1–31. [CrossRef]
Maes, J.; Leroy, H.; Sels, L. Gender differences in entrepreneurial intentions: A TPB multi-group analysis at
factor and indicator level. Eur. Manag. J. 2014, 32, 784–794. [CrossRef]
Lorenz, B.A.; Hartmann, M.; Simons, J. Impacts from region-of-origin labeling on consumer product
perception and purchasing intention—Causal relationships in a TPB based model. Food Qual. Prefer. 2015, 45,
149–157. [CrossRef]
Wu, J.-H.; Cheng, C.-M.; Cheng, P.-J. Behavioral intention toward urban eco-land performance assessment
models using TPB tests. J. Bus. Res. 2015, 68, 771–776. [CrossRef]
Onwezen, M.C.; Antonides, G.; Bartels, J. The Norm Activation Model: An exploration of the functions of
anticipated pride and guilt in pro-environmental behaviour. J. Econ. Psychol. 2013, 39, 141–153. [CrossRef]
Van Der Werff, E.; Steg, L. One model to predict them all: Predicting energy behaviours with the norm
activation model. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2015, 6, 8–14. [CrossRef]
Cyr, D.; Hassanein, K.; Head, M.; Ivanov, A. The role of social presence in establishing loyalty in e-Service
environments. Interact. Comput. 2007, 19, 43–56. [CrossRef]
Hassanein, K.; Head, M. Manipulating perceived social presence through the web interface and its impact on
attitude towards online shopping. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 2007, 65, 689–708. [CrossRef]
Silvio, V. Sustainability in Equity Crowdfunding. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2019, 141, 98–106.
Barman, E. The social bases of philanthropy. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 2017, 43, 271–290. [CrossRef]
Meer, J. Effects of the price of charitable giving: Evidence from an online crowdfunding platform.
J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 2014, 103, 113–124. [CrossRef]
Majumdar, A.; Bose, I. My words for your pizza: An analysis of persuasive narratives in online crowdfunding.
Inf. Manag. 2018, 55, 781–794. [CrossRef]
Michaelidou, N.; Micevski, M.; Siamagka, N.T. Consumers’ intention to donate to two children’s charity
brands: A comparison of Barnardo’s and BBC Children in Need. J. Prod. Brand Manag. 2015, 24, 134–146.
[CrossRef]
Michel, G.; Rieunier, S. Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving. J. Bus. Res.
2012, 65, 701–707. [CrossRef]
Liu, W.; Aaker, J. The Happiness of Giving: The Time-Ask Effect. J. Consum. Res. 2008, 35, 543–557. [CrossRef]
Feldman, N.E. Time is money: Choosing between charitable activities. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 2010, 2,
103–130. [CrossRef]
Brown, A.L.; Meer, J.; Williams, J.F. Why Do People Volunteer? An Experimental Analysis of Preferences for
Time Donations. Manag. Sci. 2019, 65, 1455–1468. [CrossRef]
Bryant, W.K.; Jeon-Slaughter, H.; Kang, H.; Tax, A. Participation in Philanthropic Activities: Donating Money
and Time. J. Consum. Policy 2003, 26, 43–73. [CrossRef]
Short, J.; Williams, E.; Christie, B. The Social Psychology of Telecommunications; John Wiley & Sons: London,
UK, 1976.
Komiak, S.Y.X.; Benbasat, I. The Effects of Personalization and Familiarity on Trust and Adoption of
Recommendation Agents. Mis Q. 2006, 30, 941–960. [CrossRef]
Kumar, N.; Benbasat, I. Research Note: The Influence of Recommendations and Consumer Reviews on
Evaluations of Websites. Inf. Syst. Res. 2006, 17, 425–439. [CrossRef]
Schroeder, R. Being There Together and the Future of Connected Presence. Presence 2006, 15, 438–454.
[CrossRef]
Animesh, A.; Pinsonneault, A.; Yang, S.B.; Oh, W. An Odyssey into Virtual Worlds: Exploring the Impacts of
Technological and Spatial Environments. Mis Q. 2011, 35, 789–810. [CrossRef]
Heijden, H.V.D. User Acceptance of Hedonic Information Systems. Mis Q. 2004, 28, 695–704. [CrossRef]
Cui, G.; Meng, C. Building modern online social presence: A review of social presence theory and its
instructional design implications for future trends. Educ. Inf. Technol. 2013, 18, 661–685. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.

19 of 21

Chang, C.-M.; Hsu, M.-H. Understanding the determinants of users’ subjective well-being in social networking
sites: An integration of social capital theory and social presence theory. Behav. Inf. Technol. 2016, 35, 720–729.
[CrossRef]
Tu, C.-H. On-line learning migration: From social learning theory to social presence theory in a CMC
environment. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2000, 23, 27–37. [CrossRef]
Gefen, D.; Straub, D.W. Consumer trust in B2C e-Commerce and the importance of social presence:
Experiments in e-Products and e-Services. Omega 2004, 32, 407–424. [CrossRef]
Choi, S. The flipside of ubiquitous connectivity enabled by smartphone-based social networking service:
Social presence and privacy concern. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2016, 65, 325–333. [CrossRef]
Wang, L.C.; Baker, J.; Wagner, J.A.; Wakefield, K. Can a Retail Web Site Be Social? J. Mark. 2007, 71, 143–157.
[CrossRef]
Gefen, D.; Straub, D. Managing User Trust in B2C e-Services. e-Service J. 2003, 2, 7–24. [CrossRef]
Gvili, Y.; Levy, S. Antecedents of attitudes toward eWOM communication: Differences across channels.
Internet Res. 2016, 26, 1030–1051. [CrossRef]
Kim, J.G.; Kong, H.K.; Karahalios, K.; Fu, W.T.; Hong, H. The Power of Collective Endorsements: Credibility
Factors in Medical Crowdfunding Campaigns. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, San Jose, CA, USA, 7–12 May 2016; pp. 4538–4549.
Jarvenpaa, S.L.; Tractinsky, N.; Vitale, M. Consumer trust in an Internet store. J. Comput.-Mediat. Commun.
1999, 5, 45–71.
Singh, J.; Sirdeshmukh, D. Agency and Trust Mechanisms in Consumer Satisfaction and Loyalty Judgments.
J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2000, 28, 150–167. [CrossRef]
Choi, J.; Lee, H.J.; Kim, Y.C. The Influence of Social Presence on Customer Intention to Reuse Online
Recommender Systems: The Roles of Personalization and Product Type. Int. J. Electron. Commer. 2014, 16,
129–154. [CrossRef]
Sullivan, Y.W.; Kim, D.J. Assessing the effects of consumers’ product evaluations and trust on repurchase
intention in e-commerce environments. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2018, 39, 199–219. [CrossRef]
Ajzen, I. The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 1991, 50, 179–211. [CrossRef]
Chen, M.-F.; Tung, P.-J. Developing an extended Theory of Planned Behavior model to predict consumers’
intention to visit green hotels. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 2014, 36, 221–230. [CrossRef]
Paul, J.; Modi, A.; Patel, J. Predicting green product consumption using theory of planned behavior and
reasoned action. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 2016, 29, 123–134. [CrossRef]
Webb, D.J.; Green, C.L.; Brashear, T.G. Development and Validation of Scales to Measure Attitudes Influencing
Monetary Donations to Charitable Organizations. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2000, 28, 299–309. [CrossRef]
Kotchen, M.J.; Reiling, S.D. Environmental attitudes, motivations, and contingent valuation of nonuse values:
A case study involving endangered species. Ecol. Econ. 2000, 32, 93–107. [CrossRef]
Saha, S.; Chandra, B. Understanding the underlying motives and intention among Indian blood donors
towards voluntary blood donation: A cross-sectional study. Transfus. Clin. Biol. 2018, 25, 109–117. [CrossRef]
Fishbein, M.; Ajzen, I. Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to the theory and research.
Philos. Rhetor. 1977, 10, 130–132.
Ajzen, I. Nature and operation of attitudes. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2001, 52, 27–58. [CrossRef]
Han, H.; Kim, Y. An investigation of green hotel customers’ decision formation: Developing an extended
model of the theory of planned behavior. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 2010, 29, 659–668. [CrossRef]
Dean, M.; Raats, M.; Shepherd, R. The Role of Self-Identity, Past Behavior, and Their Interaction in Predicting
Intention to Purchase Fresh and Processed Organic Food. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 2012, 42, 669–688. [CrossRef]
Ha, H.-Y.; Janda, S. Predicting Consumer Intentions to Purchase Energy-Efficient Products. J. Consum. Mark.
2017, 29, 461–469. [CrossRef]
Teng, Y.M.; Wu, K.S.; Liu, H.H. Integrating altruism and the theory of planned behavior to predict patronage
intention of a green hotel. J. Hosp. Tour. Res. 2015, 39, 299–315. [CrossRef]
Albayrak, T.; Aksoy, S.; Caber, M. The effect of environmental concern and scepticism on green purchase
behaviour. Mark. Intell. Plan. 2013, 31, 27–39. [CrossRef]
Harland, P.; Staats, H.; Wilke, H.A.M. Explaining Proenvironmental Intention and Behavior by Personal
Norms and the Theory of Planned Behavior. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 1999, 29, 2505–2528. [CrossRef]
Schwartz, S.H. Normative Influences on Altruism. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 1977, 10, 221–279.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

20 of 21

Park, J.; Ha, S. Understanding Consumer Recycling Behavior: Combining the Theory of Planned Behavior
and the Norm Activation Model. Fam. Consum. Sci. Res. J. 2014, 42, 278–291. [CrossRef]
Wang, B.; Wang, X.; Guo, D.; Zhang, B.; Wang, Z. Analysis of factors influencing residents’ habitual
energy-saving behaviour based on NAM and TPB models: Egoism or altruism? Energy Policy 2018, 116,
68–77. [CrossRef]
Gleasure, R.; Feller, J. Does Heart or Head Rule Donor Behaviors in Charitable Crowdfunding Markets?
Int. J. Electron. Commer. 2016, 20, 499–524. [CrossRef]
De Groot, J.I.M.; Steg, L. Morality and Prosocial Behavior: The Role of Awareness, Responsibility, and Norms
in the Norm Activation Model. J. Soc. Psychol. 2009, 149, 425–449. [CrossRef]
Doran, R.; Larsen, S. The Relative Importance of Social and Personal Norms in Explaining Intentions to
Choose Eco-Friendly Travel Options. Int. J. Tour. Res. 2016, 18, 159–166. [CrossRef]
Fishbein, M. Attitude and the prediction of behavior. In Readings in Attitude Theory and Measurement;
John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 1967; pp. 447–492.
Schwartz, S.H.; Howard, J.A. A normative decision-making model of altruism. In Altruism and Helping
Behavior; Lawrence Erbaum: Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1981; pp. 89–211.
Liu, Y.; Sheng, H.; Mundorf, N.; Redding, C.; Ye, Y. Integrating Norm Activation Model and Theory of
Planned Behavior to Understand Sustainable Transport Behavior: Evidence from China. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 2017, 14, 1593. [CrossRef]
Amos, O.M. Empirical analysis of motives underlying individual contributions to charity. Atl. Econ. J. 1982,
10, 45–52. [CrossRef]
Dawson, S. Four motivations for charitable giving: Implications for marketing strategy to attract monetary
donations for medical research. J. Health Care Mark. 1988, 8, 31–37.
Parker, D.; Manstead, A.S.R.; Stradling, S.G. Extending the Theory of Planned Behavior: The role of personal
norm. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 2011, 34, 127–138. [CrossRef]
Mittelman, R.; Rojas-Méndez, J. Why Canadians give to charity: An extended theory of planned behaviour
model. Int. Rev. Public Nonprofit Mark. 2018, 15, 189–204. [CrossRef]
Lee, T. The Impact of Perceptions of Interactivity on Customer Trust and Transaction Intentions in Mobile
Commerce. J. Electron. Commer. Res. 2005, 6, 165–180.
Gefen, D.; Straub, D. A Practical Guide to Factorial Validity Using PLS-Graph: Tutorial and Annotated
Example. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2005, 16, 91–109. [CrossRef]
Chang, Y.-W.; Hsu, P.-Y.; Yang, Q.-M. Integration of online and offline channels: A view of O2O commerce.
Internet Res. 2018, 28, 926–945. [CrossRef]
Gefen, D.; Straub, D.; Boudreau, M.-C. Structural Equation Modeling and Regression: Guidelines for Research
Practice. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2000, 4, 2–77. [CrossRef]
Tenenhaus, M.; Vinzi, V.E.; Chatelin, Y.M.; Lauro, C. PLS path modeling. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 2005, 48,
159–205. [CrossRef]
Henseler, J.; Sarstedt, M. Goodness-of-fit indices for partial least squares path modeling. Comput. Stat. 2013,
28, 565–580. [CrossRef]
Wetzels, M.; Odekerken-Schroder, G.; van Oppen, C. Using PLS path modeling for assessing hierarchical
construct models: Guidelines and empirical illustration. Mis Q. 2009, 33, 177–195. [CrossRef]
Maziriri, E.T.; Madinga, N.W. Data to model the prognosticators of luxury consumption: A partial least
squares-structural equation modelling approach (PLS-SEM). Data Brief 2018, 21, 753–757. [CrossRef]
Bird, E.L.; Panter, J.; Baker, G.; Jones, T.; Ogilvie, D. Predicting walking and cycling behaviour change using
an extended Theory of Planned Behaviour. J. Transp. Health 2018, 10, 11–27. [CrossRef]
Metzger, M.J. Making sense of credibility on the Web: Models for evaluating online information and
recommendations for future research. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 2007, 58, 2078–2091. [CrossRef]
Bauer, T.K.; Bredtmann, J.; Schmidt, C.M. Time vs. money—The supply of voluntary labor and charitable
donations across Europe. Eur. J. Political Econ. 2013, 32, 80–94. [CrossRef]
Chong, A.Y.-L.; Chan, F.T.; Ooi, K.-B. Predicting consumer decisions to adopt mobile commerce: Cross country
empirical examination between China and Malaysia. Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 53, 34–43. [CrossRef]
Lu, B.; Fan, W.; Zhou, M. Social presence, trust, and social commerce purchase intention: An empirical
research. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2016, 56, 225–237. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2019, 11, 4269

88.
89.

90.
91.
92.

21 of 21

Amin, F.; Ahmad, A.; Choi, G.S. Towards Trust and Friendliness Approaches in the Social Internet of Things.
Appl. Sci. 2019, 9, 166. [CrossRef]
Crowdfunding in UNDP—Guidance for Project Managers. Available online: https://www.sdfinance.undp.
org/content/dam/sdfinance/doc/Crowdfunding%20in%20UNDP%20-%20Guidance%20for%20Project%
20Managers.pdf (accessed on 29 June 2019).
Benabou, R.; Tirole, J. Incentives and prosocial behavior. Am. Econ. Rev. 2006, 96, 1652–1678. [CrossRef]
Mollick, E. The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. J. Bus. Ventur. 2014, 29, 1–16. [CrossRef]
Xu, L.Z. Will a digital camera cure your sick puppy? Modality and category effects in donation-based
crowdfunding. Telemat. Inform. 2018, 35, 1914–1924. [CrossRef]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

