Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics
Finding greener grass on the other side of hill: Examining donor perceived brand
equity in a moderating role of brand credibility
Muhammad Kashif, P.M.P. Fernando, Sarminah Samad, Ramayah Thurasamy,

Article information:

To cite this document:
Muhammad Kashif, P.M.P. Fernando, Sarminah Samad, Ramayah Thurasamy, (2018) "Finding
greener grass on the other side of hill: Examining donor perceived brand equity in a moderating
role of brand credibility", Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, https://doi.org/10.1108/
APJML-10-2017-0231
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/APJML-10-2017-0231

Downloaded on: 03 November 2018, At: 17:34 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 87 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 17 times since 2018*

Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:

(2018),"Putting eggs in a different basket: a typology of Islamic symbols and services",
Journal of Islamic Marketing, Vol. 9 Iss 4 pp. 935-950 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/
JIMA-09-2016-0069">https://doi.org/10.1108/JIMA-09-2016-0069</a>

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-
srm:380143 []

For Authors

If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald
for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission
guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com

Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as
well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and
services.

Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for
digital archive preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1355-5855.htm

Finding greener grass on the
other side of hill
Examining donor perceived brand equity in a
moderating role of brand credibility
Muhammad Kashif
GIFT University, Gujranwala, Pakistan
P.M.P. Fernando
Faculty of Commerce and Management Studies, University of Kelaniya,
Kelaniya, Sri Lanka
Sarminah Samad
Department of Business Administration, College of Business,
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and
Ramayah Thurasamy
School of Management, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Minden, Malaysia

Abstract
Purpose – The research concerning brand credibility of charity brands is scantly examined. The purpose of
this paper is to examine the moderating role of brand credibility within the customer-based brand equity
model to investigate donor perceived brand equity of charity brands.
Design/methodology/approach – In a cross-sectional research design, a survey-based research strategy is
followed to collect data from 448 active Muslim donors in Pakistan. The collected data are analysed by
employing confirmatory factor analysis based on Smart PLS 2.0.
Findings – The results indicate that donor perceived brand association, brand awareness and brand loyalty
strongly relate to perceived brand equity of charity brands. The brand credibility moderates the relationship
between perceived quality, equity and brand loyalty, and equity paths.
Practical implications – The charity brands need to focus on building a strong brand image and
reputation to uplift brand credibility which can be achieved by offering training programmes addressing
various social causes such as HIV and Cancer prevention.
Originality/value – The proposed moderating effects of brand credibility and its application to charity
brands operating in an Asian Muslim country context are unique products of this study.
Keywords Pakistan, Brand credibility, Charity brands, Customer-based brand equity (CBBE)
Paper type Research paper

Introduction
The growth of charity brands is threatened by strict governmental regulations and weaker
customer–brand relationships (Kashif et al., 2015). The limited funds offered by
governments to run charitable organisations also make it necessary to efficiently utilise
all available resources to achieve their objectives (i.e. excellent brand management efforts
can ensure this efficiency) (Faulkner et al., 2014). It is also notable that donors are not
emotionally associated with charity brands that can adversely affect brand loyalty patterns
(Sargeant et al., 2008). In this regard, a positive relationship between brand loyalty and
consumers’ brand associations (mainly based on trust) is pivotal to strengthen brand
resonance (Keller, 2016; Saleem et al., 2017). This is achieved by building stronger brands
which are preferred by customers and also by establishing brands with a stronger share of
heart (i.e. the products and services consumers are willing to buy) among target market(s)
(Nowak et al., 2006). However, in this regard, the marketers must understand customers’
mind-set – the driving force which may trigger positive outcomes for customers and brands

Donor
perceived
brand equity

Received 2 October 2017
Revised 30 January 2018
14 April 2018
Accepted 22 April 2018

Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing
and Logistics
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1355-5855
DOI 10.1108/APJML-10-2017-0231

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

(Grisaffe and Nguyen, 2011) in the form of value (i.e. a mutual exchange of long-lasting
relationships). A stronger emotional bonding between donors and charity brands can
ensure brand loyalty (Michel and Rieunier, 2012). It is notable that positive customer–brand
ties are a product of perceived credibility (Lee Thomas et al., 2011). However, recently,
researchers revealed questionable brand image of charity brands as a key tension facing
charitable organisations (Lee, 2013), which signals a trust deficit between charity brands
and key stakeholders.

The trust deficit (potentially an issue of brands credibility) in a relationship, especially
between donors and charity brands has the potential to drive brand rejection – a threat for
the growth and the survival of charity brands (Faulkner et al., 2014). This entails that
consumers would likely to reject less credible brands in an era where they have choices.
It is evident that non-profit organisations have overlooked the brand building efforts,
especially the emotional bonding with the donors – driving trust deficit (Laidler-Kylander
and Simonin, 2009). The contemporary researchers have suggested to aggressively initiate
re-branding efforts in the charity sector (Lee and Bourne, 2017) by establishing stronger
relationships with donors. The trust deficit in a customer–brand relationship is an issue of
brand credibility which is important while managing service brands and is acknowledged
as an important area of future investigation in services marketing literature (Hyun Baek
and Whitehill King, 2011). The weak consumer–brand relationships in the charity sector
are attributed to lack of brand credibility (Laran and Wilcox, 2011; Hyun Baek and
Whitehill King, 2011). Furthermore, in an era of economic downturn in Asian context,
the brand credibility is highlighted as an effective tool to safeguard brand value
(Drewniak and Karaszewski, 2016). This necessitates the measurement of brand equity of
charity brands and also advocates the important role of brand credibility in strengthening
the donor–brand relationships.

The brand credibility refers to the believability in brand’s perceived ability and
willingness to continuously address customer-related issues on a consistent basis
(Erdem and Swait, 1998). It is a multidimensional construct (Law et al., 1998) with expertise
and trustworthiness as sub-dimensions of brand credibility (Spry et al., 2011; Erdem and
Swait, 1998). The second-order construct of trustworthiness refers to a firm’s willingness to
deliver on brand promise, while the expertise is about the ability/motivation to perform a
task. So far, the issue of brand credibility has attracted scant attention from charity brand
the researchers have
researchers while measuring charity brand equity. Recently,
examined the credibility of charity organisations, but from an organisational perspective
(Rahayu Hijrah Hati and Idris, 2014; Kim et al., 2017) – suggested to investigate brand
credibility of charity brands in more detail. The brands which are perceived as credible and
have a tradition – a heritage – and are likely to receive stronger donor engagement,
satisfaction and loyalty (Curran et al., 2016). Another dominant reason that credibility is
important in the services sectors is also by the fact that services are intangible (i.e. cannot be
seen or felt before purchase) and hence require a significant amount of consumers’
believability to minimise their risk perceptions to trigger purchase (Brady et al., 2005).
It is attributed to stronger brand credibility as perceived by customers. This also applies to
charity brands where consumers are likely to reject brands with weaker credibility
(Faulkner et al., 2014). Above all, charity brands support consumer welfare (Kashif and
De Run, 2015), hence these organisations should survive and grow in an era where poverty
and other social and health-related issues are increasing.

Brand credibility is the perceived believability of whether a given brand contains the
ability and willingness to continuously deliver its promises to customers (Erdem and
Swait, 2004). A stronger faith by consumers signals higher levels of brand credibility which
ultimately influences their purchase intention and enhances perceptions of quality and trust
(Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011). More recently, brand trust is highlighted as an

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

antecedent to repurchase intentions among customers of service brands (Saleem et al., 2017).
These theoretical issues have stronger relevance to the pragmatic issues facing charity
brands. The charity brands are facing challenges such as the lack of donor trust, limited
amount of funds available to support social causes and poor brand image, which may drive
brand rejection among donors (Faulkner et al., 2014). A stronger loyalty pattern can be
developed by integrating brand credibility into the charity brand equity measurement model.
This is in accordance with the suggestions made by Erdem and Swait (1998), who proposed
that brand equity can be enhanced by imparting the element of believability into the brand
equity measurement model. The construct also lacks empirical evidence which necessitates a
careful re-examination of marketing matrices which aim at enhancing brand equity of charity
organisations. For that purpose, we selected CBBE model – a framework widely employed by
marketing researchers to measure brand equity of firms (Kuhn et al., 2008).

There are few research gaps which justify the theoretical and contextual contribution of
this study. First, in an effort to advance theory, marketing researchers suggested to employ
an integrated approach to examine brand equity measurement (Brodie, 2009; Keller, 2016).
This entails that novel constructs should be integrated to enrich the existing frameworks.
Furthermore, it is believed that service marketing researchers and brand management
scholastic in particular should focus on the relevance of theory to improve management
practices (Brodie and De Chernatony, 2009) which can help to counter the brand identity
issues faced by charity organisations (Lee and Bourne, 2017). The brand credibility is
scantly studied so far (Laran and Wilcox, 2011; Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011).
The contemporary researchers have not only investigated organisational credibility
(Rahayu Hijrah Hati and Idris, 2014; Kim et al., 2017), but also suggested to further examine
the issues of brand credibility of charity brands – a call addressed through this study.

The researchers advocated to frame brand credibility as a moderator to advance
marketing theory and practice (Haynes et al., 2014), which is still missing, especially in the
context of charity brands. On the other side, the CBBE model is criticised as it lacks
comprehensiveness to help marketers to counter challenges which brands are facing in
different sectors, to include charity and non-profit sectors (Kuhn et al., 2008). The traditional
CBBE model is used by charity brand researchers to examine brand equity (Cronin-Gilmore
et al., 2014); however, scholars call for more research studies to enrich the brand equity
measurement frameworks (Pike, 2013). Hence, responding to the calls for more studies to
investigate brand building issues faced by charity brands (Lee and Bourne, 2017), with a trust
deficit among donors where a likely rejection will occur (Faulkner et al., 2014), is important.
The brand credibility (McDougle, 2014), especially its potential as a moderator (to strengthen
donor–brand relationships – missed by researchers while empirically examining brand equity
of charity organisations) ( Juntunen et al., 2013) – has its theoretical value.

Contextually, Pakistan, as a developing country context,

is selected where the
measurement of charity brand equity will help management policy makers to strengthen
donor–brand relationships. There are several reasons which justify the selection of Pakistan
as a country in context for this research. Pakistan is an Islamic country – dominantly a
Muslim population –and Islam as the dominant religion. The religion Islam provides a
complete system of livinghood where Zakat is obligatory among Muslims and is being paid
at an annual rate of 2.5 per cent of annual income (Khan, 2012). Other charitable options
among Muslims are as follows: Sadaqah (i.e. an amount of money or any other thing donated
to save oneself from ghosts); Kaffara (i.e. offered to needy people in cases where the donor
has broken a promise); and Waqf (i.e. donation through owing a land to hospital or
mosque or to other social service organisation) (Kashif et al., 2015). In Asian countries,
the in-group influence is dominant which also influences the charity donation behaviours
(Wang, 2014) – an important feature and hallmark of Asian culture. It is empirically
demonstrated that in Pakistan, people lack trust in charitable institutions and pay Zakat

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

through personal means (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017) which clearly
justifies country context selected for this study. Based on the work of Kashif et al.
(Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017), the lack of trust on charity brands where
donors donate by personal means threatens the existence and survival of charitable
organisations even in the developing world. Thus, current study has a pragmatic value to
offer some data-driven marketing strategies which aim to strengthen brand equity
(via brand credibility) of charity brands.

A review of relevant theories and concepts surrounding customer-based brand equity
(CBBE) will be discussed in terms of the development of our research hypothesis. This will
be followed by research methods section where data collection procedures are presented.
Finally, the results, discussion, managerial
implications and future research direction
sections will be presented.

Literature review
Service brand equity
The customer–brand relationships are important for firms to enhance their brand equity
which can either be high or low (Rego et al., 2009). A high brand equity results in higher
profits; positive word-of-mouth reviews; higher acceptance of firm’s potential products
and services; maximisation of stakeholder equity; and reduction in the various types of
risks associated with buying and consumption of products (Bharadwaj et al., 2011).
However, on the other side, weaker consumer–brand relationships result into trust
deficit – a dominating reason that brands are rejected (Faulkner et al., 2014) in an era
where consumers have choices. There are various models employed by marketing and
brand managers to measure brand equity. For instance, the Aaker’s (1991) and Keller’s
(1993) models are two most pertinent and extensively employed frameworks to measure
brand equity. In addition to these models, the investigation of brand equity measurement
has been enriched by emphasising on employee-based brand equity (King and Grace,
2010) and CEO-based brand equity (Bendisch et al., 2013) frameworks. The central idea in
these models is to emphasise one key aspect of the brand, i.e. employees (King and Grace,
2010) as well as the CEOs (Bendisch et al., 2013) to enhance brand equity of the firm in
order to achieve marketing outcomes.

In an era where value is said to be is co-created, merely a managerialist stance is
insufficient to understand and deliver brand value. In a service environment, active
participation of two parties – the customers and frontline employees (during service
encounters) – is required to create and deliver value ( Jaakkola and Alexander, 2014).
The customer disengagement is a critical issue while marketing of services as an active
engagement is lacking but ensures marketing success (Naumann et al., 2017). In case
employees or the customers are disengaged and are not playing by their script, service is
co-destructed – a real threat where firms can easily lose customers for life (Echeverri and
Skålén, 2011). This is why an EBBE model was established which expanded from a
connectionist perspective (i.e. behavioural responses to different marketing stimuli by an
audience external to the firm) to a more culture-based, internal perspective of the firm (King
and Grace, 2010). The model is based on several dimensions such as: openness, role clarity,
brand commitment, information generation and knowledge dissemination. The scale has not
been empirically tested thus lacks external validity. Another group of researchers (Bendisch
et al., 2013) took a more holistic view of brand equity measurement and presented another
radical model, i.e. CEO-based brand equity. The previously established models incorporated
customer, managerial and employee-based views. However, none of the models framed
personal branding from a strategist – the corporate-level perspective to establish the brand
equity construct. The CEO-based brand equity model consisted of identity, reputation,
positioning and equity based on brand creator – the leader. Above all, out of all the matrices

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

available to measure and safeguard brand performance, CBBE has been extensively
employed (Christodoulides and De Chernatony, 2010), which is the core reason we selected
Aaker’s (1991) model to stretch its theoretical scope.

Marketers are under scrutiny by macro and micro environmental factors. Within an
organisation, marketing adds to the cost of making products which has motivated brand
managers to find ways to maximise return on investments by enhancing brand equity
(Mizik and Jacobson, 2008) – acknowledged as an intangible asset to strengthen relationships
between organisation and its stakeholders (Christodoulides and De Chernatony, 2010).
The trustworthiness and credibility of organisations in the customers’ minds act as cues to
create brand knowledge among stakeholders (Boenigk and Becker, 2016). Furthermore, brand
equity drives brand preference and ultimately purchase intentions (Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995)
by increasing the consumers’ willingness to pay a premium price (Aaker, 1991). This may be
true for profit-centric commercial organisations; however, the non-profit and voluntary
services sector has its own realities in terms of management of funds and classification of
customers to motivate them to donate for several charities (Kuhn et al., 2008). For instance, a
positive brand image in the donors’ mind is a source of identity and brings them closer to the
brand while making donation decisions (Kashif et al., 2015). The act of donating to a non-profit
charitable organisation is more of a social issue than economical in its nature and proper
identification and communication of benefits of donation can enable the charity organisations
to build successful and trustworthy relationships with their stakeholders (Venable et al., 2005;
Lee and Bourne, 2017).
In order to attract potential donors and volunteers, charity
marketers should manage their marketing efforts in a way to convey the antecedents of brand
equity by creating positive images and personalities through greater awareness and
familiarity (Stuart, 2016).

There are two highly regarded models of brand equity (Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993) that are
extensively employed by marketing researchers to measure brand equity. The brand, its
awareness, association, perceived quality and brand assets are the key components of Aaker’s
brand equity model. Whereas, Keller’s model
is comprised of brand equity based on
consumers’ ability to recall, associate and prefer a brand over others in a competitive
landscape. The strength of Aaker’s model lies in presenting a managerialist perspective while
Keller’s model is regarded as an efficient tool to frame consumers’ perceptions about a brand
and its customers’ perceived value. The dominant stream of research in consumer-based
brand equity is grounded in cognitive psychology. Aaker (1991) identified brand awareness,
associations, loyalty and perceived quality as composites of brand equity. On the other
side, Keller (1993) took a more customer-centric approach and defined brand equity as
“the differential effect of brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the
brand” (p. 2). Both these scholars highlighted the importance of consumer memory in
recognising the brand which can ultimately contribute to firm’s revenue stream.

Some of the key brand equity measurement models are presented as Table I.

Brand equity and charity sector
Given the identity-based challenges facing charity marketers, there is a dire need felt among
marketing researchers to present frameworks which help charity marketers to re-gain
recognition through an act of re-branding charity brands (Lee and Bourne, 2017). In this
regard, a number of studies are conducted by researchers. Through the study of Faircloth
(2005), a conceptual model of resource provider (i.e. volunteers and donors) based on
non-profit brand equity was presented. The researcher used multidimensional influences of
brand personality (brand respect and brand differentiation); brand image (brand character
and brand scale) and brand awareness (brand familiarity) as antecedents of brand equity.
The empirical testing of the model yielded mixed results where only brand personality and
brand scale, as a sub-dimension under brand image, were found to influence resource

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Author(s) and
year(s)

Theoretical paradigm

Contribution

Cognitive psychology

Aaker’s (1991)
model
Keller’s (1993) model Network memory model, theory of
semantic processor, attitude theory
Signalling theory

Erdem and Swait’s
(1998) model

King and Grace’s
(2010) employee-
based brand equity
Bendisch et al.’s
(2013) CEO-based
brand equity

Leader-member exchange theory,
relationship-mediated theory of internal
marketing, commitment – trust theory
Social identity theory, stakeholder
theory

Table I.
Key brand equity
measurement models

Brand awareness, association, perceived,
quality, brand loyalty
Brand knowledge – awareness and
associations
Brand credibility, brand clarity, consistency,
perceived quality, perceived risk,
information costs saved and expected utility
Openness, the “H” factor, knowledge
dissemination, information generation, role
clarity and brand commitment
Creator perspective – identity (human,
managerial and CEO); stakeholder
perspective – reputation (human, managerial
and CEO)

providers’ internal altruistic tendency to volunteer (Faircloth, 2005). The conventional belief
of brand familiarity yielding positive brand equity was rejected through this study which
highlights that negative perception towards the organisation might be manifesting this
donor behaviour. This also calls for establishing stronger corporate brands in the charity
sector to further strengthen donor trust – avoiding brand rejection in the charity sector
(Faulkner et al., 2014).

The issue of brand rejection is sensitive in nature as it is noticeable that donors, once
they lack trust in the charities, opt for substitutes and donate by personal means
(Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017) which is a threat to the growth of charity
brands. The researchers Becker-Olsen and Hill (2006) used measures from the CBBE Scale
developed by Keller (2001), based on the four components, namely, brand identity, brand
meaning, brand response and brand relationship, to identify the sponsor fit with brand
equity. Further to this, extending their study, Hou et al. (2009) used Faircloth’s model to test
the individual giving intention with the mediating role of individual donor’s self-concept.
These researchers found that the three dimensions of brand equity, i.e. brand personality,
brand image and brand awareness of the non-profit organisation, leave highly positive
direct effects on an individual’s donation intention. This study further validated Faircloth’s
(2005) findings that communication of charity brand image to donors acts as a significant
contributor to motivate donors’ support behaviour.

Extending the research further, Juntunen et al. (2013) focussed on developing a B2B
brand equity model based on the study of Davis et al. (2008) to describe the co-creation of
non-profit brand equity. These researchers focussed on two constructs, i.e. non-profit brand
awareness and non-profit brand image as antecedents of co-created non-profit brand equity.
The results further validated the positive effects of brand image and associations to
establish brand equity of a non-profit organisation. However, as per the limitation of their
study,
they missed few unique constructs to examine brand equity of non-profit
organisations and suggested doing the same as an important future research direction.
In another study, Laidler-Kylander and Simonin (2009) followed a different methodology
and used the grounded theory and a system dynamics approach to construct the brand
for international non-profits organisations. They proposed a model
equity model
highlighting the role of
four key variables that drive brand equity in non-profit
organisations: consistency, focus, trust and partnerships. They suggested to elaborate on
these dimensions through few quantitative studies to empirically test the proposed
framework. Apart from that, donor trust evolved as an important variable in their

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

study, which further strengthens the rationale to establish brand credibility in the charity
sector – resulting into consumer trust and other tangible outcomes.

The researchers Boenigk and Becker (2016) conceptualised a stakeholder-based brand
equity framework by emphasising brand awareness, non-profit brand trust and non-profit
brand commitment to enhance public’s attitude towards organisation. This was aimed at
uplifting the strategic position of the brand in the market. They found brand trust to
strongly effect donor behaviour, but also acknowledged that their study presents an initial
model where future researchers should take this to next level. It is also noteworthy that
some of these models framed non-profit events and organisations such as the Ages of
Mankind Exhibition in Spain (Camarero et al., 2010), National Museum of Natural Sciences
in Taiwan (Liu et al., 2015), Finnish Defence Forces military driving school ( Juntunen et al.,
2013) and the likes, which is somewhat different from the social and charitable brands – the
focus of this research. None of the above mentioned studies adapted Aaker’s model of brand
equity but used a variety of multidimensional variables to measure its influence on
perceived brand equity of charity brands. Another important outcome achieved through
critical review of these models is the fact that branding elements of awareness, image, and
brand trust are important, yet studied in isolation of the CBBE model where a cohesive
framework, the one which presents all these constructs as a unified framework, is missing.
Furthermore, there is plethora of research which highlights the importance of brand
equity, its underlying theoretical paradigms and prominent constructs but the brand
credibility in the charity sector is scarcely examined and presented. Recently, the
credibility of charity organisations is investigated but a more holistic (i.e. organisational
perspective) is taken forth to examine the issue of brand equity (Rahayu Hijrah Hati and
Idris, 2014; Kim et al., 2017). These researchers further suggested to deepen our
understanding of brand credibility of charity brands by conducting few more studies
by considering the unique constructs to strengthen donor engagement and loyalty
(Curran et al., 2016). The donor confidence on charity organisations is crucial element in
establishing brand equity but charity marketers have failed to establish donor trust – a
branding dilemma (McDougle, 2014) – which needs our scholarly attention. Hence, it can
be argued that brand performance measurements need conceptual grooming that
can easily lead to the enhancement of charitable brand performance. Despite the need and
importance of brand credibility realised among charity marketers (Spry et al., 2011), the
measurement of brand equity lacks the integration of brand credibility which we believe
must be vested into brand equity metrics in order to counteract marketing challenges.
Inculcating brand credibility into brand equity matrices can guide service marketers to
improve brand performance (Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011) – an important
contribution of this study to extend charity marketing literature.

Hypothesis and theory development
The research model for this study is based on the conceptualisations of brand equity offered
by two classic models of brand management – Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993). The brand
equity dimensions are elaborated in the next subsections.

Perceived quality and brand equity
One of the primary facets of the CBBE model is the perceived quality where Aaker (1991)
referred to the trust, supremacy and truthfulness of the brand claims as perceived by its
targeted consumer. It means that a brand must ensure it is perceived as trustworthy for its
communication (i.e. advertising, public relations) to leave a positive impact on customers
(Delgado-Ballester and Luis Munuera-Alemán, 2005) – a product of their past experiences with
the brand. The importance of perceived quality has been well recognised among charity
marketers. High perceived quality offers several benefits to the brand such as: to differentiate it

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

from other competing brands; to charge a higher price; and to leverage existing brand equity to
support brand extensions (Keller, 1993). According to Zeithaml (1981), the provision of positive
feedback enhances the quality of the service delivered and perceived – an important part of
service quality offered by non-profit organisation (Merchant et al., 2010). McGrath (1997)
identified this as the service value which is defined as the actions performed by charity
organisations to convince donors to render positive feedback, handle complaints and appreciate
the brand. The researcher further emphasised that the service value offers the opportunity
for charities to increase donors’ satisfaction – an indicator of excellent service quality
(Ramanath (2016). The researchers Sargeant and Lee (2002) highlighted the fact that receiving
feedback from the charities, appreciation of the gift received and rapid responsiveness
concerning queries are among the main attitudinal elements of donors leading towards
perceived service quality on the charities – to establish stronger consumer–brand ties.

The consumer perceptions of quality are extremely important for non-profit service
organisations to ignite a positive donor response towards the marketing efforts of charity
brands (Kashif et al., 2015). Apart from the positive donor response, perceived quality
directly influences the corporate performance as well (Aaker, 1991) in terms of revenue and
goodwill. A high perceived quality positively contributes to enhance and improve brand
equity perceptions among donors of charity organisations (Mulyanegara, 2011). However, it
must be noted that perceived quality is not a stand-alone component which contributes to
enhancement of brand equity (Tong and Hawley, 2009). Rather, the integration of perceived
quality with other components of CBBE is recommended to maximise charity brand equity.
Based on the existing relationship between perceived quality and brand equity, the
following hypothesis is proposed:

H1. The donor perceived quality positively contributes to brand equity of charity brands.

Brand awareness
Brand awareness is attributed to strong brand recognition and recall (Keller, 1993). In an era
where consumers have choices (as they can donate through different means) (Kashif, Faisal
Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017), the importance of brand awareness (i.e. the ability of a
potential donor to identify and associate a brand with a specific product category) (Aaker, 1991)
cannot be neglected for charity brands. The researchers (Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Faircloth,
2005; Juntunen et al., 2013) have used brand awareness as a substantial dimension in building
non-profit brand equity. They highlighted that donors, once they are positively associated with
charity brands, are able to recognise themselves with the organisation and also spread positive
word-of-mouth to others. A high brand awareness among donors results in a favourable
response to marketing efforts and contributes to the growth of charity organisations
(Baghi et al., 2009). There are several tools employed by brands to communicate brand-related
information to key stakeholders, especially to donors. In this regard, the role of television as a
medium to generate brand recognition and recall has been enumerated by advertising
researchers (Kashif et al., 2014) which may be useful for charity brands – depending upon the
target market(s). Furthermore, among the challenges faced by brands, brand recognition is
envisioned as a key priority for organisations (Laran and Wilcox, 2011), which is also true for
charity brand marketers. Thus the following hypothesis is proposed:

H2. The donor perceived brand awareness positively contributes to brand equity of

charity brands.

Brand association
The consumer memory is important for brands. On the one hand, it helps brands to
generate recall (Boenigk and Becker, 2016) while, on the other hand, there are set of

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

cues in the memory – to form a set of favourable, strong and unique associations about a
brand – collectively known as brand associations (Keller, 1993). The strength of brand
associations positively contributes to development of a brand image that enhances
brand equity via stronger customer–brand relationships to safeguard a brand from its
competition (Keller, 2016). One of the challenges charity sector brands face is the possibility
of a weak brand image which must be encountered through efficient brand building
strategies ( Juntunen et al., 2013).

It has already been noted that a weaker consumer–brand relationship can easily lead to
brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014), which requires careful attention from the charity brand
marketers. This is so true even in the developing world where donors do not frequently
donate through charities and prefer donations by personal means (Kashif et al., 2015).
More importantly, it is not only a matter of poor perceived quality of charity brands; rather,
the donor–brand relationships are weak (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017),
which is a product of low brand awareness and associations. Further to this, these researchers
(Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017) also explored that donors are unable to
derive meaning through brand consumption (i.e. by donating to charity organisations in our
case) – clearly an issue of weaker brand associations. This is also attributed to a weaker
position of charity brands (i.e. once compared to donation through personal means) – a matter
of weak emotional bonding and trust. Furthermore, in a collectivist culture where people know
each other, donating through personal means is more satisfying (Kashif and De Run, 2015).
These researchers recommended strengthening the donor–brand relationships in developing
world to strengthen consumer–brand relationships. Keeping these issues in mind, the
following hypothesis is proposed:

H3. The donor perceived brand association positively contributes to brand equity of

charity brands.

Brand loyalty
Brand loyalty is yet another important component of the CBBE model and refers to
the ability of a consumer to purchase a brand on a consistent basis over a period of time
(Aaker, 1991). In addition to consistently buying a brand, strong brand loyalty results in
consumers’
intention to spread positive word-of-mouth reviews to potential users
(Keller, 1993). This entails that brand loyalty is a source of spreading brand-related
information to other customers. This has been highlighted as an important function
of brands where brand-related information is passed on from one consumer to the
other – leading to establishment of stronger brand communities (Hassay and Peloza, 2009).
The brand communities, mainly a group of individuals with high brand congruence
(i.e. the ability of consumers to perceive brand value as in-sync with their personal values),
are a product of brand loyalty which is regarded as a tool to safeguard a brand from the
realm of stronger competition. For non-profit brands, the brand loyalty is weak and is
recognised as a key area of improvement ( Juntunen et al., 2013). The researchers also
believe that strong brand loyalty generates profitable returns for the firm which is pivotal
for growth and survival of organisations. The brand switching is a common phenomenon
observed among donors of charity brands which can be minimised to a certain extent by
strengthening loyalty (Bennett, 2009). The individuals, since they do not feel a strong
emotional relationship with the brand (mainly due to weak donor–brand relationships)
(Lee and Bourne, 2017), are likely to reject it and may switch to other service providers
(Faulkner et al., 2014). In other extreme situations, the donors may never come back to
donate to charity brands as they will find other substitutes to donate (Kashif, Faisal Jamal
and Abdul Rehman, 2017) – a threat to growth and survival of charity brands.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

This highlights brand loyalty to be an important component contributing to brand equity
for charity organisations. Thus, the following hypothesis is proposed:

H4. The donor perceived brand loyalty positively contributes to brand equity of

charity brands.

Moderation of brand credibility
In the realm of strong competition, brands use cues as signals to communicate brand-related
information to trigger positive outcomes of purchase and loyalty (Erdem and Swait, 1998,
Alias and Rasdi, 2015). According to brand management researchers (Erdem and Swait,
1998), brand credibility refers to consumers’ perceptions of the ability and willingness of a
brand to deliver on the brand promise over a period of time. Brand credibility is different
when compared with other constructs used to measure brand equity in a sense that it takes
an insider view of a service firm. This is regarded as the firm’s ability to deliver on the brand
promises, as perceived by its customers (Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011). This
indicates that brand credibility is a combined effect of all the prior marketing actions
(Erdem et al., 2002) and to the extent these actions are consistent (Baek et al., 2010).

The brand credibility comprises of two components, i.e. trustworthiness and expertise
(Erdem and Swait, 1998; Erdem and Swait, 2004). The trustworthiness refers to perceived
willingness of a firm to deliver on the brand promise while expertise refers to the
perceived ability of firms to actually deliver value (Bougoure et al., 2016). Since its inception,
the brand credibility has been regarded as a unidimensional construct – combining the
collective impact of trustworthiness and expertise to link it to other marketing outcomes
(Erdem and Swait, 1998; Bougoure et al., 2016; Shams et al., 2017). These researchers further
suggested employing this construct as a unidimensional to study its combined effects on
marketing outcomes.

According to Erdem and Swait (2004), the information acquisition costs and perceived
risks are to be incurred by consumers which delays consumers’ decision making – driving
weaker consumer confidence (Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011) – which can be reduced
by using brand cues. Thus, brand credibility can provide unbeatable benefits to customers
through assurance of quality and it can benefit the companies also through higher message
acceptance and repeat customers (Baek et al., 2010). Furthermore, brand credibility is an
essential tool to develop word-of-mouth for a brand and can minimise brand switching
intentions through establishing stronger customer–brand relationships (Sweeney and
Swait, 2008). In service settings, brand credibility can offer several advantages to the firm
which include; high relationship equity, decreased risk perceptions and a positive response
to marketing activities (Long and Chiagouris, 2006). When consumer risks (associated with
buying and consumption of services) are properly managed through brand credibility, it
leads to stronger ties between customers and brands (Leischnig et al., 2012).

The initial brand credibility model (Erdem and Swait, 1998) highlighted the role of
trustworthiness and expertise of a brand, which are signals to the customers and can
positively contribute to the enhancement of brand equity. This assumption we believe is true
and more important in case of service organisations where employee and customers interact
during service encounters and value is co-created (Brodie, 2009). The product categories which
are difficult to evaluate, customers perceive high risk associated with purchase and
consumption of such products ( Jones and Shandiz, 2015). In cases where risk perception is not
properly managed, it can drive brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014). This entails that
consumer confidence in trustworthiness and expertise of the firm to meet brand promises
are few critical success factors for a service firm. In an era of high competition, non-profit
and charity brands are facing the challenge of the lack of credibility (Hyun Baek and
Whitehill King, 2011), which, if not encountered strategically by charity organisations, will

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

increase charity brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014). Charity brands should pledge
assurances that the provider is worthy of trust in order to reduce the uncertainties
(Weisbrod, 2009) associated with purchase and consumption of service brands. This further
validates the role played by brand credibility to develop trustworthy relationships – the core
reason leading to brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014).

The brand credibility construct is empirically tested in isolation of the CBBE framework
(Christodoulides and De Chernatony, 2010; Bougoure et al., 2016), which entails that it has
not yet been integrated into a CBBE framework as a moderating variable. Few recent
attempts signify the importance of credibility as a construct, but it has been employed with
a different theoretical mind-set than our study. For instance, corporate credibility is
examined to investigate its impact on positive marketing outcomes (Kim et al., 2017). Few
others linked it to innovation and purchase intentions (Shams et al., 2017), and also an effort
is made to examine its relationships with brand equity (Spry et al., 2011), but still the context
of charity brands and a collectivist Muslim country is missing. This is important in an era
where charity brands are suggested to employ innovative means to reposition their brands
(Lee and Bourne, 2017), and also there are threats from substitutes where people prefer to
donate by personal means (Kashif and De Run, 2015) rather than donating through charities.
In an era where people lack trust and credibility on charity brands (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and
Abdul Rehman, 2017), the study has its value.

Keeping in view the challenges facing charity marketers and suggestions offered to
enrich brand equity measurement models, we propose a moderating effect of brand
credibility. This is because there is empirical evidence to demonstrate that people are
religious (Kashif, Zarkada and Thurasamy, 2017) and also pay charity on a regular
basis (Kashif et al., 2015), but they only donate to means where they trust and perceive as
credible (Kashif, Faisal
Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017). This way, we believe
the relationship between brands and the customers can be further strengthened
where customer perceive brands to be more credible. Thus, the following hypotheses
have been proposed:

H5. The relationship between perceived quality and brand equity is strengthened when

moderated by high brand credibility.

H6. The relationship between brand awareness and brand equity is strengthened when

moderated by high brand credibility.

H7. The relationship between brand association and brand equity is strengthened when

moderated by high brand credibility.

H8. The relationship between brand loyalty and brand equity is strengthened when

moderated by high brand credibility (Figure 1).

Research methods
Sampling and data collection
In accordance with a positivist worldview, this study aims to objectively employ and test
the proposed relationships in an extended CBBE framework. For this purpose, a cross-
sectional, survey-based design is adopted. The choice of cross-sectional research design is
based on the notion that it saves time and is objective in nature as postulated by
researchers in previously conducted studies of CBBE (Tong and Hawley, 2009).
The sample population for this study comprised of all people who have donated once in
the last two months to a charity organisation. This was to ensure that data are collected
truly from actual donors of charity organisations. We were interested specifically in
seeking the opinion of those respondents who donated to charities recently. There is

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Figure 1.
The conceptual model

Perceived
Quality

Brand
Awareness

Brand
Association

Brand
Loyalty

Donor Perceived
Brand Equity

Brand
Credibility

empirical demonstration of the fact that in countries such as Pakistan, people do not
usually donate through charities rather they use personal means to pay the amount
of Zakat to poor and needy people (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017).

Interestingly, it is noted that in countries such as Pakistan people donate for different
motives. These motives include, in addition to Zakat donation, the motives such as
Sadaqah, Kaffara and Waqf (Kashif et al., 2015). Furthermore, these researchers identified
that people from all walks of life donate, disregarding their socio-economic class or their
socio-demographic status. The research team approached respondents at various
locations in the city of Lahore,
including universities and shopping malls.
The respondents were briefed about research objectives in order to encourage them to
voluntarily partake in this survey. Once the respondents, who were randomly approached,
agreed to participate in this research, the data collection team handed over them the
questionnaires with a request to consider charities in general while filling in their
responses against the questionnaire items. In total, 500 questionnaires were distributed
where 448 respondents in total agreed and filled in the questionnaires – all in a usable
form with a response rate of 89 per cent.

Measurements
We adopted already published scales to measure constructs of this study. The dimensions
of perceived quality, brand awareness, brand association and brand loyalty were adopted
from the study of Tong and Hawley (2009). The measures of perceived quality were adapted
to embrace the donors’ quality perceptions about charity brands as suggested by
researchers, i.e. Merchant et al. (2010). These scales have excellent statistical validity as
reported by Tong and Hawley (2009). The scale comprised of three items of Perceived
quality (α ¼ 0.73), three items for brand awareness (α ¼ 0.68), four items to measure brand
association (α ¼ 0.70), five items of brand loyalty (α ¼ 0.80) and three items for brand
equity (α ¼ 0.60) with excellent α scores. The brand credibility, a six-item scale, was also
adopted from the study of Hyun Baek and Whitehill King (2011). The scale for this construct
was used as unidiensional for this study with excellent reliability (α ¼ 0.95). There were
small modifications made. For instance, in the previous studies, the researchers used
phrases about products which were rephrased as “the charity brand I donate for”. These
small changes were necessary and do not require any statistical remedy. In a similar
context, the researchers made changes to original items – modified to best suit these items to
the context without any statistical remedies reported (Kashif et al., 2015). Theoretically, this
way, the sense of items remained the same which is yet another reason we did not opt for

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)any statistical remedy for this small modification made to these scales. In this regard, a five-
point Likert scale was employed (5 ¼ strongly agree, 4 ¼ agree, 3 ¼ neutral, 2 ¼ disagree
and 1 ¼ strongly disagree).

Donor
perceived
brand equity

Social desirability and common method bias
During the conduct of survey research, it is noticed that the respondents have the tendency
to discuss survey items among each other to seek social approval of their choices which can
bias survey responses. On the other side, respondent’s motivation to actively fill-in the
questionnaire, to a large extent, is dependent upon an appropriate length of questionnaire.
These two issues cause social desirability and common method biases, respectively.
Hence,
in order to minimise the effect of these biases, research team ensured that
respondents are sitting at a fair distance from each other and are not discussing the survey
items among each other to ensure avoidance of social desirability bias – a remedy noted in
the previously held survey (Kashif and De Run, 2015) – proved as a useful tactic to
avoid survey bias. Furthermore, the length of questionnaire was restricted to minimum
items – necessary to measure the constructs used in this study. Notably, the constructs with
high reliability scores were adopted from studies published in highly respectable outlets.
Hence, the quality of measurement is not compromised while managing survey biases.
These techniques are highly recommended by quantitative researchers to establish
credibility of research designs (Conway and Lance, 2010).

Results
There were 448 responses in total and are detailed as Table II. The major strength of the
sample is equal proportion of male and female respondents. The data set is skewed towards
younger respondents which is justified as a large proportion of the Pakistani population
(almost 70 per cent) which is below the age of 24 years. The sample is representative of the
Pakistani population in terms of age.

Data analysis
We used the partial least squares structural equation modelling technique using Smart PLS
2.0, a second-generation analysis software, to conduct data analysis for this study. This is
suggested to use in situations where complex models with latent variables are to be
analysed (Ringle et al., 2005). In this regard, the research team followed a two-stage
analytical procedure as recommended by Anderson and Gerbing (1988). At an initial stage,

Demographics

Age
18–27
28–36
37–49
50 and above

Gender
Male
Female

Marital status
Single
Married
Others

Frequency

Percentage

405
34
9
0

225
223
448

410
29
9

90.4
7.6
2.0
0.0

50.2
49.8
100.0

91.5
6.5
2.0

Table II.
Sample respondents

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

the measurement model was assessed in order to validate the instruments. This led us to
test of the structural model to assess the hypothetical relationships proposed in this study.
The quantitative researchers strongly recommend to ensure reliability and validity of
data which helps to establish credibility of research designs (Hair et al., 2011, 2014).
Hence, for this purpose, convergent validity (CV ) and discriminant validity (DV ) were
envisioned. The researchers also recommend the establishment of a measurement model
before a structural model is presented. The results of Table III reveal excellent validity
scores. To finalise the measurement model, we first assessed the loadings for each item used
for the outer model. The suggestions such as loadings should exceed a value of 0.7 – a rule of
thumb (Hair et al., 2011). All the loadings exceeded the recommended value of 0.7 except for
item number 3 under brand association dimension, and were numerated as 0.698 (Table III).
It is strongly suggested if the composite reliability (CR) is more than 0.7 and the AVE
exceeds 0.5, then the item can still be retained (Hair et al., 2014). Keeping this in mind, we
retained this item.

To complement the CV, we tested the DV using the established criterion (Fornell and
Larcker, 1981). An observation of Table IV shows that the CR values are all above 0.7 and
the AVE is also exceeding the value of 0.5. Thus, we are certain that CV has been achieved.
Furthermore, from Table IV, we can observe that the square roots of AVE, which are shown

Variable

Factor loadings

Perceived quality
PQ1
PQ2
PQ3

Brand awareness
B4
B5
B6

Brand association
BA7
BA8
BA9
BA10

Brand loyalty
BL11
BL12
BL13
BL14
BL15

Brand equity
BE16
BE17
BE18

Brand credibility
BC19
BC20
BC21
BC22
BC23
BC24

0.711
0.709
0.793

0.712
0.879
0.802

0.792
0.711
0.698
0.773

0.710
0.811
0.769
0.721
0.822

0.844
0.843
0.818

0.771
0.733
0.773
0.810
0.721
0.709

Table III.
Standardized
confirmatory
factor loadings

AVE

0.604

0.576

0.550

0.575

0.582

0.782

CR

0.821

0.802

0.785

0.802

0.807

0.878

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)on the diagonals, are all higher than their respective row and column values. It indicates that
the measurements are discriminant. Thus, based on this assessment, we can conclude that
our study has sufficient validity and reliability.

Donor
perceived
brand equity

Structural model
The structural model was tested by running a bootstrapping procedure with a re-sampling
of 1,000. The R2 for the main effect model without the interaction was 0.513, and when the
interaction terms were added, the R2 increased to 0.540 – resulting in an R2 change of 0.027.
The effect size of this change f2 was 0.0587, which can be considered small effect.

Brand awareness ( β ¼ 0.91, p o0.05), brand association ( β ¼ 0.074, p o0.05) and
brand loyalty ( β ¼ 0.324, p o 0.01) were positively related to brand equity whereas
perceived quality was not found as significant. Of the four predictors, the most important
predictor of brand equity was brand loyalty, followed by brand awareness, and, to a much
lower extent, brand association. Thus, H2–H4 were supported, while H1 was not supported.
These are observations from Table V.

For the moderating effect analysis, out of the four interaction terms, only two terms were
found significant. For instance, we found support for brand credibility × perceived quality
( β ¼ 0.060, p o 0.1) and brand credibility × brand loyalty ( β ¼ 0.86, p o 0.05). Thus, H5
and H8 were supported, whilst H6 and H7 were not supported. To see the effect more
clearly, we plotted the interaction effect in Figures 2 and 3.

Figure 2 shows the relationship between brand loyalty and brand equity which is positive
for both the levels of brand credibility – much stronger when the perceived brand credibility is
higher. This indicates that brand credibility enhances the strength of the loyalty–equity
relationship in a CBBE model. This entails that loyalty of donors will bring positive brand
equity in cases where donors perceive charity brand to be highly credible.

As for the product–quality–brand equity relationship (as per Figure 3), it is noted when
brand credibility is high, the relationship between product quality and brand equity remains

Construct

Mean

SD

AVE

CR

BAssoc BAware

BC

BE

BL

PQ

Brand association
Brand awareness
Brand credibility
Brand equity
Brand loyalty
Perceived quality
0.777
Notes: AVE, average variance extracted; CR, composite reliability. Values in italics are the square root of the
AVE while the off-diagonals are the correlation

0.741
0.479
0.561
0.495
0.560
0.568

0.816
0.843
0.673
0.798
0.794
0.786

0.785
0.802
0.878
0.807
0.802
0.821

0.550
0.576
0.782
0.582
0.575
0.604

3.458
3.386
3.475
3.456
3.465
3.482

0.759
0.542
0.491
0.511
0.520

0.884
0.643
0.617
0.604

0.763
0.640
0.465

0.758
0.550

Hypothesis Relationship

β

SE

t-value Decision

−0.027 0.031 0.891

H1
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6
H7
H8
Notes: *p W0.05; **p W 0.01

Perceived quality → brand equity
Brand awareness → brand equity
0.091 0.042 2.186** Supported
Brand association → brand equity
0.074 0.043 1.717** Supported
Brand loyalty → brand equity
0.324 0.050 6.517** Supported
Brand credibility × perceived quality → brand equity
Supported
0.060 0.041 1.445*
Brand credibility × brand awareness → brand equity −0.004 0.026 0.172
Not supported
Brand credibility × brand association → brand equity
0.006 0.030 0.184
Not supported
Brand credibility × brand loyalty → brand equity
0.086 0.044 1.983** Supported

Not supported

Table IV.
Descriptive, AVE, CR
and discriminant
validity

Table V.
Hypothesis testing

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Figure 2.
Brand equity and
loyalty relationship

Figure 3.
Brand equity and
product quality
relationship

Low Brand
Credibility

High Brand
Credibility

Low Brand Loyalty

High Brand Loyalty

Low Brand
Credibility

High Brand
Credibility

y
t
i
u
q
E
d
n
a
r
B

y
t
i
u
q
E
d
n
a
r
B

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

Low Product Quality

High Product Quality

the same. Hence, it does not matter if product quality is high or low. For those with low
brand credibility, the relationship becomes negative when perception of product quality
increases. This has clear implications for charity brand marketers where they need to
enhance consumer confidence through high brand credibility efforts.

Discussion
There is excellent amount of research already published where brand credibility is used to
examine branding issues (Bougoure et al., 2016; Shams et al., 2017; Hyun Baek and Whitehill
King, 2011). Despite the extant literature on brand credibility, the studies where this
construct is positioned as a moderating variable are limited – a clear gap which we aim to
bridge. In an effort to advance theory, management scholars have suggested to use a
moderation approach to enhance the efficiency of existing models and theories
(Haynes et al., 2014). This is where we contribute to the existing branding literature by
positioning brand credibility as a moderating variable to investigate donor–brand
relationships under a CBBE model. More specifically, at a pragmatic level, the proposed
model is empirically tested among regular donors and is better suited to enhance brand

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT) 
 
Donor
perceived
brand equity

equity of charity brands in a dominantly Muslim country, Pakistan. Keeping in view the
weak donor–brand relationships, the brand management scholars have recently advocated
the idea to rebrand charity organisations (Lee and Bourne, 2017) so that donors can derive
meaning by consuming the charity brands. The issue of brand credibility is important in an
era where consumers have choices and there are weaker donor–brand relationships in terms
of credibility of charity brands (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017). This is a key
reason the donors will reject brands (Faulkner et al., 2014), which qualifies brand credibility
as an important feature of modern-day charity brand programmes.

The results demonstrate that brand awareness ( β ¼ 0.91, p o 0.05), brand association
( β ¼ 0.074, p o 0.05) and brand loyalty ( β ¼ 0.324, p o 0.01) positively relate to brand
equity of charity brands. However, perceived quality ( β ¼ −0.027, p W 0.05) was not
positively related to brand equity. The results further strengthen the traditionally
established models of brand equity (Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993) where the importance of
brand awareness, association and loyalty has been enumerated. There is tough
competition among charity brands and also the availability of substitute means of
donation (i.e. donation to individuals by personal means) (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul
Rehman, 2017) which requires stronger consumer–brand ties – awareness and
associations are regarded as keys to establish long-lasting relationships. The brand
recall is a starting point to establish stronger brands (Boenigk and Becker, 2016) which, if
not achieved, can lead to brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014). The results also highlight a
positive and significant effect of brand loyalty on brand equity which has few contextual
reasons. The in-group influence is important in charity programmes offered by firms in an
Asian context (Wang, 2014), which has the potential to shift consumer loyalties in a way
that individuals influence each other to shape their opinions. This in-group effect binds
people together to develop brand communities – to strengthen brand equity (Hassay and
the loyalty–equity relationship are
Peloza, 2009). This way, stronger patterns of
understandable in an Asian context.

Unexpectedly, the direct relationship between perceived quality and brand equity of
charity brands is not validated. This confirms the findings of a study based on the evidence
from manufacturing sector of China (Tong and Hawley, 2009) where results were not
statistically validated to explain the relationship between perceived quality and equity.
This can be attributed to the study of Camarero et al. (2010), where they highlighted
perceived quality as one of the few variables to strengthen brand equity, yet not the only
variable. Hence, our findings support the results of their study from a charity branding
perspective. There are weaker donor–brand relationships noted in the charity sector
(Kashif and De Run, 2015), which can be improved by strengthening consumer trust in
charity brands (Faulkner et al., 2014) – making trust and credibility as important features of
service brands (Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011) to enhance brand equity instead of
perceived high quality of charity brands. Another perspective is that core motive behind
charity donation (mostly Zakat as a charity is donated which is obligatory on part of
Muslims) among Muslims is to seek Allah’s forgiveness. In this way, Zakat donation is
regarded as a source of spiritual comfort (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017).
Since this act of donation is only meant for Allah’s forgiveness, the gift giving, features of
service in terms of facilities offered, courteous staff and comfort are less important,which
are hallmarks of perceived service quality, advocated by researchers to increase donors’
satisfaction (Ramanath (2016).
In this way, the lack of statistical support for this
relationship is understandable. The brand awareness and brand association to equity
path is not moderated by brand credibility. The awareness and associations are basic
tenants of a brand strategy (McDougle, 2014) – the absence of these cannot drive consumer
confidence – an imperative to establish positive equity for the brands. Hence, it can be safely
assumed that in cases where brands lack awareness and association, the brand credibility

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

cannot be established. Thus, it is inferred that the most important predictor of brand equity
is brand loyalty, followed by brand awareness, and then brand association.

Brand credibility was integrated as an additional construct

to strengthen the
relationships proposed under the traditional CBBE model. The four iterations were initially
established to measure moderating effects of brand credibility on consumer perceived
brand equity. Among the four relationships proposed, only two relationships were found
i.e. brand credibility × perceived quality ( β ¼ 0.060, p o0.1) and brand
significant,
credibility × brand loyalty ( β ¼ 0.86, p o0.05). These results are in line with the results of
studies conducted (Hyun Baek and Whitehill King, 2011). This also postulates a strong role
played by brand credibility to counter branding challenges such as low brand loyalty and
brand rejection of charity organisations (Faulkner et al., 2014). This highlights the
importance of brand credibility to enhance quality perceptions about
the brand.
Furthermore, in a context where charity brands are facing competition from category
(product based) as well as non-category players (i.e. substitutes such as donation through
personal means) (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017), brand credibility is a
source to strengthen charity brand loyalty. The moderation of brand credibility with brand
loyalty is also understood contextually as charity brands operating in Pakistan are regarded
as less credible where individuals use personal means to donate (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and
Abdul Rehman, 2017) – a credibility crisis to hinder charity brand loyalty.

Managerial implications
The charity brands need to establish a strong brand image in the minds of donors and other
stakeholders. In this context, it is notable that charity brands, so far, have failed to instil a
positive image in donors’ mind ( Juntunen et al., 2013) – a major threat to foster growth and
survival of charity brands. The positive brand image and reputation can be increased by
participating in various programmes such as child education in a country (i.e. Pakistan) where
millions of children do not attend school. This will add to brand reputation
(Meijer, 2009) which can also be achieved by arranging various awareness programmes
and trainings to counter epidemics such as Polio, HIV and Hepatitis in particular. A core
benefit of this tactic is that it is not glamourous (i.e. such as CSR initiatives by brands offering
other than charity products) rather congruent with the charity brand image (e.g. a charity
brand is supposed to help the poor and needy). This way, it is expected to bring positive
outcomes for charity brands.

It is notable that charity brands lack donors’ emotional attachment with brands to result
in brand rejection (Faulkner et al., 2014). Thus, there is a need to develop stronger ties
through emotional bonding between a charity brand and its donors – leading to spread of
positive WOM to safeguard the brand from its competition (Bennett, 2009). This can lead to
credible brand signalling in order to address the trust deficit on charities among donors.
The charity brands can ignite loyalty by offering loyalty programmes to donors. We
are suggesting the establishment of donor programmes to generate loyalty because people
donate every year. For example, Muslims are abided by Islamic Shari’ah to pay
the suggested amount of Zakat every year to poor and needy people. These people can be
attracted every year to donate money through charities. The collection of donation amount
from conveniently located centres and discounted service charges can help to attract
potential donors to charity organisations. Initiatives such as loyalty or even membership
programmes can also be useful to trigger donors’ commitment (Camarero et al., 2010).

Moreover, brand credibility can be ensured by demonstrating the experience of existing
customers who donated in recent past, and their money was safely transferred to poor and
needy people.
trust between donors and charity
brands where trust is acknowledged as a core component to establish brand credibility
(Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009; McDougle, 2014). Furthermore, charity brands can focus

It will add to the development of

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

on communicating their efficiency by sharing their annual accounts to the donors.
The arrangement of special events such as open house might result in enhancement of trust
and credibility. There is also a need to establish the expertise of a charity brand to enable brand
teams to meet the brand promise. The proposition is based on the fact that donors are doubtful
about the brand’s ability to deliver on promises, i.e. charities lack resources to meet brand
promise (McDougle, 2014). Charity brands can establish the believability component by
designing brand promotion campaigns which focus on portraying the skills, knowledge and
ability of employees to be able to meet brand promise. It is empirically demonstrated that
charity brands in countries such as Pakistan are facing troubles from non-category competitors,
i.e. the donors donate by personal means (Kashif, Faisal Jamal and Abdul Rehman, 2017).
This can be encountered by promoting EBBE (King and Grace, 2010) – portraying and
demonstrating positive stories of excellent performance of employees to establish trust.

Finally, while establishing a direct relationship between brand awareness and brand
equity, charity brands need to focus on establishing brand recognition and recall. In this
regard, consumer-led brand promotions by emphasising organisational credibility can
contribute to shape positive attitude concerning charity brands (Rahayu Hijrah Hati and
Idris, 2014). Apart from the brand investments through advertising, the charity brands
should focus on being more socially responsible in their actions to demonstrate that the firm
is committed to the communicated brand image which can strengthen brand credibility
perceptions (Erdem and Swait, 1998).

Limitations and future research directions
The present study has few limitations which also provide avenues for future research.
The extended model although provided some novel insights to enrich our understanding of
branding the charity organisations, the data are collected only from donors. The employment
of such an approach is recommended in situations where a pragmatist insight is needed
(Kashif and De Run, 2015) as in the case of this study. However, future research is
recommended to incorporate more service brands from other sectors which have the potential
to bring much more theoretical richness to the proposed framework. In this regard, all the
service products which are classified under high in credence quality can be investigated by
employing this framework based on brand credibility. The core reason is that customers’
perceived risks are high while evaluating all those services which are difficult to evaluate and
lie under the category of high in credence attribute ( Jones and Shandiz, 2015).

Second, the measures used in this study were developed in western contexts which are
far different from the Pakistani context on account of culture. Future studies are
recommended to employ measurement (i.e. configural and metric) invariance to strengthen
the methodology and statistical results.

Third, the brand credibility is regarded and treated as a unidimensional construct which is a
limitation of this study. The construct is treated as unidimensional by considering the fact that
researchers in previously held studies also used it as a unidimensional construct (Erdem and
Swait, 1998; Bougoure et al., 2016; Shams et al., 2017). This also served the purpose of this
exploratory investigation concerning brand credibility to link it to a CBBE model to unearth
charity branding issues. However, future studies are recommended to entangle sub-dimensions
of brand credibility (i.e. expertise and trustworthiness) as separate constructs.

References

Aaker, D. (1991), Managing Brand Equity: Capitalizing on the Value of a Brand Name, The Free Press,

New York, NY.

Alias, M. and Rasdi, R.M. (2015), “Organizational predictors of workplace deviance among support

staff”, Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 172, pp. 126-133.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Anderson, J.C. and Gerbing, D.W. (1988), “Structural equation modeling in practice: a review and

recommended two-step approach”, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 103 No. 3, pp. 411.

Baek, T.H., Kim, J. and Yu, J.H. (2010), “The differential roles of brand credibility and brand prestige in

consumer brand choice”, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 662-678.

Baghi, I., Rubaltelli, E. and Tedeschi, M.

(2009), “A strategy to communicate corporate social
responsibility: cause related marketing and its dark side”, Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environmental Management, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 15-26.

Becker-Olsen, K.L. and Hill, R.P. (2006), “The impact of sponsor fit on brand equity: the case of

nonprofit service providers”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 73-83.

Bendisch, F., Larsen, G. and Trueman, M. (2013), “Fame and fortune: a conceptual model of CEO

brands”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 47 Nos 3/4, pp. 596-614.

Bennett, R. (2009), “Factors influencing donation switching behaviour among charity supporters: an

empirical investigation”, Journal of Customer Behaviour, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 329-345.

Bharadwaj, S.G., Tuli, K.R. and Bonfrer, A. (2011), “The impact of brand quality on shareholder

wealth”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 75 No. 5, pp. 88-104.

Boenigk, S. and Becker, A. (2016), “Toward the importance of nonprofit brand equity”, Nonprofit

Management and Leadership, Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 181-198.

Bougoure, U.S., Russell-Bennett, R., Fazal-E-Hasan, S. and Mortimer, G. (2016), “The impact of service

failure on brand credibility”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 31, pp. 62-71.

Brady, M.K., Bourdeau, B.L. and Heskel, J. (2005), “The importance of brand cues in intangible service
industries: an application to investment services”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 6,
pp. 401-410.

Brodie, R.J. (2009), “From goods to service branding an integrative perspective”, Marketing Theory,

Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 107-111.

Brodie, R.J. and De Chernatony, L. (2009), “Towards new conceptualizations of branding: theories of the

middle range”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 95-100.

Camarero, C., Garrido, M.J. and Vicente, E. (2010), “Components of art exhibition brand equity for

internal and external visitors”, Tourism Management, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 495-504.

Christodoulides, G. and De Chernatony, L. (2010), “Consumer-based brand equity conceptualization
and measurement: a literature review”, International Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 52
No. 1, pp. 43-66.

Cobb-Walgren, C.J., Ruble, C.A. and Donthu, N. (1995), “Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase

intent”, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. 25-40.

Conway, J.M. and Lance, C.E. (2010), “What reviewers should expect from authors regarding common
method bias in organizational research”, Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 25 No. 3,
pp. 325-334.

Cronin-Gilmore, J., Bates, M. and Brown, D. (2014), “Brand awareness: a community perception of a

nonprofit organisation”, Journal of Brand Strategy, Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 155-168.

Curran, R., Taheri, B., Macintosh, R. and O’gorman, K. (2016), “Nonprofit brand heritage: its ability to
influence volunteer retention, engagement, and satisfaction”, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly, Vol. 45 No. 6, pp. 1234-1257.

Davis, D.F., Golicic, S.L. and Marquardt, A.J. (2008), “Branding a B2B service: does a brand differentiate

a logistics service provider?”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 37 No. 2, pp. 218-227.

Delgado-Ballester, E. and Luis Munuera-Alemán, J. (2005), “Does brand trust matter to brand equity?”,

Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 187-196.

Drewniak, R. and Karaszewski, R. (2016), “Brand management in a situation of an economic crisis:
methods of strengthening the brand value in the scope of emerging markets”, Asia Pacific
Journal of Marketing and Logistics, Vol. 28 No. 4, pp. 743-758.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

Echeverri, P. and Skålén, P. (2011), “Co-creation and co-destruction: a practice-theory based study of

interactive value formation”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 351-373.

Erdem, T. and Swait, J. (1998), “Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon”, Journal of Consumer

Psychology, Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 131-157.

Erdem, T. and Swait, J.

(2004), “Brand credibility, brand consideration, and choice”, Journal of

Consumer Research, Vol. 31 No. 1, pp. 191-198.

Erdem, T., Swait, J. and Louviere, J. (2002), “The impact of brand credibility on consumer price

sensitivity”, International Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 1-19.

Faircloth, J.B. (2005), “Factors influencing nonprofit resource provider support decisions: applying the
brand equity concept to nonprofits”, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 13 No. 3,
pp. 1-15.

Faulkner, M., Truong, O. and Romaniuk, J. (2014), “Barriers to increasing donor support evidence on
the incidence and nature of brand rejection”, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly.
Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.F. (1981), “Structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement error: algebra and statistics”, Journal of Marketing Research, pp. 382-388.
Grisaffe, D.B. and Nguyen, H.P. (2011), “Antecedents of emotional attachment to brands”, Journal of

Business Research, Vol. 64 No. 10, pp. 1052-1059.

Hair, F. Jr, Sarstedt, J., Hopkins, L.M. and Kuppelwieser, G.V. (2014), “Partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM): an emerging tool in business research”, European Business
Review, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 106-121.

Hair, J.F., Ringle, C.M. and Sarstedt, M. (2011), “PLS-SEM: indeed a silver bullet”, The Journal of

Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 139-152.

Hassay, D.N. and Peloza, J. (2009), “Building the charity brand community”, Journal of Nonprofit &

Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 24-55.

Haynes, K.T., Campbell, J.T. and Hitt, M.A. (2014), “When more is not enough executive greed and its

influence on shareholder wealth”, Journal of Management.

Hou, J., Du, L. and Tian, Z. (2009), “The effects of nonprofit brand equity on individual giving intention:
mediating by the self-concept of individual donor”, International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 215-229.

Hyun Baek, T. and Whitehill King, K. (2011), “Exploring the consequences of brand credibility in

services”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 260-272.

Jaakkola, E. and Alexander, M. (2014), “The role of customer engagement behavior in value co-creation:
a service system perspective”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 247-261.

Jones, J.L. and Shandiz, M.

(2015), “Service quality expectations: exploring the importance of
SERVQUAL dimensions from different nonprofit constituent groups”, Journal of Nonprofit &
Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 48-69.

Juntunen, M., Juntunen, J. and Autere, V. (2013), “Co-creating nonprofit brand equity”, International

Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 122-132.

Kashif, M. and De Run, E.C. (2015), “Money donations intentions among Muslim donors: an extended
theory of planned behavior model”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 84-96.

Kashif, M., Ayyaz, M. and Basharat, S. (2014), “TV food advertising aimed at children: qualitative
study of Pakistani fathers’ views”, Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, Vol. 26 No. 4,
pp. 647-658.

Kashif, M., Faisal Jamal, K. and Abdul Rehman, M.

(2017), “The dynamics of Zakat donation
experience among Muslims: a phenomenological inquiry”, Journal of Islamic Accounting and
Business Research.

Kashif, M., Sarifuddin, S., Hassan, A. and Wright, G.

(2015), “Charity donation:

intentions and

behaviour”, Marketing Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 33 No. 1.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Kashif, M., Zarkada, A. and Thurasamy, R. (2017), “The moderating effect of religiosity on ethical
behavioural intentions: an application of the extended theory of planned behaviour to Pakistani
bank employees”, Personnel Review, Vol. 46 No. 2, pp. 429-448.

Keller, K.L.

(1993), “Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity”,

The Journal of Marketing, pp. 1-22.

Keller, K.L. (2001), “Building customer-based brand equity: a blueprint for creating strong brands”.
Keller, K.L. (2016), “Reflections on customer-based brand equity: perspectives, progress, and priorities”,

AMS Review, Vol. 6 Nos 1-2, pp. 1-16.

Khan, A.A. (2012), “Religious obligation or altruistic giving? Muslims and charitable donations”, Sacred

Aid: Faith and Humanitarianism, p. 90.

Kim, J., Lee, J. and Kim, S. (2017), “The efficacy of cause-related marketing within a social network: the
effects of congruency, corporate credibility, familiarity of cause brands, and perceived altruistic
motive”, Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 23 No. 5, pp. 429-455.

King, C. and Grace, D. (2010), “Building and measuring employee-based brand equity”, European

Journal of Marketing, Vol. 44 Nos 7/8, pp. 938-971.

Kuhn, K.-A.L., Alpert, F. and Pope, N.K.L. (2008), “An application of Keller’s brand equity model in a
B2B context”, Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 40-58.
Laidler‐Kylander, N. and Simonin, B. (2009), “How international nonprofits build brand equity”,

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 57-69.

Laran, J. and Wilcox, K.

(2011), “Choice, rejection, and elaboration on preference-inconsistent

alternatives”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 229-241.

Law, K.S., Wong, C.-S. and Mobley, W.M. (1998), “Toward a taxonomy of multidimensional constructs”,

Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 741-755.

Lee Thomas, M., Mullen, L.G. and Fraedrich, J. (2011), “Increased word-of‐mouth via strategic cause-
related marketing”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 16
No. 1, pp. 36-49.

Lee, Z. (2013), “Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations: exploring tensions in the nonprofit sector”,

Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 29 Nos 9-10, pp. 1124-1142.

Lee, Z. and Bourne, H. (2017), “Managing dual identities in nonprofit rebranding: an exploratory

study”, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly.

Leischnig, A., Geigenmüller, A. and Enke, M.

investigation of brand credibility in services”.

(2012), “Brands you can rely on!: an empirical

Liu, C.R., Liu, H.K. and Lin, W.R. (2015), “Constructing customer-based museums brand equity model:
The mediating role of brand value”, International Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 17 No. 3,
pp. 229-238.

Long, M.M. and Chiagouris, L. (2006), “The role of credibility in shaping attitudes toward nonprofit
websites”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 11 No. 3,
pp. 239-249.

McDougle, L. (2014), “Understanding public awareness of nonprofit organizations: exploring the
awareness – confidence relationship”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 187-199.

McGrath, S. (1997), “Giving donors good reason to give again”, International Journal of Nonprofit and

Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 125-135.

Meijer, M.-M. (2009), “The effects of charity reputation on charitable giving”, Corporate Reputation

Review, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 33-42.

Merchant, A., Ford, J.B. and Sargeant, A. (2010), “ ‘Don’t forget to say thank you’: the effect of an
acknowledgement on donor relationships”, Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 26 Nos 7-8,
pp. 593-611.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

Michel, G. and Rieunier, S. (2012), “Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable

giving”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 65 No. 5, pp. 701-707.

Mizik, N. and Jacobson, R. (2008), “The financial value impact of perceptual brand attributes”, Journal

of Marketing Research, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 15-32.

Mulyanegara, R.C.

(2011), “The relationship between market orientation, brand orientation and
perceived benefits in the non-profit sector: a customer-perceived paradigm”, Journal of Strategic
Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 5, pp. 429-441.

Naumann, K., Lay-Hwa Bowden, J. and Gabbott, M. (2017), “Exploring customer engagement valences
in the social services”, Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, Vol. 29 No. 4, pp. 890-912.
Nowak, L., Thach, L. and Olsen, J.E. (2006), “Wowing the millennials: creating brand equity in the wine

industry”, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 15 No. 5, pp. 316-323.

Pike, S.D.

(2013), “Measuring a destination’s brand equity between 2003 and 2012 using the
consumer-based brand equity (CBBE) hierarchy”, 8th Consumer Psychology of Tourism,
Hospitality & Leisure Sy.

Rahayu Hijrah Hati, S. and Idris, A. (2014), “Antecedents of customers’ intention to support Islamic
social enterprises in Indonesia: the role of socioeconomic status, religiosity, and organisational
credibility”, Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, Vol. 26 No. 5, pp. 707-737.
Ramanath, R. (2016), “Unpacking donor retention: individual monetary giving to US-based Christian

faith-related, international nongovernmental organizations”, Religions, Vol. 7 No. 11, p. 133.

Rego, L.L., Billett, M.T. and Morgan, N.A. (2009), “Consumer-based brand equity and firm risk”, Journal

of Marketing, Vol. 73 No. 6, pp. 47-60.

Ringle, C.M., Wende, S. and Will, S. (2005), SmartPLS 2.0 (M3) Beta, Hamburg.
Saleem, M.A., Zahra, S. and Yaseen, A. (2017), “Impact of service quality and trust on repurchase
intentions – the case of Pakistan airline industry”, Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and
Logistics, Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 1136-1159.

Sargeant, A. and Lee, S. (2002), “Improving public trust in the voluntary sector: an empirical analysis”,
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 68-83.
Sargeant, A., Ford, J.B. and Hudson, J. (2008), “Charity brand personality: the relationship with giving

behavior”, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 468-491.

Shams, R., Brown, M. and Alpert, F. (2017), “The role of brand credibility in the relationship between
brand innovativeness and purchase intention”, Journal of Customer Behaviour, Vol. 16 No. 2,
pp. 145-159.

Spry, A., Pappu, R. and Bettina Cornwell, T. (2011), “Celebrity endorsement, brand credibility and

brand equity”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 45 No. 6, pp. 882-909.

Stuart, H. (2016), “Managing a corporate brand in a challenging stakeholder environment: charity

branding”, International Studies of Management & Organization, Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 228-234.

Sweeney, J. and Swait, J. (2008), “The effects of brand credibility on customer loyalty”, Journal of

Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 179-193.

Tong, X. and Hawley, J.M. (2009), “Measuring customer-based brand equity: empirical evidence from
the sportswear market in China”, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 18 No. 4,
pp. 262-271.

Venable, B.T., Rose, G.M., Bush, V.D. and Gilbert, F.W. (2005), “The role of brand personality in
charitable giving: an assessment and validation”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 295-312.

Wang, Y.

(2014), “Individualism/collectivism, charitable giving, and cause-related marketing: a
comparison of Chinese and Americans”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 40-51.

Weisbrod, B.A. (2009), The Nonprofit Economy, Harvard University Press.
Zeithaml, V.A. (1981), “How consumer evaluation processes differ between goods and services”.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)APJML

Appendix. Survey items

Brand association

(cid:129) The brand image of charity brands to whom I donate is unique.

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

I admire those people who pay their donations through charities to whom I donate.

I like and respect the brand image of charity brands to whom I donate.

I have a great trust in the services of charity brands to whom I donate.

Brand loyalty

(cid:129) While paying donations, charity brands whom I donate are my first choice.

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

I will be loyal with the charity brands I donate.

I would recommend the charity brands to whom I donate to my friends and family.

Currently, I consider myself loyal to the charity brands to whom I donate.

I will keep on donating through the charity brands to whom I donate.

Brand equity

(cid:129) Even I have other alternates to pay donations, I prefer charity brands to whom I donate

over others.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate are more important than a product to me.

(cid:129)

I would prefer donating through charity brands to whom I donate even if other options are
equally good.

Brand awareness

(cid:129) The service offered by charity brands to whom I donate comes to my mind quickly.

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

I can recognise charity brands to whom I donate among other sources of charity.

I am well familiar with charity brands to whom I donate.

Perceived quality

(cid:129)

I highly trust the quality of services offered by charity brands to whom I donate.

(cid:129) The services offered by charity brands to whom I donate are of supreme quality.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate offer wide variety of services.

Brand credibility

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate remind me of someone very competent.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate have the ability to deliver on the promises.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate actually deliver what they promise.

(cid:129) The brand promise of the charity brands to whom I donate is believable.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate have the name I can trust.

(cid:129) The charity brands to whom I donate do not pretend to be what they are not.

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)Donor
perceived
brand equity

About the authors
Muhammad Kashif is working as Assistant Professor at School of Business, GIFT University, in
Pakistan. He has 15 years of full-time experience of teaching in different countries. Apart from
teaching, he is an active researcher and has published extensively in business and management
journals with 43 publications to his credit in journals of repute such as: Personnel Review, British Food
Journal, TQM&BE, Marketing Intelligence & Planning, International Journal of Bank Marketing, Asia
Pacific Journal of Marketing & Logistics, and RAE, among others. Currently, he is also Guest Editor to
invite a special call for papers with British Food Journal. Apart from writing and teaching, he is a
trainer in research methods and has delivered trainings all across Asia. His research interests range
from marketing of services to aggression at work. Muhammad Kashif is the corresponding author and
can be contacted at: kashif@gift.edu.pk

P.M.P. Fernando is Senior Lecturer associated with the Department of Marketing Management,
Faculty of Commerce and Management Studies, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka. She obtained her
first degree, BSc Marketing (Special) Degree, from the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka,
and her Master’s degree from Postgraduate Institute of Management (PIM), Sri Lanka. Currently, she is
specialized in lecturing in consumer behaviour, marketing management and services marketing
courses, both at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels. Furthermore, she is specialised in soft
skills development of undergraduates – an area where she acts as a consultant to enhance softer skills
of undergraduate students.

Dr Sarminah Samad, an excellent researcher and seasoned academic, is currently working as
Professor in Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. She is an expert in
data analysis and publishes, as well as teaches mainly in the domain of HR and OB.

Ramayah Thurasamy is Professor at Universiti Sains Malaysia. He is an expert in methods and analysis,
and has offered trainings to academics and people from the industry. With over 20 years of teaching,
training and publishing experience, Prof T. Ramayah is known as an authority in quantitative research.

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Downloaded by University of Sunderland At 17:34 03 November 2018 (PT)