A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of Marketing Constructs
Author(s): Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr.
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 16, No. 1 (Feb., 1979), pp. 64-73
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3150876 .
Accessed: 23/11/2012 04:38

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Journal of Marketing Research.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Measure and Construct Validity Studies 

I 

GILBERT A.  CHURCHILL, JR.* 

A  critical  element  in  the  evolution  of  a  fundamental  body  of  knowledge 
in  marketing,  as  well  as  for  improved  marketing  practice,  is the  development 
of  better  measures  of  the  variables  with  which  marketers  work.  In this  article 
is  outlined  by  which  this  goal  can  be  achieved  and  portions 
an  approach 
of  the  approach  are  illustrated  in terms of  a  job  satisfaction  meosure. 

A 

Paradigm 

for 

Developing 

Better 

Measures 

of  Marketing 

Constructs 

In an  article  in  the  April  1978 issue  of  the  Journal 
of  Marketing,  Jacoby  placed  much  of  the  blame  for 
the  poor  quality  of  some  of  the  marketing  literature 
on the measures marketers use to assess  their variables 
of  interest  (p.  91): 

More stupefying than the sheer number of our measures 
is  the  ease  with which  they  are proposed and  the 
uncritical manner in which they are accepted. In point 
of fact, most of our measures are only measures because 
someone  says  that  they  are,  not  because  they  have 
been  shown  to  satisfy  standard  measurement  criteria 
(validity, reliability, and sensitivity). Stated somewhat 
differently, most of our measures are no more sophisti- 
cated than first asserting that the number of  pebbles 
a person can count in a ten-minute period is a measure 
of that person's intelligence; next, conducting a study 
and finding that people who can count many pebbles 
in  ten  minutes also  tend to  eat  more; and,  finally, 
concluding from this: people with high intelligence tend 
to eat more. 

*Gilbert A.  Churchill is  Professor of  Marketing, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison. The significant contributions of Michael Hous- 
ton,  Shelby Hunt, John Nevin,  and Michael Rothschild through 
their comments on a draft of this article are gratefully acknowledged, 
as are the many helpful comments of the anonymous reviewers. 

The  AMA  publications policy  states:  "No  article(s) will  be 
published in the Journal of Marketing Research written by the Editor 
or the Vice President of Publications." The inclusion of this article 
was approved by the Board of  Directors because: (1) the article 
was submitted before the author took over as Editor, (2) the author 
played no part in its review, and (3) Michael Ray, who supervised 
the  reviewing process  for  the  special issue,  formally requested 
he be allowed to publish it. 

64 

Burleigh  Gardner,  President  of  Social  Research, 
Inc.,  makes  a  similar  point  with  respect  to  attitude 
measurement  in a recent  issue  of  the Marketing News 
(May  5,  1978, p.  1): 

Today the social scientists are enamored of  numbers 
.  .. Rarely do they  stop and ask,  "What 
and counting 
lies  behind  the numbers?" 
When we  talk about attitudes we  are talking about 
constructs of the mind as they are expressed in response 
to  our questions. 
But usually all we  really know are the questions we 
ask and the answers we get. 

Marketers,  indeed,  seem  to  be  choking  on  their 
measures,  as  other  articles  in  this  issue  attest.  They 
seem  to  spend  much  effort  and  time  operating  by 
the  routine  which  computer  technicians  refer  to  as 
in,  garbage  out.  As  Jacoby  so  suc- 
GIGO-garbage 
cinctly  puts  it,  "What  does  it  mean  if  a  finding  is 
significant  or that the  ultimate  in statistical  analytical 
techniques  have  been  applied,  if  the  data  collection 
instrument generated invalid data at the outset?"  (1978, 
p.  90). 

What  accounts  for  this  gap  between  the  obvious 
need  for  better  measures  and  the  lack  of  such  mea- 
sures?  The  basic  thesis  of  this article  is  that although 
the  desire  may  be  there,  the  know-how  is  not.  The 
situation  in  marketing  seems  to  parallel the  dilemma 
which  psychologists  faced  more  than  20  years  ago, 
when  Tryon  (1957,  p.  229) wrote: 

If  an investigator should invent a new  psychological 
test  and then turn to  any recent scholarly work for 

Journal  of  Marketing Research 
Vol. XVI (February 1979), 64-73 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

PARADIGM FOR DEVELOPING MEASURES OF MARKETING CONSTRUCTS 

65 

guidance on how to determine its reliability, he would 
confront such an array of different formulations that 
he would be unsure about how to proceed. After fifty 
years of psychological testing, the problem of discover- 
ing  the  degree  to  which  an  objective  measure of 
behavior reliably differentiates individuals is still con- 
fused. 

Psychology  has  made  progress  since  that  time. 
Attention  has  moved  beyond  simple  questions  of 
reliability  and  now  includes  more  "direct"  assess- 
ments of  validity.  Unfortunately,  the marketing litera- 
ture  has  been  slow  to  reflect  that  progress.  One  of 
the  main  reasons  is  that  the  psychological  literature 
is  scattered.  The  notions  are  available  in  many  bits 
in  a  variety  of  sources.  There  is  no 
and  pieces 
overriding framework which the marketer can embrace 
to  help  organize  the  many  definitions  and  measures 
of  reliability  and  validity  into  an  integrated  whole  so 
that  the  decision  as  to  which  to  use  and  when  is 
obvious. 

This  article  is  an attempt  to  provide  such  a  frame- 
work.  A  procedure  is  suggested  by  which  measures 
of  constructs  of  interest  to  marketers  can  be  devel- 
oped.  The  emphasis  is  on developing  measures  which 
have  desirable  reliability  and validity  properties.  Part 
of  the  article  is  devoted  to  clarifying  these  notions, 
particularly those  related to validity; reliability notions 
are well covered  by Peter's article in this issue.  Finally, 
the  article  contains  suggestions  about  approaches  on 
which  marketers  historically  have  relied  in  assessing 
the  quality  of  measures,  but  which  they  would  do 
well  to  consider  abandoning  in  favor  of  some  newer 
alternatives.  The  rationale  as  to  why  the  newer  al- 
ternatives  are preferred  is  presented. 

THE PROBLEM  AND  APPROACH 
Technically,  the  process  of  measurement  or  opera- 
tionalization  involves  "rules  for  assigning  numbers 
to objects  to represent  quantities of  attributes"  (Nun- 
nally,  1967,  p.  2).  The  definition  involves  two  key 
notions.  First,  it  is  the  attributes  of  objects  that  are 
measured  and  not  the  objects  themselves.  Second, 
the  definition  does  not  specify  the  rules  by  which 
the  numbers  are  assigned.  However,  the  rigor  with 
which  the  rules  are specified  and the  skill with  which 
they  are applied determine  whether  the  construct  has 
been  captured  by  the  measure. 

Consider  some  arbitrary construct,  C,  such  as  cus- 
tomer  satisfaction.  One  can  conceive  at  any  given 
point  in  time  that  every  customer  has  a  "true"  level 
of  satisfaction;  call  this  level  XT.  Hopefully,  each 
measurement  one  makes  will  produce  an  observed 
score,  Xo,  equal  to  the  object's  true  score,  Xr 
Further, if there are differences  between  objects  with 
respect  to  their  Xo  scores,  these  differences  would 
be  completely  attributable  to  true  differences  in  the 
characteristic  one  is  attempting  to  measure,  i.e.,  true 
differences  in  XT.  Rarely  is  the  researcher  so  fortu- 

nate.  Much  more  typical  is  the  measurement  where 
the  XO score  differences  also  reflect  (Selltiz  et  al., 
1976, p.  164-8): 

1. True differences in  other relatively stable charac- 
teristics which affect  the  score,  e.g.,  a  person's 
willingness to express his or her true feelings. 
2.  Differences due to transient personal factors, e.g., 

a person's mood, state of fatigue. 

3.  Differences due to situational factors, e.g.,  whether 
the interview is conducted in the home or at a central 
facility. 

4.  Differences due to variations in administration, e.g., 

interviewers who probe differently. 

5.  Differences due  to  sampling of  items,  e.g.,  the 
specific items used on the questionnaire; if the items 
or the wording of  those items were changed, the 
XO scores would also change. 

6.  Differences due  to  lack  of  clarity of  measuring 
instruments, e.g.,  vague  or  ambiguous questions 
which are interpreted differently by those respond- 
ing. 

7.  Differences due to mechanical factors, e.g., a check 
mark in the wrong box or a response which is coded 
incorrectly. 

Not  all  of  these  factors  will  be  present  in  every 
measurement,  nor  are  they  limited  to  information 
collected  by  questionnaire  in  personal  or  telephone 
interviews.  They  arise also  in studies  in which  self-ad- 
ministered  questionnaires  or observational  techniques 
are  used.  Although  the  impact  of  each  factor  on  the 
XO score  varies  with  the  approach,  their  impact  is 
predictable.  They  distort  the  observed  scores  away 
from  the  true  scores.  Functionally,  the  relationship 
can  be  expressed  as: 

XO=  XT  +  X  +  XR 

where: 

Xs  =  systematic sources of error such as stable char- 
acteristics of the object which affect its score, 
and 

XR =  random sources of error such as transient per- 

sonal factors which affect the object's score. 

A measure is  valid when the differences  in observed 
scores  reflect  true  differences  on  the  characteristic 
one  is  attempting  to  measure  and  nothing  else,  that 
is,  XO =  XT.  A  measure  is  reliable to  the extent  that 
independent  but  comparable  measures  of  the  same 
trait or  construct  of  a  given  object  agree.  Reliability 
depends  on  how  much  of  the  variation  in  scores  is 
attributable to  random or chance  errors.  If  a measure 
is  perfectly  reliable,  XR  =  0.  Note  that  if  a  measure 
is  valid,  it  is  reliable,  but  that  the  converse  is  not 
necessarily  true  because  the  observed  score  when 
XR =  0  could  still  equal  XT  +  X,.  Thus  it  is  often 
said  that reliability is  a necessary  but not  a  sufficient 
condition  for  validity.  Reliability  only  provides  nega- 
tive evidence  of the validity of the measure.  However, 
the ease  with  which  it can  be  computed  helps  explain 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

66 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 1979 

its  popularity.  Reliability  is  much  more  routinely 
reported than is evidence,  which is much more difficult 
to secure  but which relates more directly to the validity 
of  the  measure. 

The  fundamental  objective  in  measurement  is  to 
produce  Xo scores  which  approximate  Xr  scores  as 
closely  as  possible.  Unfortunately,  the  researcher 
never  knows  for sure what the  XT scores  are.  Rather, 
the  measures  are  always  inferences.  The  quality  of 
these  inferences  depends  directly  on  the  procedures 
that are used to develop  the measures and the evidence 
supporting their  "goodness."  This  evidence  typically 
takes  the  form  of  some  reliability  or  validity  index, 
of  which  there  are a great many,  perhaps  too  many. 
The  analyst  working  to  develop  a  measure  must 
contend  with  such  notions  as  split-half,  test-retest, 
and  alternate  forms  reliability  as  well  as  with  face, 
content,  predictive,  concurrent,  pragmatic,  construct, 
convergent,  and  discriminant  validity.  Because  some 
of  these  terms  are  used  interchangeably  and  others 
are often  used  loosely,  the analyst  wishing to  develop 
a  measure  of  some  variable  of  interest  in  marketing 
faces  difficult  decisions  about  how  to  proceed  and 
what  reliability  and validity  indices  to  calculate. 

Figure  1 is  a diagram of  the  sequence  of  steps  that 
can  be  followed  and  a list  of  some  calculations  that 
should  be  performed  in developing  measures  of  mar- 

Figure  1 
SUGGESTED PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPING BETTER 
MEASURES 

Recommended Coefficients 
or  Techniques 

1. 

Specify 
of  construct 

domain 

Literature 

search 

__2  . 

Generate 

sample 

of 

items 

Collect 
data 

+ 

j 

5. 

| 

Collect 
data 

4 

7. 

| 

Assess 
validity 

4 
Develop 
norms 

8. 

| 

Literature 
Experience 
Insight 
Critical 
Focus 

groups 

search 
survey 
stimulating 
incidents 

examples 

Coefficient 
Factor 

analysis 

alpha 

Coefficient 
Split-half 

alpha 
reliability 

Multitrait-multimethod 
Criterion 
validity 

matrix 

Average 
summarizing 
scores 

and  other 

statistics 

distribution 

of 

keting constructs.  The suggested  sequence  has worked 
well  in  several  instances  in  producing  measures  with 
desirable  psychometric  properties  (see  Churchill  et 
al.,  1974,  for  one  example).  Some  readers  will  un- 
doubtedly  disagree with the suggested  process  or with 
the  omission  of  their  favorite  reliability  or  validity 
coefficient.  The  following  discussion,  which  details 
both  the  steps  and  their  rationale,  shows  that  some 
of  these  measures  should  indeed  be set  aside  because 
there  are better  alternatives  or,  if  they  are used,  that 
they  should  at  least  be  interpreted  with  the  proper 
awareness  of  their shortcomings. 

The  process  suggested  is  only  applicable  to  multi- 
item  measures.  This  deficiency  is  not  as  serious  as 
it  might  appear.  Multi-item  measures  have  much  to 
recommend  them.  First,  individual items  usually  have 
considerable  uniqueness  or  specificity  in  that  each 
item  tends  to  have  only  a  low  correlation  with  the 
attribute being  measured  and tends  to  relate  to  other 
attributes  as  well.  Second,  single  items  tend  to  cate- 
gorize people into a relatively small number of groups. 
For  example,  a  seven-step  rating  scale  can  at  most 
distinguish between  seven  levels  of an attribute. Third, 
individual items  typically  have  considerable  measure- 
ment  error; they  produce  unreliable  responses  in  the 
sense  that  the  same  scale  position  is  unlikely  to  be 
checked  in  successive  administrations  of  an  instru- 
ment. 

All  three  of  these  measurement  difficulties  can  be 
diminished with  multi-item measures:  (1) the  specific- 
ity  of  items  can  be  averaged  out  when  they  are 
combined,  (2)  by  combining  items,  one  can  make 
relatively  fine  distinctions  among people,  and  (3)  the 
reliability  tends  to  increase  and  measurement  error 
decreases  as  the  number  of  items  in  a  combination 
increases. 

The folly  of using single-item measures  is illustrated 

by  a question  posed  by  Jacoby  (1978,  p.  93): 

How comfortable would we feel having our intelligence 
assessed  on  the  basis  of  our  response to  a  single 
question?" Yet that's exactly what we do in consumer 
research....  The literature reveals hundreds of  in- 
stances in which responses to a single question suffice 
to establish the person's level on the variable of interest 
and then  serves  as  the  basis  for  extensive  analysis 
and entire articles. 
.  .  . Given the complexity of our subject matter, what 
makes us  think we  can use  responses to  single items 
(or even to two or three items) as measures of  these 
concepts, then relate these scores to  a host of  other 
variables, arrive at  conclusions  based  on  such  an 
investigation, and get away calling what we have done 
"quality research?" 

In  sum,  marketers  are  much  better  served  with 
multi-item  than  single-item  measures  of  their  con- 
structs,  and they should take the time to develop  them. 
This  conclusion  is  particularly true  for  those  investi- 
gating  behavioral  relationships  from  a  fundamental 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

PARADIGM FOR DEVELOPING MEASURES OF MARKETING CONSTRUCTS 

67 

as well  as applied perspective,  although it applies  also 
to  marketing practitioners. 

SPECIFY  DOMAIN  OF  THE  CONSTRUCT 
The first  step  in the  suggested  procedure  for  devel- 
oping better  measures  involves  specifying  the  domain 
of  the  construct.  The  researcher  must  be  exacting 
in  delineating  what  is  included  in  the  definition  and 
what is excluded.  Consider,  for example,  the construct 
customer  satisfaction,  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  the 
marketing  concept.  Though  it  is  a  central  notion  in 
modern marketing thought, it is also  a construct  which 
marketers  have  not  measured  in exacting  fashion. 

Howard and Sheth (1969, p.  145), for example,  define 

customer  satisfaction  as 

.  .  .the buyer's cognitive state of being adequately or 
inadequately rewarded in  a  buying situation for  the 
sacrifice he has undergone. The adequacy is a conse- 
quence of matching actual past purchase and consump- 
tion experience with the reward that was expected from 
the brand in terms of its anticipated potential to satisfy 
the  motives  served by  the  particular product class. 
It includes not only reward from consumption of  the 
brand but any other reward received in the purchasing 
and consuming process. 

Thus,  satisfaction  by  their  definition  seems  to  be 
attitude.  Further,  in  order  to  measure  satisfaction, 
it  seems  necessary  to  measure  both  expectations  at 
the time  of  purchase  and reactions  at some  time  after 
purchase.  If  actual  consequences  equal  or  exceed 
expected  consequences,  the consumer is satisfied,  but 
if  actual  consequences  fall  short  of  expected  conse- 
quences,  the  consumer  is  dissatisfied. 

But what expectations  and consequences  should the 
marketer attempt to assess?  Certainly one would  want 
to  be  reasonably  exhaustive  in  the  list  of  product 
features  to  be  included,  incorporating  such  facets  as 
cost,  durability,  quality,  operating  performance,  and 
aesthetic  features (Czepeil et al.,  1974). But what about 
purchasers'  reactions  to  the  sales  assistance  they 
received  or subsequent service by independent dealers, 
as  would  be  needed,  for  example,  after  the  purchase 
of  many  small  appliances?  What  about  customer 
reaction  to  subsequent  advertising  or  the  expansion 
of  the  channels  of  distribution  in  which  the  product 
is  available?  What  about  the  subsequent  availability 
of  competitors'  alternatives  which  serve  the  same 
needs  or  the  publishing  of  information  about  the 
environmental  effects  of  using the  product? To  detail 
which  of  these  factors  would  be  included  or  how 
customer  satisfaction  should  be  operationalized  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  this  article;  rather,  the  example 
emphasizes  that  the  researcher  must  be  exacting  in 
the conceptual  specification  of the construct  and what 
is  and what is  not  included  in the  domain. 

It  is  imperative,  though,  that  researchers  consult 
the  literature  when  conceptualizing  constructs  and 
specifying  domains.  Perhaps  if  only  a  few  more  had 

done  so,  one  of  the  main  problems  cited  by  Kollat, 
Engel,  and  Blackwell  as  impairing  progress  in  con- 
sumer  research-namely, 
the  use  of  widely  varying 
definitions-could  have been  at least diminished (Kol- 
lat  et  al.,  1970, p.  328-9). 

Certainly definitions  of  constructs  are means  rather 
than  ends  in  themselves.  Yet  the  use  of  different 
definitions  makes  it difficult  to compare  and accumu- 
late  findings  and  thereby  develop  syntheses  of  what 
is  known.  Researchers  should  have  good  reasons  for 
proposing  additional  new  measures  given  the  many 
available  for  most  marketing  constructs  of  interest, 
and  those  publishing  should  be  required  to  supply 
their rationale.  Perhaps the older measures  are inade- 
quate.  The  researcher  should  make  sure  this  is  the 
case  by  conducting  a  thorough  review  of  literature 
in  which  the  variable  is  used  and  should  present  a 
detailed  statement  of  the  reasons  and  evidence  as  to 
why  the  new  measure  is  better. 

GENERA TE SAMPLE  OF ITEMS 
The  second  step  in  the  procedure  for  developing 
better  measures  is  to  generate  items  which  capture 
the  domain  as  specified.  Those  techniques  that  are 
typically productive in exploratory research,  including 
literature  searches,  experience  surveys,  and  insight- 
stimulating  examples,  are  generally  productive  here 
(Selltiz  et  al.,  1976).  The  literature  should  indicate 
how the variable has been defined previously  and how 
many  dimensions  or  components  it  has.  The  search 
for  ways  to  measure  customer  satisfaction  would 
include product brochures,  articles in trade magazines 
and  newspapers,  or  results  of  product  tests  such  as 
those published by Consumer Reports. The experience 
survey  is  not  a  probability  sample  but  a  judgment 
sample  of  persons  who  can  offer  some  ideas  and 
insights into the phenomenon.  In measuring consumer 
it  could  include  discussions  with  (1) 
satisfaction, 
appropriate  people  in  the  product  group  responsible 
for  the product,  (2) sales  representatives,  (3) dealers, 
(4)  consumers,  and (5) persons  in marketing  research 
or  advertising,  as  well  as  (6)  outsiders  who  have  a 
special  expertise  such  as  university  or  government 
personnel.  The insight-stimulating  examples  could  in- 
volve  a  comparison  of  competitors'  products  or  a 
detailed  examination  of  some  particularly  vehement 
complaints  in  unsolicited  letters  about  performance 
of  the  product.  Examples  which  indicate  sharp  con- 
trasts or have  striking features  would be most  produc- 
tive. 

Critical incidents  and focus  groups also  can be used 
to  advantage  at the  item-generation  stage.  To  use  the 
critical incidents  technique a large number of scenarios 
describing  specific  situations  could  be  made  up  and 
a  sample  of  experienced  consumers  would  be  asked 
what  specific  behaviors  (e.g.,  product  changes,  war- 
ranty handling) would  create  customer  satisfaction  or 
dissatisfaction  (Flanagan,  1954;  Kerlinger,  1973,  p. 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

68 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 1979 

536). The  scenarios  might be presented  to the respon- 
dents  individually or 8 to  10 of  them might be  brought 
together  in  a  focus  group where  the  scenarios  could 
be used  to trigger open discussion  among participants, 
although  other  devices  might  also  be  employed  to 
promote  discourse  (Calder,  1977). 

The emphasis  at the  early stages  of item  generation 
would  be  to  develop  a  set  of  items  which  tap  each 
of  the  dimensions  of  the  construct  at issue.  Further, 
the  researcher  probably  would  want  to  include  items 
with  slightly  different  shades  of  meaning because  the 
original list will be refined to produce the final measure. 
Experienced  researchers  can  attest  that  seemingly 
identical statements  produce widely different answers. 
By incorporating slightly different nuances of  meaning 
in statements  in the item pool,  the researcher provides 
a better foundation  for  the  eventual  measure. 

Near  the  end  of  the  statement  development  stage 
the  focus  would  shift  to item  editing.  Each  statement 
would  be  reviewed  so  that  its  wording  would  be  as 
precise  as possible.  Double-barreled statements  would 
be  split  into  two  single-idea  statements,  and  if  that 
proved  impossible  the  statement  would  be  eliminated 
altogether.  Some  of  the  statements  would  be  recast 
to  be  positively  stated  and  others  to  be  negatively 
stated to reduce  "yea-"  or  "nay-"  saying  tendencies. 
The  analyst's  attention  would  also  be  directed  at 
refining  those  questions  which  contain  an  obvious 
"socially  acceptable"  response. 

After  the  item  pool  is  carefully  edited,  further 
refinmement would  await  actual data.  The  type  of  data 
collected  would  depend  on  the  type  of  scale  used 
to  measure  the  construct. 

PURIFY  THE MEASURE 
The calculations one performs in purifying a measure 
depend  somewhat  on  the  measurement  model  one 
embraces.  The  most  logically  defensible  model  is  the 
domain  sampling model  which  holds  that the purpose 
of any particular measurement  is to estimate  the score 
that would  be  obtained  if  all  the  items  in the  domain 
were  used  (Nunnally,  1967, p.  175-81).  The score  that 
any  subject  would  obtain  over  the  whole  sample 
domain  is  the  person's  true score,  XT. 

In  practice,  though,  one  does  not  use  all  of  the 
items  that could  be  used,  but  only  a sample  of  them. 
To the extent  that the  sample of  items  correlates  with 
it  is  good.  According  to  the  domain 
true  scores, 
sampling  model,  then,  a  primary source  of  measure- 
ment  error is  the  inadequate  sampling  of  the  domain 
of  relevant  items. 

Basic  to  the  domain  sampling model  is  the  concept 
of  an  infinitely  large  correlation  matrix  showing  all 
correlations  among the items  in the domain.  No  single 
item  is  likely  to  provide  a  perfect  representation  of 
the  concept,  just  as  no  single  word  can  be  used  to 
test  for  differences  in  subjects'  spelling  abilities  and 
no single question can measure a person's  intelligence. 

Rather,  each  item  can  be  expected  to  have  a  certain 
amount  of  distinctiveness  or  specificity  even  though 
it relates  to  the  concept. 

The  average  correlation  in  this  infinmitely large  ma- 
trix,  r,  indicates  the  extent  to  which  some  common 
core is present  in the items.  The dispersion  of  correla- 
tions  about  the  average  indicates  the  extent  to  which 
items  vary  in  sharing  the  common  core.  The  key 
assumption  in  the  domain  sampling  model  is  that  all 
items,  if  they  belong  to  the  domain  of  the  concept, 
have an equal amount of common core.  This statement 
implies  that  the  average  correlation  in  each  column 
of  the  hypothetical  matrix  is  the  same  and  in  turn 
equals  the  average  correlation  in  the  whole  matrix 
(Ley,  1972,  p.  111; Nunnally,  1967,  p.  175-6).  That 
is,  if  all  the  items  in  a  measure  are  drawn  from  the 
domain of  a single construct,  responses  to those  items 
should  be  highly  intercorrelated.  Low  interitem  cor- 
relations,  in  contrast,  indicate  that  some  items  are 
not  drawn  from  the  appropriate domain  and  are  pro- 
ducing  error and unreliability. 

Coefficient Alpha 

The  recommended  measure  of  the  internal  consis- 
tency  of  a  set  of  items  is  provided  by  coefficient 
alpha which  results  directly  from  the  assumptions  of 
the domain sampling model.  See  Peter's  article in this 
issue  for  the  calculation  of  coefficient  alpha. 

Coefficient  alpha  absolutely  should  be  the  first 
measure  one  calculates  to  assess  the  quality  of  the 
instrument.  It  is  pregnant  with  meaning  because  the 
square  root  of  coefficient  alpha  is  the  estimated 
correlation of  the k-item test  with errorless true scores 
(Nuinnally,  1967,  p.  191-6).  Thus,  a  low  coefficient 
alpha  indicates  the  sample  of  items  performs  poorly 
in  capturing the  construct  which  motivated  the  mea- 
sure. Conversely,  a large alpha indicates  that the k-item 
test  correlates  well  with  true scores. 

If  alpha  is  low,  what  should  the  analyst  do?'  If 
the  item  pool  is  sufficiently  large,  this  outcome  sug- 
gests  that  some  items  do  not  share  equally  in  the 
common  core  and  should  be  eliminated.  The  easiest 
way  to  finmd them  is  to  calculate  the  correlation  of 
each  item  with  the  total  score  and  to  plot  these 
correlations  by  decreasing  order of  magnitude.  Items 
with  correlations  near  zero  would  be  eliminated. 
Further, items  which  produce  a substantial  or  sudden 
drop  in  the  item-to-total  correlations  would  also  be 
deleted. 

'What is "low" for alpha depends on the purpose of the research. 
For early stages of basic research, Nunnally (1967) suggests reliabil- 
ities of  .50 to  .60 suffice and that increasing reliabilities beyond 
.80 is probably wasteful. In many applied settings, however, where 
important decisions are made with respect to specific test scores, 
"a reliability of  .90 is the minimum that should be tolerated, and 
a reliability of  .95 should be  considered the desirable standard" 
(p. 226). 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

PARADIGM FOR DEVELOPING MEASURES OF MARKETING CONSTRUCTS 

69 

If  the  construct  had,  say,  five  identifiable  dimen- 
sions  or  components,  coefficient  alpha  would  be 
calculated  for  each  dimension.  The  item-to-total  cor- 
relations  used  to  delete  items  would  also  be  based 
on  the  items  in  the  component  and  the  total  score 
for  that  dimension.  The  total  score  for  the  construct 
would  be  secured  by  summing  the  total  scores  for 
the  separate  components.  The  reliability  of  the  total 
construct  would  not  be  measured  through coefficient 
alpha, but rather through the formula for the reliability 
of  linear combinations  (Nunnally,  1967, p.  226-35). 

Some  analysts  mistakenly  calculate  split-half  reli- 
ability to  assess  the  internal homogeneity  of  the  mea- 
sure. That is,  they divide  the measure into two halves. 
The  first  half  may  be  composed  of  all the  even-num- 
bered items,  for  example,  and the  second  half  all  the 
odd-numbered  items.  The  analyst  then  calculates  a 
total  score  for  each  half  and  correlates  these  total 
scores  across subjects.  The problem with this approach 
is  that  the  size  of  this  correlation  depends  on  the 
way  the  items  are split  to  form the  two  halves.  With, 
say,  10 items  (a very  small number for most  measure- 
ments),  there  are  126 possible  splits.2  Because  each 
of  these  possible  divisions  will  likely  produce  a  dif- 
ferent  coefficient,  what  is  the  split-half  reliability? 
Further,  as  the  average  of  all  of  these  coefficients 
equals coefficient  alpha, why  not calculate  coefficient 
alpha  in  the  first  place?  It  is  almost  as  easy,  is  not 
arbitrary, and has an important practical  connotation. 

Factor  Analysis 

Some  analysts  like  to  perform  a factor  analysis  on 
the  data  before  doing  anything  else  in  the  hope  of 
determining the  number of dimensions  underlying the 
construct.  Factor  analysis  can  indeed  be  used  to 
suggest  dimensions,  and  the  marketing  literature  is 
replete  with  articles  reporting  such  use.  Much  less 
prevalent  is  its  use  to  confirm  or  refute  components 
isolated  by  other  means.  For  example,  in  discussing 
a test composed  of items tapping two common  factors, 
verbal  fluency  and  number  facility,  Campbell  (1976, 
p.  194) comments: 

Recognizing multidimensionality when we see it is not 
always an easy  task. For example, rules for when to 
stop extracting factors are always arbitrary in  some 
sense.  Perhaps the wisest  course is  to  always make 
the  comparison between  the  split  half  and  internal 
consistency estimates after first splitting the compo- 
nents into  two  halves  on  a  priori grounds. That is, 
every  effort  should be  made to  balance the  factor 

2The  number  of  possible  splits  with  2n  items  is  given  by  the 

(Bohrnstedt,  1970).  For  the  example  cited, 

formula 

(2n)! 

2(n !) (n!) 

n  =  5 and the  formula reduces  to 

10! 

2(5!) (5!) 

content of each half [part] before looking at component 
intercorrelations. 

When factor  analysis  is done  before  the purification 
steps  suggested  heretofore,  there  seems  to  be  a  ten- 
dency  to  produce  many  more  dimensions  than  can 
be  conceptually  identified.  This  effect  is  partly  due 
to the "garbage items"  which do not have the common 
core  but  which  do  produce  additional  dimensions  in 
the  factor  analysis.  Though  this  application  may  be 
satisfactory  during  the  early  stages  of  research  on 
a construct,  the use of factor analysis in a confirmatory 
fashion  would  seem  better  at  later  stages.  Further, 
theoretical  arguments support the iterative  process  of 
the  calculation  of  coefficient  alpha,  the  elimination 
of items,  and the subsequent  calculation  of  alpha until 
a satisfactory  coefficient  is  achieved.  Factor  analysis 
then  can  be  used  to  confirm  whether  the  number  of 
dimensions conceptualized  can be verified empirically. 

Iteration 

The  foregoing  procedure  can  produce  several  out- 
comes.  The  most  desirable  outcome  occurs  when  the 
measure  produces  a satisfactory  coefficient  alpha (or 
alphas if there are multiple dimensions)  and the dimen- 
sions  agree  with  those  conceptualized.  The  measure 
is  then  ready  for  some  additional  testing  for  which 
a  new  sample  of  data  should  be  collected.  Second, 
factor  analysis  sometimes  suggests  that  dimensions 
which  were  conceptualized  as  independent  clearly 
overlap.  In  this  case,  the  items  which  have  pure 
loadings  on  the  new  factor  can  be  retained  and  a 
new  alpha calculated.  If  this  outcome  is  satisfactory, 
additional testing  with  new  data is  indicated. 

The  third and least  desirable  outcome  occurs  when 
is  too  low  and  restructuring 
the  alpha  coefficient(s) 
of  the  items  forming each  dimension  is  unproductive. 
In this  case,  the  appropriate strategy  is  to  loop  back 
to  steps  1 and  2  and  repeat  the  process  to  ascertain 
what  might  have  gone  wrong.  Perhaps  the  construct 
was  not  appropriately  delineated.  Perhaps  the  item 
pool did not sample all aspects  of the domain.  Perhaps 
the  emphases  within  the  measure  were  somehow 
distorted  in  editing.  Perhaps  the  sample  of  subjects 
was  biased,  or the  construct  so  ambiguous  as  to  defy 
measurement.  The  last  conclusion  would  suggest  a 
fundamental  change  in  strategy,  starting  with  a  re- 
thinking of  the  basic  relationships  that  motivated  the 
investigation  in the  first  place. 

ASSESS  RELIABILITY  WITH NEW  DATA 
The  major source  of  error within a test  or measure 
is  the  sampling  of  items.  If  the  sample  is  appropriate 
and  the  items  "look  right,"  the  measure  is  said  to 
haveface  or content  validity.  Adherence  to  the  steps 
suggested  will tend to produce content  valid measures. 
But  that is  not  the  whole  story!  What about  transient 
personal  factors,  or  ambiguous  questions  which  pro- 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

70 

duce guessing, or any of the other extraneous influ- 
ences,  other than the sampling of  items, which tend 
to produce error in the measure? 

Interestingly, all of  the errors that occur within a 
test can be easily encompassed by the domain sampling 
model. All  the  sources of  error occurring within a 
measurement will tend to lower the average correlation 
among the  items  within the  test,  but  the  average 
correlation is all that is needed to estimate the reliabil- 
ity.  Suppose, for  example, that one of  the items is 
vague and respondents have  to  guess  its  meaning. 
This guessing will  tend to  lower  coefficient  alpha, 
suggesting there is error in the measurement. Subse- 
quent calculation of item-to-total correlations will then 
suggest this item for elimination. 

Coefficient alpha is the basic statistic for determin- 
ing  the  reliability of  a  measure based  on  internal 
consistency.  Coefficient alpha does  not  adequately 
estimate, though, errors caused by  factors external 
to the instrument, such as differences in testing situa- 
tions and respondents over  time.  If  the  researcher 
wants  a  reliability coefficient  which  assesses  the 
between-test error, additional data must be collected. 
It is  also advisable to collect additional data to  rule 
out the possibility that the previous findings are due 
to chance. If the construct is more than a measurement 
artifact, it  should be  reproduced when the purified 
sample of  items  is  submitted to  a  new  sample of 
subjects. 

Because  Peter's  article treats the  assessment  of 
reliability, it is not examined here except to  suggest 
that test-retest reliability should not be used. The basic 
problem with straight test-retest reliability is respon- 
dents' memories. They will tend to reply to an item 
the same way in a second administration as they did 
in  the  first.  Thus,  even  if  an  analyst were  to  put 
together an instrument in which the items correlate 
poorly, suggesting there is no common core and thus 
no  construct,  it  is  possible  and  even  probable  that 
the responses to each item would correlate well across 
the two  measurements. The high correlation of  the 
total scores on the two tests would suggest the measure 
had small measurement error when in fact very little 
is  demonstrated about validity by straight test-retest 
correlations. 

ASSESS CONSTRUCT VALIDITY 
Specifying the domain of the construct, generating 
items  that  exhaust  the  domain,  and  subsequently 
purifying the resulting scale should produce a measure 
which is  content or face  valid and reliable. It  may 
or may not produce a  measure which has construct 
validity. Construct validity, which lies  at  the  very 
heart of the scientific process, is most directly related 
to  the  question of  what the  instrument is  in  fact 
measuring-what construct, trait, or concept underlies 
a person's performance or score on a measure. 

The preceding steps  should produce an internally 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 1979 

consistent or  internally homogeneous set  of  items. 
Consistency is  necessary but not sufficient for con- 
struct validity (Niunnally, 1967, p. 92). 

Rather, to  establish  the  construct validity of  a 
measure, the analyst also must determine (1) the extent 
to which the measure correlates with other measures 
designed to measure the same thing and (2) whether 
the measure behaves as expected. 
Correlations With Other Measures 

A  fundamental principle in  science  is  that  any 
particular construct or trait should be measurable by 
at least two, and preferably more, different methods. 
Otherwise the  researcher has  no  way  of  knowing 
whether the  trait is  anything but an artifact of  the 
measurement procedure. All the measurements of the 
trait may not be equally good, but science continually 
emphasizes improvement of the measures of the vari- 
ables with which it works. Evidence of the convergent 
validity of  the measure is  provided by the extent to 
which it correlates highly with other methods designed 
to measure the same construct. 

The  measures should have  not  only  convergent 
validity, but also discriminant validity. Discriminant 
validity is the extent to which the measure is indeed 
novel  and  not  simply  a  reflection of  some  other 
variable. As Campbell and Fiske (1959) persuasively 
argue, "Tests can be invalidated by too high correla- 
tions with other tests from which they were intended 
to differ" (p. 81). Quite simply, scales that correlate 
too  highly may be  measuring the  same rather than 
different constructs. Discriminant validity is indicated 
by "predictably low correlations between the measure 
of  interest and other measures that are supposedly 
not measuring the same variable or concept" (Heeler 
and Ray, p. 362). 

A  useful  way  of  assessing  the  convergent and 
discriminant validity of  a  measure is  through the 
multitrait-multimethod matrix, which is  a  matrix of 
zero order correlations between different traits when 
each of  the traits is  measured by different methods 
(Campbell and Fiske,  1959). Table 1, for example, is 
the matrix for a Likert type of  measure designed to 
assess  salesperson job  satisfaction (Churchill et  al., 
1974). The  four  essential elements  of  a  multitrait- 
multimethod matrix are identified by the numbers in 
the upper left corner of each partitioned segment. 

Only the  reliability diagonal (1) corresponding to 
the Likert measure is shown; data were not collected 
for the thermometer scale because it was not of interest 
itself.  The entries reflect the  reliability of  alternate 
forms  administered two  weeks  apart. If  these  are 
unavailable, coefficient alpha can be used. 

Evidence about the convergent validity of a measure 
is provided in the validity diagonal (3) by the extent 
to  which the  correlations are significantly different 
from zero and sufficiently large to encourage further 
examination of  validity. The validity coefficients  in 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

PARADIGM FOR DEVELOPING MEASURES OF MARKETING CONSTRUCTS 

71 

Table  1 
MULTITRAIT-MULTIMETHOD 

MATRIX 

Method 

l--Likert 

Scale 

Method  2--Thermometer 

Scale 

Job 
Satisfaction 

Role 
Conflict 

Role 

Ambiguity 

Job 
Satisfaction 

Role 
Conflict 

Role 
Ambiguity 

Job  Satisfaction 

Method 
Likert 

1-- 
Scale 

Role  Conflict 

Role  Ambiguity 

Job  Satisfaction 

- 

5 

.4 082 

-.0546 

2-- 
Method 
Thermometer 
Scale 

Role  Conflict 

-.239 

4 

Role  Ambiguity 

-.  252 

.141 

.464 

Table  1  of  .450,  .395  and  .464  are  all  significant  at 
the  .01 level. 

Discriminant validity,  however,  suggests  three com- 

parisons,  namely  that: 

1.  Entries in the validity diagonal (3) should be higher 
than the correlations that occupy the same row and 
column in  the  heteromethod block (4).  This is  a 
minimum requirement as it  simply means that the 
correlation between two different measures of  the 
same variable should be higher than the correlations 
"between that variable and any other variable which 
has neither trait nor method in common" (Campbell 
and Fiske, 1959, p. 82). The entries in Table 1 satisfy 
this condition. 

2.  The validity coefficients (3) should be higher than 
the correlations in the heterotrait-monomethod tri- 
angles (2) which suggests that the correlation within 
a trait measured by different methods must be higher 
than the  correlations between  traits which  have 
method in common. It is a more stringent require- 
ment than that involved in the heteromethod com- 
parisons of  step  1 as the off-diagonal elements in 
the  monomethod blocks may be  high because of 
method variance. The evidence in Table I is consis- 
tent with this requirement. 

3.  The pattern of  correlations should be the same in 
all of  the  heterotrait triangles, e.g.,  both (2)  and 
(4). This requirement is a check on the significance 
of  the traits when compared to  the methods and 
can be  achieved by  rank ordering the correlation 
coefficients in  each  heterotrait triangle; though a 
visual inspection often suffices,  a rank order cor- 

relation coefficient such as the coefficient of  con- 
cordance can be computed if there are a great many 
comparisons. 

The  last  requirement  is  generally,  though  not  com- 
pletely,  satisfied  by  the  data  in  Table  1.  Within each 
heterotrait triangle,  the  pairwise  correlations  are con- 
sistent  in  sign.  Further, when  the  correlations  within 
each  heterotrait  triangle are ranked from largest  posi- 
tive to largest negative,  the same order emerges  except 
for  the  lower  left  triangle in the  heteromethod  block. 
Here  the correlation between  job  satisfaction  and role 
ambiguity  is  higher,  i.e., 
less  negative,  than  that 
between  job  satisfaction  and  role  conflict  whereas 
the  opposite  was  true  in  the  other  three  heterotrait 
triangles  (see  Ford  et  al.,  1975,  p.  107,  as  to  why 
this  single  violation  of  the  desired  pattern  may  not 
represent  a serious  distortion  in the  measure). 

Ideally,  the methods  and traits generating the multi- 
trait-multimethod matrix should  be  as  independent  as 
possible  (Campbell  and  Fiske,  1959,  p.  103).  Some- 
times  the  nature of  the  trait rules  out  the  opportunity 
for measuring it by different  methods,  thus introducing 
the possibility  of method variance.  When this situation 
arises,  the  researcher's  efforts  should  be  directed  to 
obtaining  as  much  diversity  as  possible  in  terms  of 
data sources  and scoring  procedures.  If the  traits  are 
not  independent,  the  monomethod  correlations  will 
be  large  and  the  heteromethod  correlations  between 
traits will  also  be  substantial,  and the  evidence  about 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

72 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 1979 

the discriminant validity of  the measure will not  be 
as  easily established as  when they are independent. 
Thus, Campbell and Fiske (1959, p.  103) suggest that 
it is preferable to include at least two sets of indepen- 
dent traits in the matrix. 

Does  the Measure  Behave as  Expected? 

Internal consistency is a necessary but insufficient 
condition for construct validity. The observables may 
all relate to  the  same  construct, but that does  not 
prove that they relate to  the specific construct that 
motivated the research in the first place. A suggested 
final step  is  to  show  that the  measure behaves  as 
expected in  relation to  other constructs. Thus one 
often  tries  to  assess  whether the  scale  score  can 
differentiate the  positions  of  "known  groups"  or 
whether the  scale  correctly predicts some  criterion 
measure (criterion validity). Does a salesperson's job 
satisfaction, as measured by the scale, for example, 
relate to  the  individual's likelihood of  quitting? It 
should, according to what is known about dissatisfied 
employees; if  it  does  not,  then one  might question 
the quality of the measure of salesperson job satisfac- 
tion.  Note,  though,  there  is  circular logic  in  the 
foregoing argument. The argument rests on four sepa- 
rate propositions (Nunnally, 1967, p. 93): 

of quitting (B) are related. 

1. The constructs job satisfaction (A) and likelihood 
2. The scale X provides a measure of A. 
3.  Y provides a measure of B. 
4.  X and Y correlate positively. 

Only the  fourth proposition is  directly examined 
with empirical data. To establish that X truly measures 
A,  one  must assume that propositions 1 and 3  are 
correct. One must have a good measure for B,  and 
the theory relating A and B must be true. Thus, the 
analyst tries to  establish the construct validity of  a 
measure by relating it to a number of other constructs 
and not  simply one.  Further, one  also  tries to  use 
those theories and hypotheses which have been suffi- 
ciently well scrutinized to inspire confidence in their 
probable truth. Thus, job  satisfaction would not be 
related to  job  performance because  there is  much 
disagreement about  the  relationship between  these 
constructs (Schwab and Cummings, 1970). 

DEVELOPING  NORMS 

Typically, a  raw score on  a measuring instrument 
used in a  marketing investigation is  not  particularly 
informative about the position of  a given object on 
the characteristic being measured because the units 
in which the scale  is  expressed are unfamiliar. For 
example, what does  a  score  of  350  on  a  100-item 
Likert scale with 1-5 scoring imply about a salesper- 
son's job satisfaction? One would probably be tempted 
to conclude that because the neutral position is  3,  a 
350 score with 100 statements implies slightly positive 

attitude or satisfaction. The analyst should be cautious 
in  making such  an  interpretation, though. Suppose 
the  350  score  represents  the  highest  score  ever 
achieved on  this  instrument. Suppose it  represents 
the lowest score. Clearly there is a difference. 

A  better  way  of  assessing  the  position  of  the 
individual on  the  characteristic is  to  compare the 
person's score with the score achieved by other people. 
The technical name for  this process is  "developing 
norms," although it is something everyone does  im- 
plicitly every  day.  Thus, by  saying a  person "sure 
is  tall,"  one  is  saying the individual is  much taller 
than others encountered previously. Each person has 
a mental standard of  what is average, and classifies 
people as tall or short on the basis of how they compare 
with this mental standard. 

In psychological measurement, such processes are 
formalized by making the implicit standards explicit. 
More particularly, meaning is  imputed to  a  specific 
score  in  unfamiliar units by  comparing it  with the 
total distribution of  scores,  and this  distribution is 
summarized by calculating a mean and standard devia- 
tion as  well  as  other statistics such as  centile rank 
of any particular score (see Ghiselli, 1964, p. 37-102, 
for a particularly lucid and compelling argument about 
the need and the procedures for norm development). 
Norm quality is  a function of both the number of 
cases on which the average is based and their repre- 
sentativeness. The larger the  number of  cases,  the 
more stable will be the norms and the more definitive 
will be the conclusions that can be drawn, if the sample 
is representative of the total group the norms are to 
represent. Often it proves necessary to develop distinct 
norms for separate groups, e.g., by sex or by occupa- 
tion. The need for such norms is particularly common 
in  basic  research, although it  sometimes arises  in 
applied marketing research as well. 

Note that norms need not be developed if one wants 
only  to  compare salespersons i  and j  to  determine 
who is more satisfied, or to determine how a particular 
individual's satisfaction has changed over time. For 
these comparisons, all one  needs to  do  is  compare 
the raw scores. 

SUMMA R Y AND  CONCLUSIONS 

The purpose of this article is to outline a procedure 
which can be  followed to  develop better measures 
of marketing variables. The framework represents an 
attempt to unify and bring together in one place the 
scattered bits of information on how one goes about 
developing improved measures and how one assesses 
the quality of the measures that have been advanced. 
Marketers certainly need to pay more attention to 
measure development. Many measures with  which 
marketers now work are woefully inadequate, as the 
many literature reviews suggest. Despite the time and 
dollar costs  associated  with  following  the  process 
suggested here, the payoffs with respect to the genera- 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

PARADIGM FOR DEVELOPING MEASURES OF MARKETING CONSTRUCTS 

73 

tion  of  a  core  body  of  knowledge  are  substantial. 
As Torgerson (1958) suggests in discussing the ordering 
of the various sciences  along a theoretical-correlational 
continuum  (p.  2): 

It is  more than a mere coincidence that the sciences 
would order themselves in  largely the  same  way  if 
they were classified on the basis to which satisfactory 
measurement of  their important variables has  been 
achieved. The  development of  a  theoretical science 
.  .  . would seem to be virtually impossible unless its 
variables can be measured adequately. 

Progress in the development  of marketing as a science 
certainly  will  depend  on  the  measures  marketers  de- 
velop  to  estimate  the  variables  of  interest  to  them 
(Bartels,  1951; Buzzell,  1963; Converse,  1945; Hunt, 
1976). 

Persons  doing research of  a fundamental nature are 
well  advised  to  execute  the  whole  process  suggested 
here.  As  scientists,  marketers  should  be  willing  to 
make  this  committment  to  "quality  research."  Those 
doing  applied  research  perhaps  cannot  "afford"  the 
execution  of  each  and  every  stage,  although  many 
of  their  conclusions  are  then  likely  to  be  nonsense, 
one-time  relationships.  Though  the  point  could  be 
argued at length,  researchers  doing  applied work  and 
practitioners  could  at  least  be  expected  to  complete 
the  process  through  step  4.  The  execution  of  steps 
1-4 can be accomplished  with one-time,  cross-section- 
al data and will  at least  indicate  whether  one  or more 
isolatable  traits  are  being  captured  by  the  measures 
as well  as the quality with which these  traits are being 
assessed.  At  a  minimum  the  execution  of  steps  1-4 
should  reduce  the  prevalent  tendency  to  apply  ex- 
tremely sophisticated  analysis to faulty data and there- 
by execute  still another GIGO routine.  And once  steps 
1-4  are  done,  data  collected  with  each  application 
of  the  measuring  instrument  can  provide  more  and 
more evidence  related to the other steps.  As Ray points 
out  in  the  introduction  to  this  issue,  marketing  re- 
searchers  are already collecting  data relevant  to  steps 
5-8.  They just  need to plan data collection  and analysis 
more  carefully  to  contribute  to  improved  marketing 
measures. 

REFERENCES 
Bartels, Robert. "Can Marketing Be a Science?," Journal 

of Marketing, 15 (January 1951), 319-28. 

Bohmstedt, George W. "Reliability and Validity Assessment 
in  Attitude Measurement," in  Gene F.  Summers, ed., 
Attitude  Measurement.  Chicago:  Rand  McNally  and 
Company, 1970, 80-99. 

Buzzell,  Robert D.  "Is  Marketing a  Science,"  Harvard 
Business Review, 41 (January-February 1963), 32-48. 
Calder, Bobby J. "Focus Groups and the Nature of Qualita- 
tive Marketing Research,"  Journal of Marketing Research, 
14 (August 1977), 353-64. 

Campbell, Donald R.  and Donald W.  Fiske.  "Convergent 

and Discriminant Validation by the Multitrait-Multimethod 
Matrix,"  Psychological  Bulletin,  56 (1959),  81-105. 

Campbell, John P.  "Psychometric Theory," in Marvin D. 
Dunette,  ed.,  Handbook  of Industrial  and  Organizational 
Psychology. Chicago: Rand McNally, Inc., 1976, 185-222. 
Churchill, Gilbert A.,  Jr.,  Neil  M.  Ford, and Orville C. 
Walker, Jr.  "Measuring the  Satisfaction of  Industrial 
Salesmen,"  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  11  (August 
1974), 254-60. 

Converse,  Paul D.  "The  Development of  a  Science  in 
Marketing," Journal of Marketing, 10 (July 1945), 14-23. 
Cronbach, L. J. "Coefficient Alpha and the Internal Struc- 

ture of Tests," Psychometrika, 16 (1951), 297-334. 

Czepeil, John A., Larry J. Rosenberg, and Adebayo Akerale. 
"Perspectives on Consumer Satisfaction," in Ronald C. 
Curhan, ed.,  1974 Combined Proceedings.  Chicago:  Amer- 
ican Marketing Association, 1974, 119-23. 

Flanagan, J. "The Critical Incident Technique," Psychologi- 

cal  Bulletin,  51 (1954),  327-58. 

Ford,  Neil  M.,  Orville C.  Walker, Jr.  and  Gilbert A. 
Churchill, Jr.  "Expectation-Specific Measures of  the 
Intersender Conflict and Role Ambiguity Experienced by 
Industrial  Salesmen,"  Journal  of  Business  Research,  3 
(April 1975), 95-112. 

Gardner, Burleigh B.  "Attitude Research Lacks System to 
Help It Make Sense," Marketing News, 11 (May 5,  1978), 
1+. 

Ghiselli,  Edwin  E.  Theory of  Psychological  Measurement. 

New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1964. 

Heeler, Roger M. and Michael L. Ray. "Measure Validation 
in  Marketing,"  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  9  (No- 
vember 1972), 361-70. 

Howard, John A.  and Jagdish N.  Sheth.  The Theory of 
Buyer Behavior. New  York: John Wiley &  Sons,  Inc., 
1969. 

Hunt, Shelby D.  "The Nature and Scope of  Marketing," 

Journal  of  Marketing, 40 (July  1976),  17-28. 

Jacoby, Jacob.  "Consumer Research: A  State of  the  Art 
Review,"  Journal  of  Marketing, 42 (April  1978),  87-96. 
Kerlinger,  Fred  N.  Foundations  of  Behavioral  Research, 
2nd ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, Inc.,  1973. 
Kollat, David T., James F.  Engel, and Roger D. Blackwell. 
"Current Problems in  Consumer Behavior Research," 
Journal  of Marketing Research  7 (August  1970), 327-32. 
Ley,  Philip.  Quantitative  Aspects  of  Psychological  Assess- 
ment. London: Gerald Duckworth and Company, Ltd., 
1972. 

Nunnally,  Jum  C.  Psychometric  Theory.  New  York:  Mc- 

Graw-Hill Book Company, 1967. 

Schwab, D.  P. and L.  L.  Cummings, "Theories of  Perfor- 
mance and Satisfaction: A Review," Industrial Relations, 
9 (1970), 408-30. 

Selltiz,  Claire, Lawrence S.  Wrightsman, and Stuart W. 
Cook.  Research Methods in Social  Relations,  3rd ed.  New 
York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1976. 

Torgerson,  Warren S.  Theory and Methods  of  Scaling.  New 

York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  1958. 

Tryon, Robert C. "Reliability and Behavior Domain Validity: 
Reformulation and  Historical Critique," Psychological 
Bulletin,  54 (May  1957), 229-49. 

This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.82.205 on Fri, 23 Nov 2012 04:38:10 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions