Journal of Services Marketing
Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations
Jackie L.M. Tam

Article information:

To cite this document:
Jackie L.M. Tam, (2008),"Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations", Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 22 Iss 1
pp. 3 - 12
Permanent link to this document:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/08876040810851914

Downloaded on: 31 January 2016, At: 07:48 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 48 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 4939 times since 2008*

Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:

Jihye Park, Leslie Stoel, (2005),"Effect of brand familiarity, experience and information on online apparel
purchase", International Journal of Retail &amp; Distribution Management, Vol. 33 Iss 2 pp. 148-160 http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/09590550510581476

Elena Delgado-Ballester, Angeles Navarro, María Sicilia, (2012),"Revitalising brands through communication messages: the
role of brand familiarity", European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 46 Iss 1/2 pp. 31-51 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03090561211189220

Carmina Fandos Herrera, Carlos Flavián Blanco, (2011),"Consequences of consumer trust in PDO food
products: the role of familiarity", Journal of Product &amp; Brand Management, Vol. 20 Iss 4 pp. 282-296 http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/10610421111148306

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:198285 []

For Authors

If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com

Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.

Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on
satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam
Department of Management and Marketing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to examine the moderating effects of brand familiarity on satisfaction evaluations and behavioral intentions.
Design/methodology/approach – A longitudinal survey involving pre-purchase measures and post-purchase measures was conducted with
consumers in a restaurant setting. The hypotheses were assessed through LISREL methodology.
Findings – The results showed that there are some similarities and differences among customers with different levels of brand familiarity regarding
satisfaction formation and behavioral intentions.
Research limitations/implications – A self-reported item was used to measure brand familiarity. Although there was some evidence to support that
the measure captured what it was intended to measure, it would be desirable to develop a multi-item scale for this construct. There is also a need to
extend the ﬁndings to other service industries.
Practical implications – Marketers should familiarize customers with a service while capturing opportunities to create a positive experience to gain
customers’ future purchases.
Originality/value – The study offers some insights into the effects of brand familiarity on satisfaction evaluations and behavioral intentions. It is
particularly relevant for marketing services that are high in experience qualities.

Keywords Brand awareness, Customer satisfaction

Paper type Research paper

An executive summary for managers can be found at
the end of this article.

Introduction

satisfaction continues

to draw interest and
Customer
attention among academics and practitioners alike since it is
a necessary precondition to succeed in highly competitive
markets. The most prominent conceptual model that explains
the customer satisfaction formation process is the expectancy-
disconﬁrmation model. Despite much effort having been
devoted to understanding the satisfaction formation process,
the results of various studies have been inconsistent. Johnson
and Fornell (1991) suggest that differences found in studies of
the effects of expectations, disconﬁrmation and perceptions of
performance on satisfaction may be attributable to individual
differences
category differences.
Churchill and Surprenant (1982) suggest that the process of
types of
satisfaction formation may vary for different
products/services.

and product/service

While familiarity has been used to explain the differences in
information acquisition and choice behavior, little has been
studied of
its effects on post-purchase evaluations. Do
customers who are familiar with a brand evaluate their
satisfaction with the brand’s performance in a similar manner

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0887-6045.htm

as customers who are not familiar with the brand? This is an
intriguing issue, particularly for services that are high in
experience qualities in which customers can only evaluate
during consumption. Customers are likely to have less well-
formed expectations of its performance since prior beliefs
about a brand’s performance are only veriﬁable through
consumption experience (Hoch and Deighton, 1989). It is
expected that low familiarity customers would exert a greater
cognitive effort in evaluating a brand’s performance, and that
they are likely to experience some disconﬁrmation of their
expectations. On the other hand, high familiarity customers
may require less cognitive effort in evaluating a brand’s
performance due to the fact that they have already established
some rules and have a better knowledge structure (Alba and
Hutchinson, 1987). Moreover, if high familiarity customers
continue to make repeat purchases in a competitive market,
they presumably have some positive evaluations of the brand
(Johnson and Fornell, 1991). It is reasonable to predict that
the relationship between customer satisfaction and repeat
purchase is stronger for high familiarity customers than for
low familiarity customers.

There is little research available on the effects of brand
familiarity on post-purchase evaluations. The objective of this
study is to examine the moderating effects of brand familiarity
on satisfaction and behavioral
speciﬁcally
repurchase and recommendation intentions. The study
extends the relationship between satisfaction and behavioral
intentions to include post-consumption expectations. These

intentions,

Journal of Services Marketing
22/1 (2008) 3–12
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 0887-6045]
[DOI 10.1108/08876040810851914]

Received: July 2005
Revised: December 2005
Accepted:

January 2006

3

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Johnson and Fornell (1991) expect that experience has an
effect on satisfaction evaluations. From a dynamic
perspective, they argue that as experience increases, not
only expectations become entrenched, but they may also
coincide with perceived performance, and less likely result in
disconﬁrmation. This may suggest that satisfaction is not
inﬂuenced by disconﬁrmation but accumulated experience.
Zajonc and Markus (1982) suggest that familiarity may lead
to positive evaluations of a service or object. When confronted
with a familiar service/brand, the consumer may feel a glow of
warmth and intimacy.

Research framework and hypotheses

this

study expands

intentions. Moreover,

the
The research framework for
expectancy-disconﬁrmation model by incorporating brand
familiarity as a moderator of satisfaction evaluations and
behavioral
post-consumption
expectations are included in the model as they are expected
role in inﬂuencing post-purchase
to play an important
behavior. Previous studies have devoted considerable effort
to understanding the relationship between satisfaction and
loyalty, but incorporation of the post-hoc expectations to
predict repurchase and recommendation behavior is scarce
(Yi and La, 2004).

Expectations are a dynamic phenomenon as they are
continuously updated based on new information. There is
some empirical support
for the effect of experience on
expectations (Dorsch et al., 2000; Johnson and Mathews,
1997; Tam, 2005; Yi and La, 2004). Anderson and Sullivan
(1993) suggest
that disconﬁrmation inﬂuences customer
satisfaction, and in turn may lead to an adjustment of
expectations toward the next purchase. In line with this, Rust
and Oliver (2000) indicated that delighting customers by
delivering a service beyond the normal expected range would
heighten repurchase expectations and make it more difﬁcult
to satisfy the customers in the future. This supports the
notion that expectations are dynamic, that is, they change
based on new information acquired from service experience,
and these updated expectations will
inﬂuence customers’
intentions regarding repurchase and recommendation to
others. Based on this discussion and consistent with prior
research by Yi and La (2004), it is posited that satisfaction
inﬂuence post-hoc expectations, which in turn will
will
inﬂuence behavioral
intentions. Figure 1 presents the
research framework for this study.

Figure 1 Framework for customer satisfaction and behavioral
intentions

are expectations updated through consumption experience,
and should be instrumental in predicting repeat purchases.
Review of the literature has found that only Yi and La’s
(2004)
research has considered the effects of post-
consumption expectations on repeat purchase behavior.

In the next section, a review of the literature on customer
satisfaction and familiarity is presented,
followed by a
discussion of the development of the research framework
and hypotheses. The methodology of
the study is then
described, and the analysis and results are presented. Lastly,
the managerial implications of the results are discussed and
some suggestions for future research are offered.

Literature review

Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction is deﬁned as an emotional state that
occurs in response to the evaluation of a service (Cadotte
et al., 1987; Westbrook, 1981). Oliver (1980) considers that
the evaluative process involves disconﬁrmed expectations and
customers’ expectations about a service. This process is
referred to as expectancy disconﬁrmation in the satisfaction
literature. Oliver (1980) posited expectations as adapted
standards which provide a frame of reference for customers’
there is a disparity between
If
evaluative judgments.
expectations
performance,
perceptions
disconﬁrmation occurs, which in turn may affect the level of
satisfaction. Churchill and Surprenant (1982) were among
the ﬁrst to extend this model to include a direct effect of
perceived performance on satisfaction. Other studies have
also extended the model to include post-purchase behavioral
intentions (Gupta and Stewart, 1996; Yoon and Kim, 2000).
Recent research has included involvement as a moderator of
satisfaction evaluations (Bolﬁng and Woodruff, 1988; Spreng
and Sonmez, 2000, 2001).

and

of

Brand familiarity
Alba and Hutchison (1987) deﬁned familiarity as the number of
product-related/service-related experiences that have been
accumulated by the consumer. These related experiences
include direct and indirect experiences such as advertising
exposures,
interactions with salespersons, word of mouth
communications, trial and consumption. Johnson and Russo
(1984) viewed familiarity as being synonymous with
knowledge.
(1988) considered
experience contributing to familiarity. Review of the literature
indicates that knowledge, experience and familiarity are closely
related. Following Alba and Hutchison’s (1987) deﬁnition,
brand familiarity is deﬁned as the accumulated related
experiences that customers have had with a brand.

Johnson and Kellaris

Studies have shown that familiarity inﬂuences consumers’
decision-making process (Bettman and Park, 1980; Park and
Lessig, 1981), the relationship between price and quality
(Johnson and Kellaris, 1988), and advertising effectiveness
(Campbell and Keller, 2003). So¨ derlund (2002) showed that
satisfaction and behavioral intentions are different between
high and low familiarity customers in extreme conditions that
is, either high performance or low performance,
in an
experimental setting. However, the effects of familiarity on the
evaluation process of satisfaction and the relationship between
satisfaction and behavioral intentions have not been explored.

4

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Effects of brand familiarity on satisfaction
formation process

In some cases,

Expectations inﬂuence consumers’ choices of brand or type of
service (Spreng et al., 1993). In a normal purchase situation,
if customers anticipate that brand A’s performance is better
than that of other brands, then they will choose and consume
brand A, on the assumption that all other factors are equal.
However, since services are intangible, customers who are not
familiar with a brand are less likely to accurately anticipate the
their
level of services to be received.
expectations may be inﬂated by their wishes to get the best
out of the deal or by exaggerated marketing practice. Contrary
to this, Kopalle and Lehmann (2001) drew on cognitive
dissonance theory, arguing that customers may understate
expectations in order to avoid disappointment or to justify
purchase decision. There is empirical evidence to show that
expectations have a negative effect on disconﬁrmation
(Cadotte et al., 1987; Patterson, 1993; Spreng et al., 1996).
With little knowledge or experience, it is expected that there is
high uncertainty about the prediction of outcome among low
familiarity customers. Consequently, they are more likely to
result
in high disconﬁrmation than moderate and high
familiarity customers.

Perceived performance has

effect
on
a positive
disconﬁrmation, which in turn inﬂuences
satisfaction
(Montfort et al., 2000; Patterson et al., 1997). The higher a
performance, the more likely that customers’ expectations will
be exceeded, thus resulting in positive disconﬁrmation, and
leading to satisfaction. On the other hand,
the lower a
performance, the less likely that customers’ expectations will
be met,
thus resulting in negative disconﬁrmation, and
leading to dissatisfaction. Low familiarity customers are likely
to rely on perceptions of performance during consumption to
verify prior beliefs, and subsequently use disconﬁrmation to
evaluate satisfaction. When customers are experiencing an
unfamiliar brand, they are more likely to have the goal of
learning about and forming an accurate impression of the
brand (Campbell and Keller, 2003). On the other hand, high
familiarity customers with some established rules and
knowledge structure may be less motivated to learn from
consumption experience (Hoch and Deighton, 1989).
Disconﬁrming evidence in one particular instance may be
irrelevant to the validity of a rule (Hoch, 1984). It is expected
that the effect of perceived performance on disconﬁrmation,
and the effect of disconﬁrmation on satisfaction are stronger
low familiarity customers than for high familiarity
for
customers.

Perceived performance has a positive effect on satisfaction.
This effect has been found in a number of studies, despite
different types of products/services investigated and different
involvement (Churchill and Surprenant, 1982;
customer
Gupta and Stewart, 1996; Liljander and Strandvik, 1993;
Spreng and Sonmez, 2000, 2001). Familiarity may have a
positive effect on evaluations of a service (Zajonc and Markus,
1982). An individual develops stronger associations to a
stimulus as exposure increases. If previous encounters are
positive, one additional encounter
is likely to produce
increased liking. On the other hand, if previous encounters
are negative, one additional encounter is likely to produce
increased disliking (So¨ derlund, 2002). These associations

tend to be of similar valence, that is, a positively evaluated
stimulus produces positive associations, and a negatively
evaluated stimulus produces negative associations (Grush,
1976). This leads us to suggest that the effect of perceived
performance on satisfaction is stronger for high and moderate
familiarity customers than for low familiarity customers.
Based on the preceding discussions, the following hypotheses
are proposed:
H1. The effect of expectations on disconﬁrmation differs

H2. The

effect

among high, moderate and low familiarity customers
on
perceived
disconﬁrmation differs among high, moderate and
low familiarity customers

performance

of

H3. The effect of disconﬁrmation on satisfaction differs

among high, moderate and low familiarity customers

H4. The effect of perceived performance on satisfaction
differs among high, moderate and low familiarity
customers

Effects of brand familiarity on behavioral
intentions

than

among

that
is

intentions

experienced

In a competitive market, consumers generally do not continue
to purchase a brand toward which they are ambivalent or of
which they hold negative evaluations (Johnson and Fornell,
1991). If a customer continues to make repeat purchases, this
may suggest that she/he has some positive evaluations for the
brand. It is likely that a stronger attitude and behavior link
exists for high familiarity customers than for moderate and
low familiarity customers. The relationship between
satisfaction and loyalty was found to be stronger among
online
online
customers
inexperienced customers (Rodgers et al., 2005).
is
It
the effect of satisfaction on
reasonable to posit
for high familiarity
stronger
behavioral
customers than for moderate and low familiarity customers.
The earlier discussion suggests that satisfaction affects post-
consumption expectations, which in turn affects behavioral
intentions. These effects are likely to be stronger among low
familiarity customers as they learn through consumption
experience. Having developed relatively weak associations
with the brand, post-consumption expectations are expected
to continue to play an important
role in determining
repurchase behavior. However, high familiarity customers
with extensive knowledge and experience tend to develop
consistent expectations, and it is less likely that a consumption
experience would signiﬁcantly change them. Based on the
preceding discussions, the following hypotheses are proposed:
satisfaction on repurchase and
H5. The effect of
recommendations differs among high, moderate and
low familiarity customers

H6. The effect of satisfaction on post-hoc expectations
differs among high, moderate and low familiarity
customers

H7. The effect of post-hoc expectations on repurchase and
recommendation intentions differs among high,
moderate and low familiarity customers

5

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Research population and setting

The study was conducted among Chinese consumers in Hong
Kong in the People’s Republic of China. Family/popular
chains of restaurants which offer table service and extensive
menus were chosen for the study. While restaurants possess
search qualities such as exterior and interior decoration, they
are high in experience qualities in which customers can only
evaluate during consumption, such as service delivery,
attitudes and manner. Alba and Hutchinson (1987) suggest
that an appropriate range of experience should be covered
when measuring familiarity. Since the purpose of this study
was to assess the impact of
familiarity on post-purchase
evaluations in a natural setting, the restaurants chosen were at
different locations, enabling the study to generate a sample of
customers with diverse demographics and levels of familiarity
with the restaurant.

Methodology

A longitudinal survey involving pre-purchase measures and
post-purchase measures was conducted over a two-month
period. The pre-purchase survey measured customer
familiarity, ease of making the patronage decision, dining
the
experience, and expectations of various aspects of
restaurant service including food, process, service personnel
and environment. The post-purchase survey measured
customers’ perceptions of
the restaurant’s performance,
satisfaction, post-hoc expectations, behavioral intentions and
demographic questions. Data were collected from consumers
at two points in time, before and after dining at the restaurant.
An identical number was used for matching the pre-purchase
survey with post-purchase survey.

Pre-purchase measures
The measures used in this study are adapted from a review of
the literature. The expectation measure included twenty-ﬁve
restaurant attributes and one overall item. These attributes
were identiﬁed in a previous study (Tam, 2005). Participants
were asked to indicate the level of service that they would
expect to receive from the restaurant on the twenty-ﬁve
attributes (e.g., “please rate the level of service performance
you expect this restaurant will deliver on the attributes”). The
scale was 7-point with anchors at 1 “poor” and 7 “excellent”.
Customer familiarity was a self-reported measure: “How
familiar are you with this restaurant with respect to food,
service and environment?” (Johnson and Russo, 1984). The
7-point scale was anchored at 1 “not familiar at all” and 7
“very familiar”. Familiarity is highly related to experience
(Alba and Hutchinson, 1987) and knowledge (Raju et al.,
1995). Highly familiar consumers are more knowledgeable,
thus they are more conﬁdent in making a purchase decision
(Raju et al., 1995). As a validity check, the questionnaire
included measures on frequency of visits and ease of making
the patronage decision.

Post-purchase measures
Customer perceptions of performance were measured using
the twenty-ﬁve attributes and an overall item on a 7-point
scale with anchors at 1 “poor” and 7 “excellent”.
Disconﬁrmation and post-hoc expectations measures were
adapted from Yi and La (2004). Disconﬁrmation was

the
measured by asking “How did you feel about
performance of this restaurant?” and “Did you feel that the
performance of this restaurant meets your needs?”. The 7-
point scale was anchored at 1 “worse than I expected” and 7
“better than I expected” with “same as I expected” for the
middle point. Post-hoc expectations were measured by two
absolute and one relative scales. The absolute scale asked
respondents to indicate the level of service they would expect
this restaurant to deliver in future and the level of service they
would expect relative to price. Both were measured on a 7-
point
scale, anchored by “poor/excellent” and “not
worthwhile at all/very worthwhile”. The relative scale asked
respondents to indicate their expectations of
the service
relative to the ones prior to consumption on a 7-point scale,
which was anchored by “worse than prior expectations/better
than prior expectation”, with “same as prior expectations” for
the middle point. Customer satisfaction was measured with
three 7-point scales anchored by “very dissatisﬁed/very
satisﬁed”, “very unpleasant/very pleasant” and “I enjoyed it
very much/I did not enjoy it at all”. These scales were utilized
to capture both the cognitive and the emotional nature of this
construct (Hausknecht, 1990). Behavioral
intentions were
measured by three future purchase intention items and two
recommendation intention items. They were measured on a
7-point scale with anchors “deﬁnitely will not/deﬁnitely will”.
The post-purchase measures also included demographic
questions. The questionnaire was pretested prior to the ﬁeld
survey to assure its clarity and readability.

Data collection
Participants were selected before they entered the restaurants.
interviews were used to obtain the pre-purchase
Personal
responses because interviewers needed to ensure the
participants understood the questions and the data
collection procedure. Post-purchase evaluations were self-
administered. The participants were given the second part of
the questionnaire with a return envelope and a cover letter
requesting them to complete and return the questionnaire
after dining at the restaurant. An incentive was used as a
token of appreciation to encourage their participation.

Four interviewers were recruited to conduct the personal
interviews. They were marketing graduates of a large
university in Hong Kong and all had received formal
interview training. A brieﬁng session was held with the
interviewers to explain the objective,
the questionnaire
content and the sampling procedure. This was important to
ensure that the selection of the participants and the interviews
were conducted in a consistent manner. A total of 505 pre-
purchase questionnaires were completed but only 378
participants returned the post-purchase questionnaires,
representing a 74.9 percent return rate. T-tests and chi-
square analysis were performed, and there was no signiﬁcant
difference in expectations and demographic characteristics
between respondents who had returned questionnaires and
those who had not. Twelve returned questionnaires were
discarded due to many responses missing on key measures or
the demographics of the respondents not corresponding to
earlier responses. The number of valid responses for analysis
was 366.

6

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Sample
The sample consisted of 37 percent males, and 63 percent
females. The age of the sample was fairly evenly distributed
except in the “18-24” group, which accounted for a slightly
higher percentage (22.1), and the “above 50” group, which
accounted for a lower percentage (6.8). The median personal
monthly income was between $10,001 and $15,000, and
about 52 percent of participants had attained secondary
education. Table I presents the demographic characteristics of
the respondents.

Analysis and results

Reliability and validity checks
Familiarity was measured by a single item, and its validity was
assessed by how well this measure related to the measures of
other constructs to which the construct ‘familiarity’ was
theoretically related (Churchill and Iacobucci, 2002). The
correlation between experience and familiarity was 0.78
( p , 0.00). This supports the contention that familiarity is
highly associated with experience, which is consistent with the
literature. The sample was
into three groups.
Respondents rated 3 or less on the familiarity scale were
classiﬁed as falling into the low familiarity group, those rated
4 as falling into the moderate familiarity group, and those

split

Table I Demographic characteristics of the respondents

rated 5 or above as falling into the high familiarity group. The
resultant sizes of the three groups were 153, 108 and 105
respondents respectively. Analysis of variance showed that
there was a signiﬁcant difference in the ease with which
restaurant patrons made the decision to dine among the three
groups (F ¼ 34:17, p ¼ 0:00). High familiarity customers on
average felt more at ease making that decision than moderate
and low familiarity customers ðx ¼ 5:65 v. x ¼ 4:89 and
x ¼ 4:36). This provides some evidence to support the validity
of this measure.

Reliability analyses were performed of

the multiple
measures, with the Cronbach alpha ranging from 0.87 to
0.94. The perceived performance scale achieved a high
reliability of alpha 0.96, expectation (0.95), disconﬁrmation
(0.84), customer satisfaction (0.91), post-hoc expectations
(0.87), and behavioral intentions (0.94). Conﬁrmatory factor
analysis using LISREL was performed to assess the validity of
the measures. In order to maintain parsimony in the number
of indicators in the model, expectation was measured by the
overall item measure and the multi-item measure whereby the
responses to the individual expectation attributes were
averaged. Similarly, perceived performance was measured by
the overall item measure and the multi-item measure whereby
the responses to the individual performance attributes were
averaged (Hair et al., 1998). Disconﬁrmation was measured
by two indicators, customer satisfaction by three indicators,
post-hoc expectations by three indicators, and behavioral
intentions by ﬁve indicators.

Demographic characteristics

Sex
Male
Female

Age
18-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50 or above

Marital status
Single
Married
Divorced

Educational attainment
Primary or below
Secondary
Post-secondary
Tertiary or above

Personal monthly income (HK$)
5000 or below
5,001-10,000
10,001-15,000
15,001-20,000
20,001-25,000
25,001-30,000
30,001 or above

n

135
231

81
52
58
51
53
46
25

164
231
4

20
189
48
108

56
102
81
39
21
19
27

%

36.9
63.1

22.1
14.2
15.8
13.9
14.5
12.6
6.8

45.2
53.7
1.1

5.5
51.8
12.1
29.6

16.2
29.6
23.5
11.3
6.1
5.5
7.8

7

item was highly

Measurement model
The conﬁrmatory factor analysis showed a moderate ﬁt with
x2 statistic ¼ 330:50 (104 degrees of freedom), GFI ¼ 0:90
and RMSEA ¼ 0:077. The results were closely examined to
identify any possible causes of misﬁt. The standardized
residual of covariance between one of the disconﬁrmation
items and the relative post-hoc expectation item was 8.22,
which was considered very large compared to standardized
residuals of covariances among other item (Sharma, 1996).
The correlation analysis showed that the relative post-hoc
correlated with this
expectations
disconﬁrmation item than with the other
two post-hoc
expectations items. Exploratory factor analysis also showed
that the relative post-hoc expectations item heavily loaded on
the disconﬁrmation factor. Based on these results and the
wording of the item, it appears that this item on “customer
expectations relative to the ones prior to consumption” was
than post-hoc
measuring adjusted expectations
expectations, hence it was removed from further analysis.
There was no change in the Cronbach alpha for the post-hoc
expectations scale after this item was removed (a ¼ 0:87).
The revised measurement model produced a x2 statistic ¼
freedom), GFI ¼ 0:93 and
236:31 (89 degrees
RMSEA ¼ 0:067. The results suggest a reasonably good ﬁt.
The squared multiple correlations were all met the 0.50
threshold suggested by Fornell and Larcker (1981). The t-
statistics showed that the factor loadings were signiﬁcant (all
were greater than 1.96).

rather

of

Test for metric invariance
Establishment of metric invariance is a logical prerequisite for
the structural relations between constructs across groups to be

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

signiﬁcant

compared meaningfully (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998;
Yoo, 2002). The equality of metric invariance among the low,
moderate and high familiar groups was assessed by multiple
sample analysis using LISREL. The covariance matrix was
computed separately for each group. Each measurement
model was speciﬁed as described previously. The full metric
invariance was not supported, as the chi-square difference
between the nonrestricted model and the full metric
ð32Þ ¼ 112:43,
invariance model was
p , 0.00). The invariance factor loading was relaxed one at
a time, following the recommendations of Steenkamp and
Baumgartner (1998) and Byrne (1998). A partial metric
invariance model with three factor loadings were relaxed for
the moderate familiar group, and three factor loadings were
relaxed for the high familiar group. Further relaxing the factor
loading did not improve the x2 statistic signiﬁcantly. The ﬁt of
the model was better than the full metric invariance model x2
d
ð6Þ ¼ 50:9, p , 0.00). The alternative ﬁt indices as suggested
by Steenkamp and Baumgartner (1998) have also improved;
CFI ¼ 0:97,
and
NNFI ¼ 0:97. This partial metric invariance was used in
subsequent analyses. The results are presented in Table II.

CAIC ¼ 1084:44

RESEA ¼ 0:092,

(x2
d

Hypotheses tests
The structural model was speciﬁed as in Figure 1, and
multiple sample analysis using LISREL was adopted. This
technique had the advantage of estimating the multiple and
interrelationships whilst accounting for the measurement
errors (Hair et al., 1998). Separate covariance matrix, means
and standard deviations for the three groups were used as
input. The structural estimates were constrained to be equal
across three groups and the x2 statistic was compared with the
x2 statistic of the model in which the structural estimates were
ð14Þ ¼ 31:42,
relaxed. The chi-square difference
p , 0.00) suggested that the structural estimates were not
equal across three groups. Table III presents the results of
unconstrained structural estimates and constrained structural
estimates.

(x2
d

through

intentions

behavioral

For the high familiarity group, perceived performance
inﬂuenced satisfaction, which in turn directly and indirectly
inﬂuenced
post-hoc
expectations. Disconﬁrmation and prior expectations did
not exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence on satisfaction. Unlike for their
high familiar counterpart, expectations were found to exert a
signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on disconﬁrmation, which in turn
inﬂuenced satisfaction and, directly and indirectly also
post-hoc
inﬂuenced
expectations for the low familiarity group. For the moderate
familiarity group, perceived performance directly affected
satisfaction, which in turn directly affected post-hoc
expectations and indirectly affected behavioral
intentions
through post-hoc expectations.

behavioral

intentions

through

To assess the hypotheses formally,

the methodology
adopted was described as follows. An initial baseline model

Table II Results of test for metric invariance

Chi-square df CFI RMSEA CAIC NNFI

Full metric invariance
Partial metric invariance

769.50
718.60

361 0.96 0.097 1093.83 0.96
355 0.97 0.092 1084.44 0.97

8

was estimated by relaxing the structural paths across three
groups. A structural estimate was then constrained to be equal
across three groups, and the x2 statistic of this nested model
was compared with the ones of the baseline model. The
difference between chi-square statistics for the nested models
is itself asymptotically distributed as chi-square, with degrees
of freedom equal to the difference in the degrees of freedom
for the two models (Steiger et al., 1985). A signiﬁcant chi-
square difference suggested that the structural estimate for the
three groups is different. The procedure was repeated until all
the structural estimates were assessed. The results showed
that three structural estimates were signiﬁcantly different at
the 5 percent
level, while one structural estimate was
signiﬁcantly different among the three groups at the 10
percent level. Based on these results, H1, H4 and H6 were not
supported, while H2, H5 and H7 were supported at the 5
percent level and H3 was supported at the 10 percent level.
Table IV presents the results.

Discussion

This study shows that the effect of perceived performance on
disconﬁrmation, the effect of disconﬁrmation on satisfaction,
and the effect of post-hoc expectations on behavioral intentions
were stronger for the low familiarity group. Consistent with
prior beliefs, the effect of satisfaction on behavioral intentions
was stronger for the high familiarity group. There was no
difference in the effect of perceived performance on
satisfaction, and the effect of satisfaction on post-hoc
expectations across the three groups.

The rather unexpected result is the effect of expectations on
disconﬁrmation. In the model with all structural estimates
unconstrained, negative effects were found for low and
moderate familiarity groups, and no signiﬁcant effect for high
familiarity group, yet the chi-square difference test showed
that the effect was not signiﬁcantly different across the three
groups. The reason may be that the differences in the effects
between low and moderate familiarity groups, and between
moderate and high familiarity groups, were small and that
they were not
found to be signiﬁcantly different when
comparing across three groups.

Managerial implications

Expectations play an important role in satisfaction and
repurchase behavior among low familiarity customers. They
inﬂuence satisfaction through disconﬁrmation, and strongly
determine repurchase and referral behavior. The results
conﬁrm Hoch and Deighton’s (1989) suggestion that in an
unambiguous experience, customers can quickly learn during
consumption experience. Although expectations are held with
some uncertainty before purchase, customers would learn
through the experience and update expectations accordingly.
Care should be taken to avoid overly promising customers as a
shortfall of expectations can have a great
impact on
satisfaction and repurchase behavior.

To inﬂuence future purchases among low familiarity
customers, it may be necessary to deliver services beyond
their expectations. It has been stated that this may result in
high expectations which make it harder to satisfy customers in
the future (Rust and Oliver, 2000). However, understanding

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Table III Parameter estimates of constrained model and unconstrained model

Constrained model
Betas and gammas invariant

Standardized
structural
coefﬁcients

t-
values

Low familiar

Standardized
structural
coefﬁcients

t-
values

Unconstrained model
Moderate familiar

Standardized
structural
coefﬁcients

t-
values

High familiar

Standardized
structural
coefﬁcients

t-
values

2 0.29

23.77 *

20.32

23.53 *

2 0.32

2 2.67 *

2 0.10

20.54

10.74 *

1.11

8.63 *

1.06

0.30

0.68

0.89

0.12

0.76

11.49 *

4.10 *

8.54 *

18.70 *

1.14

0.38

0.61

0.91

3.19 *

5.02 *

15.29 *

1.11

20.11

20.67

6.47 *

1.00

5.92 *

2 0.04

2 0.27

0.99

0.90

0.11

0.76

6.06 *

12.13 *

0.57

3.79 *

0.82

0.01

0.93

0.79

0.47

0.40

4.56 *

0.04

6.14 *

7.92 *

3.07 *

2.53 *

Expectations !
Disconﬁrmation
Perceived performance !
Disconﬁrmation
Disconﬁrmation !
Customer satisfaction
Perceived performance !
Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction !
Post-hoc expectations
Customer satisfaction !
Behavioral intentions
Post-hoc expectations !
Behavioral intentions

Notes: Completely standardized structural coefﬁcients with t-values; * Structural coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly different from zero at 5% level

Table IV Results of Chi-square difference test

Expectations ! disconﬁrmation
Perceived performance ! disconﬁrmation
Disconﬁrmation ! customer satisfaction
Perceived performance ! customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction ! post-hoc expectations
Customer satisfaction ! behavioral intentions
Post-hoc expectations ! behavioral intentions

Chi-square
difference
(df 5 2)

0.62
8.98 *
5.36 * *
3
0.06
10.65 *
11.53 *

Notes: * Signiﬁcantly different at 5% level; * * Signiﬁcantly different at
10% level

customers’ expectations and ﬁnding an opportunity to exceed
them is a viable strategy to gain repeat purchases. Firms
should always be responsive to customers’ needs, and
empower staff to incorporate some delightful surprises in
their delivery of services to make the consumption experience
memorable. In services marketing, people are a crucial
element. A warm welcome, and serving with a caring and
responsive attitude can make an ordinary service into a
unique and memorable experience.

The results of this study reveal that the role of expectations
in satisfaction evaluation seems to diminish with experience,
and perceptions of performance appear to dominate among
high familiarity customers. A plausible explanation is that
customers do not actively process expectations when
evaluating familiar stimuli such that a small discrepancy
between expectations and performance perceptions is not
noticed (Oliver, 1989). If there are changes made to the
service, customers might need to devote some effort to learn
and be familiar with those. It is important that ﬁrms conduct

9

thorough pilot
comfortable with changes.

testing to ensure that customers are

A high level of familiarity is desirable as it facilitates the
purchase decision process, and increases conﬁdence in the
purchase. While advertising and public relations can be used
to improve familiarity,
inﬂuential source of
familiarity is direct experience. Marketers can offer some
incentives such as a free trial or coupons to stimulate
consumption, and then, during the consumption, educate and
familiarize customers with the service while using the
opportunity to gain customers’ future purchases.

the most

Limitations and future research

limitations. First,

This study has several
familiarity was
measured using a self-reported single item. Ideally, a multi-
item scale should be used as a single item scale yields
relatively low reliability as documented in the literature.
However, there is some evidence to support the contention
that the measure used in this study captures what it was
intended to measure. It has high face validity, and was highly
it would be desirable to
related to experience. However,
develop a multi-item scale for this construct in future studies.
Second, the study was conducted in the context of the
restaurant industry, thus generalization of the ﬁndings to the
other industries may be limited. Future research is needed to
see if the familiarity effects on satisfaction evaluation would
still hold in a different service setting. Lastly, it has been
shown that expectations are dynamic and change during
consumption (Hamer et al., 1999). Consequently, customers
might not use their prior expectations to assess their
satisfaction
during
consumption, thus reducing the effect of prior expectations
on satisfaction. It has been suggested that customers might
have different
types of expectations when making a
purchasing decision, evaluating satisfaction and considering

expectations

adapted

but

the

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

to revisit (Kopalle and Lehmann, 2001). Understanding the
type of expectations customers use during the purchase and
consumption process is an issue which deserves further
investigation.

References

Alba, J.W. and Hutchinson, J.W. (1987), “Dimensions of
consumer expertise”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 13,
March, pp. 411-54.

Anderson, E. and Sullivan, M. (1993), “The antecedents and
consequences of customer satisfaction for ﬁrms”, Marketing
Science, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 125-43.

Bettman, J. and Park, W. (1980), “Effects of prior knowledge
and experience on consumer decision processes: a protocol
analysis”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 7 No. 3,
pp. 234-48.

Bolﬁng, C. and Woodruff, R. (1988), “Effects of situational
involvement on consumers’ use of standards in satisfaction/
dissatisfaction processes”, Journal of Consumer Satisfaction,
Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior, Vol. 1, pp. 16-24.
(1998), Structural Equation Modeling with
LISREL, PRELIS and SIMPLIS, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah, NJ.

Byrne, B.M.

Cadotte, E., Woodruff, R. and Jenkins, R.

(1987),
“Expectations and norms
in models of consumer
satisfaction”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 24,
August, pp. 305-14.

Campbell, M.C. and Keller, K.L. (2003), “Brand familiarity
and advertising repetition effects”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 30, September, pp. 292-304.

Churchill, G. and Iacobucci, D. (2002), Marketing Research
Methodological Foundations, 8th ed., Harcourt College
Publishers, Orlando, FL.

Churchill, G.A. and Surprenant, C. (1982), “An investigation
into the determinants of customer satisfaction”, Journal of
Marketing Research, Vol. 19, November, pp. 491-504.

Dorsch, M., Grove, S. and Darden, W. (2000), “Consumer
intentions to use a service category”, Journal of Services
Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 92-117.

Fornell, C. and Larcker, D. (1981), “Evaluating structural
equation models with unobservable
and
measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research,
Vol. 24, pp. 337-46.

variables

Grush, J.E. (1976), “Attitude formation and mere exposure
phenomena: a non-artifactual explanation of empirical
ﬁndings”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Vol. 33, pp. 281-90.

Gupta, K. and Stewart, D. (1996), “Customer satisfaction
and customer behavior: the differential role of brand and
category expectations”, Marketing Letters, Vol. 7 No. 3,
pp. 249-63.

Hair, J., Anderson, R., Tatham, R. and Black, W. (1998),
Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings, 5th ed., Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Hamer, L., Liu, B. and Sudharshan, D. (1999), “The effects
of intra-encounter changes in expectations on perceived
service quality models”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 1
No. 3, pp. 275-89.

‘if

(1984), “Hypothesis testing and consumer
Hoch, S.J.
behavior:
it’”,
in Kinnear, T.C. (Ed.), Advances in Consumer Research,
Vol. 11, Association for Consumer Research, Ann Arbor,
MI, pp. 478-83.

don’t mess with

it works,

Hoch, S.J. and Deighton,

J. (1989), “Managing what
consumers learn from experience”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 53, April, pp. 1-20.

Johnson, C. and Mathews, B. (1997), “The inﬂuence of
experience on service expectations”, International Journal of
Service Industry Management, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 290-305.
Johnson, E.J. and Russo, J.E. (1984), “Product familiarity and
learning new information”, Journal of Consumer Research,
Vol. 11, June, pp. 542-50.

Johnson, M.D. and Fornell, C. (1991), “A framework for
comparing customer satisfaction across individuals and
product categories”, Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 12,
pp. 267-86.

Johnson, R. and Kellaris, J. (1988), “An exploratory study of
price/perceived quality relationships among consumer
services”,
in Houston, M. (Ed.), Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 15, Association for Consumer Research,
Provo, UT, pp. 316-22.

Kopalle, P. and Lehmann, D. (2001), “Strategic management
of expectations: the role of disconﬁrmation sensitivity and
perfectionism”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 38,
August, pp. 386-94.

Liljander, V. and Strandvik, T. (1993), “Different comparison
standards as determinants of service quality”, Journal of
Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction, and Complaining
Behavior, Vol. 6, pp. 118-32.

Montfort, K., Masurel, E. and Van Rijn, I. (2000), “Service
satisfaction: a empirical analysis of consumer satisfaction in
ﬁnancial services”, The Service Industries, Vol. 20 No. 3,
pp. 80-94.

Oliver, R. (1980), “A cognitive model of the antecedents and
satisfaction decisions”, Journal of

consequences of
Marketing Research, Vol. 17, November, pp. 460-9.

Oliver, R. (1989), “Processing of the satisfaction response in
consumption: an suggested framework and research
propositions”,
Satisfaction,
Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior, Vol. 2, pp. 1-16.
Park, C.W. and Lessig, V.P. (1981), “Familiarity and its
impact on consumer decision biases and heuristics”, Journal
of Consumer Research, Vol. 8, pp. 223-30.

of Consumer

Journal

Patterson, P. (1993), “Expectations and product performance
as determinants of satisfaction for a high involvement
purchase”, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 5,
pp. 449-65.

Patterson, P., Johnson, L. and Spreng, R. (1997), “Modeling
the determinants of customer satisfaction for business-to-
business professional services”, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 4-17.

Raju, P.S., Lonial, S.C. and Mangold, W.G.

(1995),
“Differential effects of subjective knowledge, objective
knowledge, and usage experience on decision-making:
of Consumer
an exploratory investigation”, Journal
Psychology, Vol. 4, pp. 153-80.

Hausknecht, D. (1990), “Measurement scales in consumer
satisfaction/dissatisfaction”,
Consumer
Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction and Complaining Behavior,
Vol. 3, pp. 1-11.

Journal

of

10

Rodgers, W., Negash,

(2005),
“The moderating effect of on-line experience on the
antecedents
satisfaction”,
consequences of on-line
Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 22, April, pp. 313-31.

Suk, K.

and

S.

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

Rust, R. and Oliver, R. (2000), “Should we delight the
customer?”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 86-94.

Sharma, S. (1996), Applied Multivariate Techniques, John

Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, NY.

So¨ derlund, M. (2002), “Customer familiarity and its effects
intentions”, Psychology

on satisfaction and behavioral
& Marketing, Vol. 19, October, pp. 861-80.

Spreng, R. and Sonmez, E. (2000), “The moderating effect of
satisfaction formation
involvement on the consumer
process”,
(Eds),
Conference Proceedings, Vol. 11, American Marketing
Association, Chicago, IL, pp. 168-74.

in Gundlach, G. and Murphy, P.

Spreng, R. and Sonmez, E. (2001), “Consumer satisfaction
involvement”,
(Eds), Conference

and
in Marshall, G.W. and Grove, S.
Proceedings, Vol. 12, pp. 184-9.

the moderating

effect

of

Spreng, R., Dixon, A. and Olshavsky, R. (1993), “The impact
of perceived value on consumer satisfaction”, Journal of
Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction, and Complaining
Behavior, Vol. 6, pp. 50-5.

Spreng, R., MacKenzie, S. and Olshavsky, R. (1996),
“A re-examination of the determinants of consumer
July,
satisfaction”, Jour nal of Marketing, Vol. 60,
pp. 15-32.

Steenkamp, J.B. and Baumgartner, H. (1998), “Assessing
measurement
invariance in cross-national consumer
research”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 25, June,
pp. 78-90.

Steiger, J.H., Shapiro, A. and Browne, M. (1985), “On the
multivariate asymptotic distribution of sequential chi-
square statistics”, Psychometrika, Vol. 50, pp. 253-64.

Tam, J.L.M. (2005), “Examining the dynamics of consumer
expectations in a Chinese context”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 58, June, pp. 777-86.

Westbrook, R. (1981), “Sources of consumer satisfaction with
retail outlets”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 57, Fall, pp. 8-85.
Yi, Y. and La, S. (2004), “What inﬂuences the relationship
between customer satisfaction and repurchase intention?
Investigating the effects of adjusted expectations and
customer loyalty”, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 21, May,
pp. 351-73.

Yoo, B. (2002), “Cross-group comparisons: a cautionary
note”, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 4, pp. 357-68.
Yoon, S.J. and Kim, J.H. (2000), “An empirical validation of
a loyalty model based on expectation disconﬁrmation”,
Journal of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 120-36.
Zajonc, R.B. and Markus, H. (1982), “Affective and cognitive
factors in preferences”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 9,
September, pp. 123-31.

Further reading

Sujan, M.

(1985), “Consumer knowledge: effects on
judgments”,

evaluation strategies mediating consumer
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 12, June, pp. 31-46.

Corresponding author

Jackie L.M. Tam can be contacted at: msjackie@polyu.edu.hk

11

Executive summary and implications for
managers

This summary has been provided to allow managers and executives
a rapid appreciation of the content of the article. Those with a
particular interest in the topic covered may then read the article in
toto to take advantage of the more comprehensive description of the
research undertaken and its results to get the full beneﬁt of the
material present.

A couple, regular patrons of a restaurant chain, invite another
couple who have never been before to join them for a meal.
Evidently the restaurant management has been doing
something
of mouth
“word
recommendation” and “repeat purchase” goals.

scoring

right,

both

As each couple sits back, relaxes and anticipates the meal,
they are both – probably without being entirely conscious of
the fact – involved in a complex process of evaluating the food
and drink, the ambiance of the place, the courtesy and
friendliness of the staff and, among other things, value for
money.

it

Isn’t

But will these evaluations be working in different ways for
each of them? The regulars will already be in a position to
satisfaction, having had many good
anticipate their
experiences there. They will be hoping their friends are
equally satisﬁed. The newcomers’ expectations will be
somewhat different. Like any new patron of an unfamiliar
service offering, they will have their own views of what to
expect, no doubt heightened by their friends’ glowing reports.
likely that disconﬁrmation theory – whereby
comparison of expectations and actual experience are
conﬁrmed (if there is a match), negatively disconﬁrmed (if
the perception is lower than the expectation), or positively
disconﬁrmed (if the perception is higher than expectation) –
work differently for those who have a pretty good idea of what
to expect and those who lack that familiarity and experience?
And what of other diners who have walked into the
time, without anyone
restaurant
recommending it to them? Maybe they have seen the place
advertised, maybe it is part of a chain and they are familiar
with the brand, or maybe they are taking a chance on the
unknown. Will
the service
experience – both the anticipated and actual – differ from
those other people’s and, if so, how?

their evaluation process of

the very ﬁrst

for

As Jackie L.M. Tam asks: “Do customers who are familiar
with a brand evaluate their satisfaction with the brand’s
performance in a similar manner as customers who are not
familiar with the brand?”

The study examines the moderating effects of brand
familiarity on satisfaction and behavioral
intentions,
speciﬁcally repurchase and recommendation intentions. It
also extends the relationship between satisfaction and
behavioral
post-consumption
to
expectations – expectations updated through experience.

intentions

include

It shows that

the effect of perceived performance on
disconﬁrmation, the effect of disconﬁrmation on satisfaction,
and the effect of post-hoc expectations on behavioral intentions
were stronger for the low familiarity group. Consistent with
prior beliefs, the effect of satisfaction on behavioral intentions
was stronger for the high familiarity group. There was no
difference in the effect of perceived performance on

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction evaluations

Jackie L.M. Tam

Journal of Services Marketing

Volume 22 · Number 1 · 2008 · 3 –12

satisfaction, and the effect of satisfaction on post-hoc
expectations across the groups.

Managers should be aware that expectations play an
important role in satisfaction and repurchase behavior among
low familiarity customers. They inﬂuence satisfaction through
disconﬁrmation, and strongly determine repurchase and
referral behavior. Although expectations are held with some
uncertainty before purchase, customers would learn through
the experience and update expectations accordingly. Care
should be taken to avoid overly promising customers as a
shortfall of expectations can have a great
impact on
satisfaction and repurchase behavior.

To inﬂuence future purchases among low familiarity
customers, it may be necessary to deliver services beyond
their expectations even if this could make it harder to satisfy
customers in the future. However, understanding customers’
expectations and ﬁnding an opportunity to exceed them is a
viable strategy to gain repeat purchases. Firms should always
be responsive to customers’ needs, and empower staff to
incorporate some delightful surprises in their delivery of
services to make the consumption experience memorable. In
services marketing, people are a crucial element. A warm
welcome, and serving with a caring and responsive attitude

can turn an ordinary service into a unique and memorable
one.

that

The study reveals

the role of expectations

in
satisfaction evaluation seems to diminish with experience,
and perceptions of performance appear to dominate among
high familiarity customers. A plausible explanation is that
customers do not actively process expectations when
evaluating familiar stimuli such that a small discrepancy
between expectations and performance perceptions is not
noticed. If there are changes made to the service, customers
might need to devote some effort to learn and be familiar with
those. It is important that ﬁrms conduct thorough pilot
testing to ensure customers are comfortable with changes.

A high level of familiarity is desirable as it facilitates the
purchase decision process, and increases conﬁdence in the
purchase. While advertising and public relations can be used
to improve familiarity, the most inﬂuential source is direct
experience. Marketers can offer incentives such as a free trial
or coupons and then educate and familiarize customers with
the service with a few to future purchases.

(A pre´cis of the article “Brand familiarity: its effects on satisfaction
evaluations”. Supplied by Marketing Consultants for Emerald.)

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

12

Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)This article has been cited by:1.Annie Chen, Norman Peng, Kuang-peng Hung. 2016. Examining guest chefs’ influences on luxury restaurants’ images.International Journal of Hospitality Management 53, 129-132. [CrossRef]2.Hye-Shin Kim, Eun-Young Shin, An Cheng, Sharron J. Lennon, Wing-sun Liu. 2015. Influence of design, workmanship, andfamiliarity on perceptions of country-of-origin apparel brands: A study of consumers in the US, China and Japan. Journal ofGlobal Fashion Marketing 6, 265-277. [CrossRef]3.Gopal Das. 2015. Linkages between self-congruity, brand familiarity, perceived quality and purchase intention: A study of fashionretail brands. Journal of Global Fashion Marketing 6, 180-193. [CrossRef]4.Selin Türkel, Ebru Uzunoğlu, Melike Demirbağ Kaplan, Beril Akıncı Vural. 2015. A Strategic Approach to CSR Communication:Examining the Impact of Brand Familiarity on Consumer Responses. Corporate Social Responsibility and EnvironmentalManagement n/a-n/a. [CrossRef]5.Manuel J. Sánchez-Franco, Eva María Buitrago-Esquinas, Rocío Yñiguez-Ovando. 2015. What drives social integration in thedomain of social network sites?. Online Information Review 39:1, 5-25. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]6.Zuhal Cilingir, Cigdem Basfirinci. 2014. The Impact of Consumer Ethnocentrism, Product Involvement, and Product Knowledgeon Country of Origin Effects: An Empirical Analysis on Turkish Consumers’ Product Evaluation. Journal of InternationalConsumer Marketing 26, 284-310. [CrossRef]7.Gundars Egons Kaupins, James Edward Wanek, Malcolm Paulin Coco. 2014. The Relationship of HR Professionals' OnlineExperiences With Perceptions of Organizational Hiring and Promotion of Online Graduates. Journal of Education for Business89, 222-229. [CrossRef]8.Jackie Tam, Piyush Sharma, Namwoon Kim. 2014. Examining the role of attribution and intercultural competence in interculturalservice encounters. Journal of Services Marketing 28:2, 159-170. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]9.Natalie T. Wood, Janée N. Burkhalter. 2014. Tweet this, not that: A comparison between brand promotions in microbloggingenvironments using celebrity and company-generated tweets. Journal of Marketing Communications 20, 129-146. [CrossRef]10.Sandra A. Vannoy, B. Dawn Medlin, Charlie C. Chen. 2013. Enhancing the Trust of Members in Online Social Networks.International Journal of Virtual Communities and Social Networking 3:10.4018/jvcsn.20111001, 15-31. [CrossRef]11.Cigdem Basfirinci. 2013. Effect of brand origin on brand personality perceptions: an empirical analysis from Turkey. Asia PacificJournal of Marketing and Logistics 25:4, 539-560. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]12.Liyanage Chamila Roshani Perera, Jayawickrama Withanage Dushan Chaminda. 2013. Corporate Social Responsibility andProduct Evaluation: The Moderating Role of Brand Familiarity. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management20:10.1002/csr.v20.4, 245-256. [CrossRef]13.Yi‐Chin Lin. 2013. Evaluation of co‐branded hotels in the Taiwanese market: the role of brand familiarity and brand fit.International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 25:3, 346-364. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]14.Beatriz Moliner Velázquez. 2013. Las experiencias insatisfactorias en restaurantes y el boca-oído negativo. Revista Europea deDirección y Economía de la Empresa 22, 80-88. [CrossRef]15.Soyoung Kim, Hyunjong Chung. 2012. The impacts of perceived fit, brand familiarity, and status consciousness on fashion brandextension evaluation. International Journal of Fashion Design, Technology and Education 5, 203-211. [CrossRef]16.Abhik Roy, Adwait Khare, Ben S.C. Liu, Linda M. Hawkes, Janice Swiatek-Kelley. 2012. An Investigation of Affect of ServiceUsing a LibQUAL+™ Survey and an Experimental Study. The Journal of Academic Librarianship 38, 153-160. [CrossRef]17.Jackie L. M. Tam. 2012. Linking Perceived Service Quality to Relational Outcomes in a Chinese Context. Journal of InternationalConsumer Marketing 24, 7-23. [CrossRef]18.Beatriz Moliner Velázquez, María Fuentes Blasco, Irene Gil Saura, Gloria Berenguer Contrí. 2010. Causes for complainingbehaviour intentions: the moderator effect of previous customer experience of the restaurant. Journal of Services Marketing 24:7,532-545. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]19.Nadia Huitzilin Jiménez, Sonia San Martín. 2010. The role of country-of-origin, ethnocentrism and animosity in promotingconsumer trust. The moderating role of familiarity. International Business Review 19, 34-45. [CrossRef]20.Enhancing the Trust of Members in Online Social Networks 201-217. [CrossRef]Downloaded by New York University At 07:48 31 January 2016 (PT)