TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED

17 August 2022

DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Ines Pfeffer,
Medical School Hamburg, Germany
REVIEWED BY

Thomas Hannan,
Griffith University, Australia
Giorgia Varallo,
University of Parma, Italy
*CORRESPONDENCE

L. Alison Phillips
alisonp@iastate.edu

The utility of the integrated
behavior change model as an
extension of the theory of
planned behavior
Kimberly R. More1 and L. Alison Phillips2*
1
Department of Psychology, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2 Department of
Psychology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States

SPECIALTY SECTION

This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
RECEIVED 10 May 2022
ACCEPTED 05 July 2022
PUBLISHED 17 August 2022
CITATION

More KR and Phillips LA (2022) The
utility of the integrated behavior
change model as an extension of the
theory of planned behavior.
Front. Psychol. 13:940777.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777
COPYRIGHT

© 2022 More and Phillips. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Psychology

Introduction: There are several widely used theories of health behavior
change, which mostly utilize the social cognitive approach. These theories
tend to posit that intention is a direct predictor of behavior, do not include
automatic influences on behavior, and propose a one-size-fits-all theory for
both initiators and maintainers. However, the intention-behavior gap is a wellobserved phenomenon, researchers have highlighted that both automatic
and reflective factors promote behavioral engagement, and predictors of
behavior have been shown to differ between initiators and maintainers—
three issues that necessitate theory advancement. To that end, the present
research compares the utility of the Integrated Behavior Change Model
(IBCM) – a social cognitive model that includes automatic factors involved in
behavioral engagement and a moderator of the intention-behavior gap – to
its theoretical predecessor, the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB). Further, the
relevance of the IBCM factors for predicting exercise behavior is compared in
initiators versus maintainers.
Method: Participants were 494 US undergraduates. Participants reported on
variables from the IBCM (and TPB) at baseline and reported on their exercise
behavior in two surveys at seven- and 14-days post-baseline.
Results: Findings supported the first hypothesis that the IBCM would
be more relevant for initiators in comparison with maintainers, using
structural equation modeling. Specifically, only the paths between intrinsic
motivation and affective attitude, affective attitude and intention, and
intention and behavior were reliably found for maintainers. For initiators,
the aforementioned paths were also reliably supported and the additional
following paths were also supported: intrinsic motivation and perceived
behavioral control, perceived behavioral control and intention, and intention
and action planning. However, results did not support the second
hypothesis that the IBCM would predict significantly more variance
in behavior than its theoretical predecessor, the TPB. Specifically, the
addition of action planning, implicit attitude, implicit motivation, and
the interaction between intention and action planning only predicted an
additional 0.3% (p < 0.05) of the variance in exercise behavior above and
beyond intention.

01

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

Conclusion: Results highlight the continued need for theoretical refinement in
terms of delineating mechanisms of initiation and maintenance and the need
for further development in terms of improving upon current predictions of
behavior engagement and change.
KEYWORDS

theory of planned behavior, integrated behavior change model, physical activity,
stage of change, dual process cognition

Introduction

perceived behavioral control (Table 1 and Figure 1). Within
the TPB, all constructs are reflective in nature. Moreover, the
TPB includes three mediational hypotheses whereby attitudes,
subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control predict
behavior through intentions (Table 1). In general, attitudes
refer to an individual’s beliefs about whether a behavior
is favorable or unfavorable (Ajzen, 1991). Attitudes can be
delineated into affective and instrumental types – a distinction
that is not explicitly made in the TPB. Affective attitudes are
emotion-based, whereas instrumental attitudes are based on
thoughts about the costs and benefits associated with a behavior
(Hamilton and Johnson, 2020). Generally, subjective norms refer
to an individual’s perception of the social pressure surrounding
behavioral performance (Ajzen, 1991). Subjective norms can be
further delineated into descriptive and instrumental norms –
similar to attitude types this distinction is not explicitly made by
the TPB. Descriptive norms are an individual’s perception of the
behavior of others, whereas injunctive norms are an individual’s
perception of perceived pressure to engage in a behavior (Okun
et al., 2002). Perceived behavioral control refers to an individual’s
assessment of how easy or difficult it would be to engage in a
behavior (Ajzen, 1991). Finally, intentions reflect an individual’s
motivation to engage in a behavior (Ajzen, 1991). Intentions can
vary in quality with higher quality intentions (e.g., intentions
that are based on goals that are promotion versus prevention
focused, autonomy versus control focused, and mastery versus
performance focused) being more likely to lead to behavioral
performance (Sheeran and Webb, 2016).
The TPB (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2011) has been criticized in
part for not addressing the robustly observed intention-behavior
gap (e.g., Sniehotta et al., 2014). Specifically, approximately
50% of intentions do not get translated into behavioral action
(Sheeran and Webb, 2016). Perhaps unsurprisingly, metaanalyses of experimental studies have found that a mediumto-large change in manipulated intentions only leads to a
small-to-medium change in behavior (Webb and Sheeran,
2006; Rhodes and Dickau, 2012). The intention-behavior gap
is largely due to inclined abstainers, those who intend to
change their behavior but fail to do so (Godin and Conner,
2008). Not acting on intentions can be due to barriers
such as forgetting intentions, failing to engage in preparatory

The World Health Organization reports that worldwide
1.4 billion adults do not engage in sufficient levels of physical
activity (WHO, 2020). This is problematic given that sufficient
levels of physical activity engagement can decrease the risk
of all-cause mortality as well as the onset of certain chronic
illnesses such as hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and some sitespecific cancers (e.g., colon). The fields of health psychology
and behavioral medicine utilize many theoretical models
to understand health behavior and health behavior change
(Smedslund, 2000). Most of these theories take the social
cognitive approach, which hypothesizes that intention is a direct
proximal predictor of behavioral action, neglect to include the
influence of automatic constructs on behavior, and generally
do not differentiate between mechanisms of initiation and
maintenance – specifying an invariant theory of behavior.
However, the intention-behavior gap is a well-observed
phenomenon (Sheeran and Webb, 2016), both automatic and
reflective constructs have been shown to influence behavioral
engagement (Rebar et al., 2016), and predictors of behavior
have been shown to differ between initiators and maintainers
(Phillips et al., 2016) – three issues that require theory
advancement to promote more well-rounded, theoreticallybased interventions. Using an exploratory approach, the focus of
the present research is to compare, conceptually and statistically,
two theories of health behavior change – for exercise initiators
and maintainers – which are rooted in the link between
intentions and behavior: The Integrated Behavior Change
Model (IBCM; Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b) and its
theoretical predecessor, the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB;
Fishbein and Ajzen, 2011). Moreover, this research will compare
the utility of the IBCM for predicting behavior against the
TPB for initiators.

The theory of planned behavior
The TPB (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2011) specifies that behavior
is proximally predicted by intentions and that intention is
proximately predicted by attitudes, subjective norms, and

Frontiers in Psychology

02

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

TABLE 1 Theory of Planned Behavior predictions for positive health behaviors.

Independent variable

Dependent variable

Mediator

Prediction

1

Attitude

Intention

–

Effect (+)

2

Subjective norm

Intention

–

Effect (+)

3

Perceived behavioral control

Intention

–

Effect (+)

4

Intention

Behavior

–

Effect (+)

1

Attitude

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

2

Subjective norm

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

3

Perceived behavioral control

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

Direct effects

Mediated effects

FIGURE 1

The theory of planned behavior and the integrated behavior change model. The Theory of Planned Behavior is represented by the solid lines
only. The Integrated Behavior Change model is an extension of the Theory of Planned Behavior and encompasses the entirety of the figure.

behaviors, or missing behavioral opportunities (Sheeran and
Webb, 2016). Considering this, forming if-then plans (i.e.,
action planning/implementation intentions) has been suggested
as an effective means of reducing the intention-behavior gap.
Specifically, a meta-analysis (Gollwitzer and Sheeran, 2006)
found that action planning is strongly related to actual behavior
(d = 0.65), and that this effect did not significantly differ based
on study design (observational: d = 0.70; experimental: d = 0.65)
or on the type of outcome measure (self-report: d = 0.63;
objective: d = 0.67). Specifically, action plan formation predicted
greater detection (d = 0.72) and attention (d = 0.72) to specified
cues as well as behavioral opportunities for action.

alongside reflective processes, and by introducing a humanistic
approach with the inclusion of autonomous motivation derived
from Self-Determination Theory. Specifically, the IBCM adds
(1) autonomous motivation as a predictor of attitudes, subjective
norms, and perceived behavioral control, (2) implicit attitudes
and implicit motivation (automatic factors) as direct predictors
of behavior, and (3) action planning as a moderator of the
intention-behavior gap (Figure 1; Hagger and Chatzisarantis,
2014b). Preliminary support for this theory has been given
with regard to both simple behaviors such as sunscreen use
as well as more complex behaviors such as fruit and vegetable
consumption (Hagger et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown
et al., 2018; Caudwell et al., 2019; Shannon et al., 2019).
To date, the full IBCM has yet to be tested with physical
activity or exercise as an outcome (although this extension was
theoretically proposed in 2014 by Hagger and Chatzisarantis,
2014a). Preliminary observational studies using the IBCM have
not supported the moderating effect of action planning on
the relationship between intention and behavior. This is the

The integrated behavior change model
The IBCM (Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b) expands
upon the TPB by including action planning as a moderator of
the intention-behavior gap, by including automatic processes

Frontiers in Psychology

03

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

Shannon et al., 2019). Including participants from both the
initiation and maintenance phase is a limitation and likely skews
the direct linear effect of intentions on behavior as well as
the moderating effect of action planning due to the shift to
automatization of behavior when an individual has repeated
behavioral experiences (Sheeran and Webb, 2016; Sheeran
et al., 2017). Indeed, intentions have been shown to predict
exercise behavior in initiators but not maintainers (Phillips
et al., 2016). Additionally, other social cognitive models of
health engagement have started to delineate the mechanisms
of behavior for initiators versus maintainers (e.g., Health
Action Process Approach, Schwarzer and Luszczynska, 2008; the
Commonsense Model of Self-Regulation, Phillips et al., 2013).

case for research examining sugar consumption, sun safety
behaviors, and fruit and vegetable consumption (Hagger et al.,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2018). That is, the
intention-behavior gap has not been reduced by the inclusion
of action planning in observational research using the IBCM as
a guiding theory.
Preliminary findings have supported the direct relationships
between autonomous motivation and attitudes, subjective
norms, and perceived behavioral control regarding sugar
consumption, fruit and vegetable consumption, pre-drinking
behavior, sun safety behavior, and self-management of mental
health (Hagger et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al.,
2018; Caudwell et al., 2019; Shannon et al., 2019). The mediated
relationship between autonomous motivation and intentions
through attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral
control were also supported for sugar consumption, fruit and
vegetable consumption, and sun safety behaviors (Hagger et al.,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2018; Shannon
et al., 2019). However, the relationship between autonomous
motivation and pre-drinking intention was only mediated by
attitudes (Caudwell et al., 2019). In addition, there were no
significant indirect effects regarding self-management of mental
health (Shannon et al., 2019).
Finally, findings on the utility of the addition of implicit
attitudes and implicit motivation as direct predictors of
behavior within the IBCM are sparse. First, a literature search
revealed only one empirical test of implicit attitudes within
the framework, which supports the direct relationship between
implicit attitudes about sugar and actual sugar consumption
(Hagger et al., 2017). Second, implicit motivation as a
direct predictor of behavior – as suggested by Hagger and
Chatzisarantis (2014b) – has not been included in any test of
the IBCM to date.

Purpose of the present research
The purpose of the present research is twofold. First, the
utility of the predictions made by the IBCM (Figure 1) –
including automatic factors and moderation of the relationship
between intention and behavior by action planning – will
be compared between initiators and maintainers of physical
activity. It was predicted that this model would fit better for
initiators in comparison with maintainers. Second, prediction
of physical activity behavior by the IBCM will be compared to
prediction by its theoretical predecessor, the TPB, for initiators.
This hypothesis was tested for initiators only as neither the TPB,
nor the IBCM, includes constructs that have been proposed to
be critical for maintenance (Rhodes et al., 2021).

Materials and methods
Participants and procedures

Stage of change

Participants were recruited from a Midwestern university in
the United States and were eligible to participate if they were
18 years of age or older and participated in physical activity, at
least sometimes. Non-exercisers were not eligible to participate
in the present study, because they were not in the initiation
or maintenance phase of behavior change. In addition to this,
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) athletes were
ineligible for participation because they have at least some
of their exercise sessions scheduled by an external source.
Participants reported their age, exercise stage of change, and
NCAA status at pre-screen. A total of 21 participants were
excluded at the pre-screen for not meeting the eligibility
criteria. Eligible participants were directed to baseline and were
asked to complete two weekly assessments of their exercise
behavior at seven- and 14-days post-baseline. Participants were
compensated with course credit. All procedures were approved
by the institutional review board prior to data collection, and
informed consent was collected from all participants via a

The absence of a significant moderating effect of action
planning in tests of the IBCM does not negate the important
role of action planning in intention fulfillment with regard to
both the observational and experimental literature (Gollwitzer
and Sheeran, 2006). The mechanisms of behavioral engagement
have been theorized to differ between individuals who are
just starting a behavior (i.e., initiators) versus those who have
been engaging in a behavior for some time (i.e., maintainers;
Rothman, 2000; Rothman et al., 2009; Rhodes et al., 2021).
Specifically, behavioral intention is thought to be a mechanism
of initiation, and action planning is a means of action control
to translate behavioral intention into behavior, which may be
less relevant for maintainers (Rhodes et al., 2021). Previous tests
of the IBCM for health outcomes do not recruit participants
based on their stage of behavior change (Hagger et al., 2017;
Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2018; Caudwell et al., 2019;

Frontiers in Psychology

04

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

Subjective norms were measured in terms of both injunctive
and descriptive norms (Rhodes and Courneya, 2010). Injunctive
norms were measured using the following two items: (1) ‘Most
people in my social network want me to exercise regularly in
the next 2 weeks’, and (2) ‘Most people in my social network
would approve if I exercised regularly in the next 2 weeks’.
Descriptive norms were measured using the following three
items: (1) ‘Most of my friends exercise regularly’, (2) ‘Most of
my family members exercise regularly’, and (3) ‘Most of my
college peers exercise regularly’. The third item was adapted
from the original measure, which specified co-workers in lieu
of college peers.
Perceived behavioral control was assessed using three items
from Rhodes and Courneya (2010): (1) ‘How confident are you
that you will be able to exercise regularly in the next 2 weeks’,
(2) ‘How confident are you over the next 2 weeks that you could
overcome obstacles that prevent you from exercising regularly’,
and (3) ‘I believe that I have the ability to regularly exercise in
the next 2 weeks’.
Intention was measured using one item from Rhodes and
Courneya (2010): ‘Over the next 2 weeks, I intend to exercise
_________times per week’.
Action planning was measured using four items from
Sniehotta et al. (2005). Four items followed the stem: ‘I have
made a detailed plan regarding. . .’. Items were: (1) ‘when to
exercise’, (2) ‘where to exercise’, (3) ‘how to exercise’, and (4) ‘how
often to exercise’.
Implicit attitudes and motivation were assessed using
two Implicit Association Tests (IATs) created in the iatgen
program (Carpenter et al., 2019). For the attitude IAT, stimuli
from the categories ‘good’ (i.e., pleasure, enjoy, happy), ‘bad’
(i.e., pain, horrible, sadness), ‘exercise’ (i.e., active, fitness,
workout), and ‘sedentary’ (i.e., inactive, seated, sitting) were
used. Terminology used for the exercise and sedentary stimuli
were adapted from Banting et al. (2009) to reflect neutral
sedentary words – in lieu of words with negative connotations.
This was done as even the most active individuals engage in
sedentary behaviors, such as sitting down in lieu of standing,
at least some of the time and over-engagement in sedentary
behaviors poses risk even to individuals who exercise (e.g.,
Keadle et al., 2014). Thus, words like ‘lazy’ and ‘sluggish’ are
likely not reflective of all sedentary behavior engagement. For
the motivation IAT, stimuli were adapted from Keatley et al.
(2014): self (i.e., me, myself), not self (i.e., it, that), autonomous
motivation (i.e., choice, free, spontaneous, willing, authentic),
and controlled motivation (i.e., pressured, restricted, forced,
should, controlled). IAT order was randomized using a random
number generator. Additionally, within IAT, left or right starting
position was also randomized within each IAT. This is standard
practice and implemented automatically by the iatgen program
(Carpenter et al., 2019).
Two random response checks were administered at baseline
to detect careless responding as this response pattern has been

checkbox in the online baseline survey. Hypotheses and analyses
were pre-registered on the Open Science Framework (https:
//osf.io/78fuh), study termination because of the announcement
of the COVID-19 pandemic was also registered on the Open
Science Framework (https://osf.io/4b7gf). It should be noted
that the analysis type for the second hypothesis was updated
after data collection to reflect a more appropriate methodology.
Thus, the analysis of the second hypothesis should be considered
exploratory in nature.

Measures
Pre-screen
Participants reported their age, gender, race, ethnicity, and
NCAA membership. Additionally, participants reported their
stage of change regarding exercise (Prochaska and Velicer,
1997). Participants were asked to ‘Please tell us which option
most closely fits you currently’ (Note: ‘Regular exercise’ = 3
or more times per week for at least 30 min at moderate
or greater intensity each time). Response options were: (1)
‘I currently do not exercise and I do not intend to start’,
(2) ‘I currently do not exercise, but I am thinking about
starting’, (3) ‘I currently exercise some, but not regularly
(regularly is 3x per week or more)’, (4) ‘I currently exercise
regularly, but have only begun doing so within the past
6 months’, and (5) ‘I currently exercise regularly, and I have
been doing so for longer than 6 months’. These options
correspond to pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation,
action, and maintenance, respectively. Participants who were
in the pre-contemplation or contemplation stages were not
eligible for participation because they did not engage in exercise.
Participants in the preparation or action stages of behavior
change were classified as ‘initiators’, and participants in the
maintenance phase were classified as ‘maintainers’.

Baseline
Autonomous motivation was assessed using the Behavioral
Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire – 3 (Markland and
Tobin, 2004; Wilson et al., 2007). Three types of autonomous
motivation were measured with four items each: (1) integrated
(e.g., ‘I exercise because it is consistent with my life goals’), (2)
identified (e.g., ‘It’s important to me to exercise regularly’), and
(3) intrinsic (e.g., ‘I enjoy my exercise sessions’).
Explicit attitudes were measured in terms of both
instrumental and affective attitudes (Rhodes and Courneya,
2010). All items were preceded by the following stem: ‘Over the
next 2 weeks, engaging in physical activity on a regular basis
would be. . .’. Affective attitudes were assessed using three items
ranging from: (1) ‘boring’ to ‘interesting’, (2) ‘unenjoyable’ to
‘enjoyable’, and (3) ‘stressful’ to ‘relaxing’. Instrumental attitudes
were assessed using three items ranging from: (1) ‘harmful’ to
‘beneficial’, (2) ‘useless’ to ‘useful’, and (3) ‘foolish’ to ‘wise’.

Frontiers in Psychology

05

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

compares the IBCM to its theoretical predecessor, the TPB,
was analyzed using hierarchical linear regression to determine
whether implicit motivation, implicit attitudes, action planning,
and the interaction between action planning and intention add
to the prediction of behavior above and beyond intention.
This contrasts with the pre-registered analysis, which specified
comparing the two theories using structural equation modeling.
This pre-registered plan was deviated from because Mplus
does not allow for comparing models with different observed
variables (Mplus Discussion, 2008).

shown to drastically alter effect sizes (Credé, 2010). Participants
who failed either of these checks were excluded from all analyses
(n = 17).

Weekly surveys
Physical activity behavior was measured at baseline and
at each of the two weekly surveys using the International
Physical Activity Questionnaire (Booth, 2000). Participants
self-reported the number of minutes that they engaged in
moderate and vigorous physical activity over the previous
seven days. A composite score of moderate and vigorous
physical activity was created for each timepoint. Weekly
assessments were utilized if they were completed within
48 hours of administration and were emailed to participants
at nine o’clock in the morning, with a follow-up email being
administered 24 hours prior to the 48-hour deadline.

Results
Preliminary results
For the power analysis, as suggested by Muthén and
Muthén (2002), path parameter estimates were obtained from a
previous meta-analysis conducted by Hagger and Chatzisarantis
(2014a). However, implicit attitudes, implicit motivation, and
action planning were not assessed in the meta-analytic study,
and therefore β (standardized beta coefficients) values for
the relationship between these variables and behavior were
estimated using a sensitivity analysis from previous tests of the
IBCM in terms of both weakest and strongest reported values
(i.e., Hagger et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al.,
2018; Caudwell et al., 2019; Shannon et al., 2019). Parameter
estimates were expressed as (β) to account for shared variance
between a set of predictors with a given outcome variable
with residual variance being calculated using the formula: 1 –
6(β 2 ). The primary power analysis suggested that 300 initiators
and 300 maintainers were needed to be sufficiently powered
across paths, however, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, data
collection was terminated early as lockdown resulted in many
participants leaving the area and having their routines disrupted.
Online data collection after this point was deemed not feasible
as the measured variables and the relationships between them
would almost certainly have been affected by the pandemic. An
updated power analysis for the IBCM for 287 initiators and
207 maintainers was conducted. For initiators, the observed
power was as follows: (1) autonomous motivation and attitude,
100%, (2) autonomous motivation and subjective norms, 65.1%,
(3) autonomous motivation and perceived behavioral control,
100%, (4) attitude and intention, 100%, (5) subjective norm and
intention, 22.3%, (6) perceived behavioral control and intention,
98.9%, (7) intention and behavior, 66.1–96.9%, (8) implicit
attitudes and behavior 47.7–97.1%, (9) implicit motivation
and behavior, 46.5–96.2%, (10) action planning and behavior,
12.3–99.6%, and (11) action planning∗ intention and behavior,
14.5–67.9%. For maintainers, the observed power was: (1)
autonomous motivation and attitude, 100%, (2) autonomous
motivation and subjective norms, 52.8%, (3) autonomous
motivation and perceived behavioral control 99.9%, (4) attitude

Statistical analyses
Power analysis for the proposed paths within the IBCM
was conducted a priori using Monte Carlo simulations in
Mplus, using α = 0.05 and 1,000 bootstrapped samples
(Muthén and Muthén, 2012).
Participants’ implicit attitudes and motivation IATs were
scored using the Greenwald et al. (2003) scoring algorithm
through the iatgen shiny app program (Carpenter et al.,
2019). This scoring resulted in a D-score, with higher
scores indicating more positive implicit attitudes and more
autonomous motivation and lower scores indicating less
positive implicit attitudes and more controlled motivation.
Data were examined for multivariate outliers on all models,
separately for initiators and maintainers using Mahalanobis
distances (p < 0.001). Multivariate outliers were removed and
the analysis reconducted until there were no outliers remaining.
A multiverse approach (Steegen et al., 2016) was taken where
the baseline data, week one data, and week two data were all
analyzed with and without multivariate outliers. Main results are
reported with the inclusion of multivariate outliers and baseline
data. Deviations in results according to the multiverse approach
are also reported.
Self-Determination Theory hypothesizes that motivation
can vary in terms of autonomy. Therefore, a maximum
likelihood exploratory factor analysis with an oblique rotation
was used to determine whether all types of autonomous
orientation (i.e., intrinsic, identified, and integrated) should
be combined into one scale. Parallel analysis was used to
determine the appropriate number of factors for extraction
(Zwick and Velicer, 1986).
The first analysis, which compares the utility of the
IBCM between initiators and maintainers, was conducted using
multi-group recursive structural equation modeling in Mplus to
test the relationships between both observed and latent variables
(Muthén and Muthén, 2012). The second analysis, which

Frontiers in Psychology

06

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

TABLE 2 Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) pattern matrix.

and intention, 100%, (5) subjective norms and intention, 18.4%,
(6) perceived behavioral control and intention, 96.1%, (7)
intention and behavior, 52.2–93.8%, (8) implicit attitudes and
behavior, 36.9–89.3%, (9) implicit motivation and behavior,
35.4 and 89.1%, (10) action planning and behavior, 10.9–
97.4%, and (11) action planning∗ intention and behavior, 10.3–
53.7%.
A total of 17 participants were excluded from data analysis
because they failed at least one of two random response checks at
baseline leaving a total of 494 participants (i.e., 287 initiators and
207 maintainers). Participants were 19.31 years of age on average
(SD = 1.77), and most participants self-identified as female using
she/her pronouns (54.7%). Most participants also self-identified
as Caucasian (86%). For the weekly data, 339 participants
completed the first survey and 323 completed the second survey.
Maintainers engaged in more moderate and vigorous physical
activity in comparison to initiators, at baseline [t(473) = −3.70,
p < 0.001], week one [t(353) = −4.08, p < 0.001], and week
two [t(336) = −3.43, p = 0.001]. Additionally, maintainers
(Mmonths = 28.79, SE = 0.58) had been engaging in regular
exercise significantly longer than initiators (Mmonths = 5.67,
SE = 2.05; [t(474) = −12.67, p = < 0.001]).
Missing data was relatively sparse as the survey reminded
(but did not force) participants to respond to unanswered
questions. For predictor variables, there was only one missing
item for injunctive subjective norms. For the outcome
variable of exercise there were 19 cases of missing data
at baseline, eight cases for week one, one case for week
two. Missing data represented at least 50% of each scale.
Therefore, multiple imputation was not conducted as
the proportion of missing data was too large to impute
(Garson, 2015).
A maximum likelihood exploratory factor analysis with an
oblique rotation – allowing for factors to be correlated – was
conducted to determine whether all autonomous motivation
types should be combined into one factor. A parallel analysis
(Zwick and Velicer, 1986) revealed that it was appropriate to
extract two factors. Both factors also met the eigenvalue greater
than one threshold (i.e., Factor 1 = 6.09; Factor 2 = 1.28).
The first factor accounted for 50.73% of the total variance and
was made up of the items from the integrated and identified
subscales of the BREQ-3 (Table 2). The second factor explained
10.69% of the total variance and was made up of the items from
the intrinsic motivation scale. Due to intrinsic motivation being
the most prototypical form of autonomous motivation, and the
fact that it loaded separately from both identified and integrated
motivation types, it was used as the measure for motivation
in hypothesis 1.
For hypothesis 1, multivariate outliers were removed
separately for initiators and maintainers as these groups
were analyzed separately and have been shown to differ on
mechanisms of behavior in past research (Phillips et al., 2016).
For the relationship between the predictor intrinsic motivation

Frontiers in Psychology

Item

Factor 1
loading

Integrated: I consider exercise a
fundamental part of who I am

1.04

Integrated: I consider exercise
part of my identity

0.991

Integrated: I consider exercise
consistent with my values

0.623

Identified: It’s important for me
to exercise regularly

0.516

Integrated: I exercise because it
is consistent with my life goals

0.499

Identified: I get restless if I
don’t exercise regularly

0.436

Factor 2
loading

Intrinsic: I enjoy my exercise
sessions

0.906

Intrinsic: I find exercising a
pleasurable activity

0.876

Intrinsic: I exercise because it’s
fun

0.717

Intrinsic: I get pleasure and
satisfaction from participating
in exercise

0.632

Items with cross loadings ≤ 0.2 were not included in the model.

and the outcomes of perceived behavioral control, explicit
attitudes, and descriptive subjective norms, there was one
multivariate outlier for initiators and no multivariate outliers
for maintainers exceeding the critical value of 18.47 (p < 0.001).
For the relationship of intentions being predicted by perceived
behavioral control, explicit attitudes, and descriptive subjective
norms, there were six multivariate outliers for both initiators
and maintainers exceeding the critical value of 18.47 (p < 0.001).
For the relationship between intention and action planning,
there were three multivariate outliers for initiators and no
multivariate outliers for maintainers exceeding the critical value
of 13.82 (p < 0.001). Finally, for the prediction of exercise
behavior from intention, action planning, implicit attitudes, and
implicit motivation, the multivariate analysis was as follows
(critical value: 20.52, p < 0.001): (1) with baseline exercise as the
outcome, there were eight initiators and two maintainers with
outlying values, (2) with week one exercise as the outcome, there
were three initiators and four maintainers with outlying values,
and (3) with week two exercise as the outcome, there were three
initiators and four maintainers with outlying values.
For hypothesis 2, multivariate outliers were assessed at the
critical value of 20.52 (p < 0.001) for behavior, intention, action
planning, implicit attitude, and implicit motivation. Unlike
hypothesis 1, this was done without the removal of outliers for
preceding relationships in the IBCM. Multivariate outliers were
as follows: baseline had 13 outliers, week one had seven outliers,
and week two had six outliers.

07

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

Hypothesis 1

‘general’, which allows for indices of model fit. Thus, action
planning was instead specified as a variable linking intention
and behavior, which has been done in previous structural
equation modeling assessments of the IBCM (e.g., Hagger et al.,
2017).

Measurement model
The first hypothesis, that the IBCM would more accurately
reflect the antecedents of physical activity for initiators in
comparison with maintainers was first assessed by examining
the measurement model (i.e., CFA) and recursive structural
equation modeling in initiators only. The measurement
model was conducted between the latent variables and their
indicators (i.e., all variables except for intention, implicit
attitudes and motivation, and behavior; Kline, 2005; Hoyle,
2012). In this model, the latent factor of attitudes was
composed of both affective and instrumental attitudes and
the latent factor of subjective norms consisted of both
injunctive and descriptive norm indicators (Rhodes and
Courneya, 2010). This model was not a good fit for
the data [RMSEA = 0.09, CFI = 0.83, TLI = 0.80, χ2
(199) = 615.18, p < 0.001]. Although all factor indices
significantly loaded onto their latent factor (p < 0.001),
instrumental attitudes represented points of ill fit on the
latent factor of attitudes (Hoyle, 2012). Specifically, all R2
values were equal to or lower than 0.32 (i.e., 0.21 –
0.32). Additionally, injunctive norms represented points of
ill fit with the latent factor of subjective norms with
all R2 values being equal to or below 0.20 (i.e., 0.09 –
0.20). Both instrumental attitudes and injunctive norm items
explained less variance in their latent variables than either
affective attitudes (R2 = 0.34 – 0.62) or descriptive norms
(R2 = 0.08 – 0.84). Additionally, instrumental attitudes
(R2 = 0.68 – 0.79) and injunctive norms (R2 = 0.80 –
0.91) had higher levels of residual item variance compared
to affective attitudes (R2 = 0.28 – 0.66) and descriptive
norms (R2 = 0.17 – 0.93), respectively. Thus, a second
measurement model without the inclusion of instrumental
attitude and injunctive norm items was conducted and fit
the data well [RMSEA = 0.04, CFI = 0.99, TLI = 0.96,
χ2 (109) = 169.49, p < 0.001]. It should be noted that
within this model the first descriptive norm item was a poor
indicator of the latent construct of subjective norms (factor
loading: 0.27, residual variance: 0.93, R2 = 0.07). However, this
item was retained as it is part of a validated scale and the
removal of the item did not improve the overall model fit
[RMSEA = 0.05, CFI = 0.97, TLI = 0.96, χ2 (95) = 156.78,
p < 0.001].
A structural model was computed to determine whether
action planning significantly moderated the intention behavior
gap, as the analysis type in Mplus that allows for specification
of interactions between latent and observed variables does not
provide indices of model fit, which are necessary to compare
models (Muthén, 2009). Results indicated that action planning
did not moderate the intention behavior gap (p = 0.28).
Considering this, the interaction term was removed from
the model and hypothesis 1 was conducted using the type

Frontiers in Psychology

Structural equation model in initiators
Prior to comparing the IBCM between initiators and
maintainers, the utility of this model in initiators only was
established. Data is presented with the inclusion of multivariate
outliers and with baseline physical activity data (RMSEA = 0.04,
CFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.94).
Intrinsic motivation predicted perceived behavioral control
(β = 0.26, SE = 0.07, p < 0.001) and affective attitude (β = 0.72,
SE = 0.04, p < 0.001), but did not predict descriptive subjective
norms (β = 0.11, SE = 0.06, p = 0.093). Second, perceived
behavioral control (β = 0.18, SE = 0.06, p = 0.004), affective
attitude (β = 0.24, SE = 0.06, p < 0.001), and descriptive
subjective norms (β = 0.17, SE = 0.06, p = 0.003) all predicted
intention to engage in physical activity, with affective attitudes
being the strongest predictor. Intention predicted both action
planning (β = 0.32, SE = 0.06, p < 0.001) and behavior (β = 0.15,
SE = 0.06, p = 0.019). Action planning (β = 0.11, SE = 0.08,
p = 0.115), implicit attitudes (β = 0.04, SE = 0.07, p = 0.549), and
implicit motivation (β = −0.07, SE = 0.07, p = 0.289) did not
predict behavior. All significant findings were consistent with
the hypothesized direction (Table 3).
The multiverse analyses revealed several deviations from
the main results. First, the relationship between intentions and
behavior was non-significant, concerning week one exercise,
when outliers were included. When outliers were excluded,
the relationship between intention and behavior was significant
in all models, except for the week 2 data, in which the
data was not interpretable due to poor model fit. Thus, the
relationship between intention and behavior was significant
in four of the five interpretable models. Additionally, in the
data with the removal of multivariate outliers, the relationship
between descriptive subjective norms and intentions was nonsignificant in all interpretable models (i.e., except for week
2, which had poor model fit). Thus, the relationship between
descriptive subjective norms and intention was significant in
three of the five interpretable models. No other paths varied
across the multiverse analysis in terms of either significance or
directionality of the effect.

Comparison between initiators and maintainers
Hypothesis 1, that the IBCM would more accurately reflect
the antecedents of behavior for initiators in comparison with
maintainers, was first assessed by comparing the equivalence
of the measurement model with fixed factor loadings with
the measurement model with free factor loadings to assess
metric invariance, which is a pre-requisite of multi-group
structural equation modeling. The measurement model with

08

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

TABLE 3 Integrated Behavior Change Model predictions for positive health behaviors.

Independent variable

Dependent variable

Mediator

Moderator

Prediction

Direct effects
1

Autonomous motivation

Attitude

Effect (+)

2

Autonomous motivation

Subjective norm

Effect (+)

3

Autonomous motivation

Perceived behavioral control

Effect (+)

4

Attitude

Intention

Effect (+)

5

Subjective norm

Intention

Effect (+)

6

Perceived behavioral control

Intention

Effect (+)

7

Intention

Behavior

Effect (+)

8

Implicit attitude

Behavior

Effect (+)

9

Implicit motivation

Behavior

Effect (+)

1

Autonomous motivation

Intention

Attitude

Effect (+)

2

Autonomous motivation

Intention

Subjective norm

Effect (+)

3

Autonomous motivation

Intention

Perceived behavioral control

Effect (+)

4

Attitude

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

5

Subjective norm

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

6

Perceived behavioral control

Behavior

Intention

Effect (+)

1

Intention

Behavior

Mediated effects

Moderator effects
Effect (+)

models for initiators and five models for maintainers, (3)
intrinsic motivation predicted descriptive subjective norms
in none of the models for initiators or for maintainers, (4)
perceived behavioral control predicted intention in five models
for initiators and none of the models for maintainers, (5)
affective attitudes predicted intention in five models for
initiators and five models for maintainers, (6) descriptive
subjective norms predicted intention in two models for
initiators and none of the models for maintainers, (7) intention
predicted action planning in five models for initiators and
none of the models for maintainers, (8) action planning
predicted behavior in none of the models for initiators or
for maintainers, (9) intention predicted behavior in four
models for initiators and three models for maintainers, (10)
implicit motivation predicted behavior in none of the models
for initiators or for maintainers, and (11) implicit attitudes
predicted behavior in none of the models for initiators
and one model for maintainers. All significant paths were
in the expected direction for initiators and maintainers
(Table 3), except for the significant relationship between
implicit attitude and behavior for maintainers in which
worse attitudes resulted in more behavioral engagement
with the week two data with the inclusion of multivariate
outliers. Overall, these results further highlight how the
IBCM is supported more for initiators in comparison with
maintainers. However, there were no unique proximal
predictors of behavior for initiators in comparison with
maintainers overall.

fixed factor loadings for initiators and maintainers fit the data
well [RMSEA = 0.05, CFI = 0.94, TLI = 0.94, χ2 (242) = 417.77,
p < 0.001]. The model that allowed free factor loadings
for initiators and maintainers fit the data similarly well
[RMSEA = 0.05, CFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.95, χ2 (230) = 3328.17,
p < 0.001]. The criteria of metric invariance were satisfied as the
RMSEA values not differ substantially between models (Cheng
and Rensvold, 2002). Specifically, The RMSEA values fit within
each other’s confidence intervals (Fixed: 95% CI [0.045,0.063],
Free: 95% CI [0.042,0.061]).
The model fit was assessed by comparing the model
where factor loadings were fixed between initiators and
maintainers, but paths were able to vary (i.e., unconstrained
model), and a model where both factor loadings and path
and mean parameters were fixed (i.e., constrained model).
Across the six multiverse iterations, the unconstrained
model fit better than the constrained model in five of the
iterations. The unconstrained model was not supported
in terms of baseline exercise when multivariate outliers
were included. The overarching robustness of these
results supports the notion that model paths and mean
parameters are significantly different between initiators
and maintainers.
Overall, across the five iterations of the multiverse
analysis results were as follows (Figure 2): (1) intrinsic
motivation predicted perceived behavioral control in five
models for initiators and none of the models for maintainers,
(2) intrinsic motivation predicted affective attitudes in five

Frontiers in Psychology

Action planning

09

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

FIGURE 2

Supported paths across multiverse analysis for the Integrated Behavior Change Model weighted by level of support. Initiators are represented by
the solid lines only. Maintainers are represented by dashed lines only. Thicker lines indicate support across more multiverse iterations than
thinner lines.

Hypothesis 2

the interaction between intention and action planning (β = 0.45,
SE = 22.11, t = 1.01, p = 0.316). In the analysis utilizing the
week 1 data with multivariate outliers included, intention was
no longer significant at the second step. Otherwise, results were
consistent across the entirety of the multiverse analysis in terms
of significant predictors. Overall, these results highlight that the
additional proximal predictors in the IBCM did not predict
behavior better than intentions in the current data.

The second hypothesis, that the IBCM would add unique
direct predictors of behavior above and beyond the TPB, was
assessed using linear regression. In all models, moderate and
vigorous exercise behavior was the outcome (i.e., baseline, week
one, or week two). Intention was entered into the first block,
action planning, implicit attitude, and implicit motivation were
entered into the second block, and the interaction between
intention and action planning was entered into the third block.
Intention accounted for 3.1% (Adjusted R2 = 0.031, p = 0.003)
of the variance in behavior and was a significant predictor
of behavior (β = 0.19, SE = 14.59, t = 3.03 p = 0.003). The
addition of action planning, implicit attitudes, and implicit
motivation accounted for an additional 0.3% (1R2 change) of
the variance in behavior above and beyond intention (Adjusted
R2 = 0.034, p = 0.012). Only intention significantly predicted
behavior (β = 0.16, SE = 15.17, t = 2.46, p = 0.015). Action
planning (β = 0.11, SE = 32.56, t = 1.66, p = 0.097), implicit
attitudes (β = 0.04, SE = 43.09, t = 0.61, p = 0.545), and implicit
motivation (β = −0.07, SE = 62.81, t = −1.07, p = 0.285)
did not significantly predict behavior. The addition of the
interaction between intention and action planning in step
three accounted for no additional variance in exercise behavior
(Adjusted R2 = 0.034, p = 0.017). When the interaction term was
included, none of the variables significantly predicted behavior:
intention (β = −0.22, SE = 89.42, t = −0.57, p = 0.567), action
planning (β = −0.04, SE = 81.98, t = −0.26, p = 0.793), implicit
attitudes (β = 0.04, SE = 71.29, t = 0.54, p = 0.588), implicit
motivation (β = −0.07, SE = 62.81, t = −1.08, p = 0.280), and

Frontiers in Psychology

Discussion
Behavioral theories have largely taken a social cognitive
approach specifying intention as a proximal predictor of
behavior, including only reflective constructs, thereby neglecting
to include the influence of automatic processes, and have
specified an invariant theory of behavior across different stages
of behavior change such as initiation and maintenance. This
is problematic as the intention-behavior gap is a well-observed
phenomenon (e.g., Sheeran and Webb, 2016), focusing only on
reflective factors, such as attitudes, ignores the influence that
automatic processes have on behavior (Rebar et al., 2016), and
predictors of behavior are known to differ between initiators and
maintainers (Phillips et al., 2016). The overarching purpose of
this study was twofold. First, the present research compared, two
theories of health behavior change – for exercise initiators and
maintainers – which are rooted in the link between intentions
and behavior: the IBCM (Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b)
and its theoretical predecessor, the TPB (Fishbein and Ajzen,

10

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

to be the most highly ranked reason across the lifespan (Gavin
et al., 2014). Thus, the most autonomous form of motivation
(i.e., intrinsic) in and of itself may not be a viable target
in terms of changing intentions and subsequent behavior for
most individuals as it likely does not reflect their pre-existing
goals. Additionally, because feeling competent is a theoretical
precursor of the development of fully autonomous or intrinsic
motivation in Self-Determination Theory (Ryan and Deci,
2000), it is unlikely that fully autonomous motivation would
precede perceived behavioral control as feeling competent
requires behavioral practice. However, it should be noted that
the causal link between autonomous motivation and attitudes,
social norms, and perceived behavioral control as specified in the
IBCM may be more theoretically appropriate when considering
partially controlled motivations such as identified motivation
(i.e., valuing the outcomes of a behavior).
Additionally, it is important to note that although the IBCM
hypothesizes that action planning moderates the intention
behavior gap, a recent systematic review has shown that many
psychosocial variables are potentially important moderators
of this relationship (Rhodes et al., 2022). These include
demographic variables (e.g., employment), personality variables
(e.g., conscientiousness), and automatic factors (e.g., identity).
Moreover, another recent systematic review has shown that
unpleasant experiences while engaging in physical activity may
reduce participation for people with chronic illnesses that are
related to increased pain and fatigue (Collado-Mateo et al.,
2021). Thus, the TPB and IBCM likely need to be extended to
include other moderators of the intention-behavior gap. These
moderators may serve to not only identify who is at risk of
not fulfilling their physical activity intentions (e.g., based on
demographic factors, personality factors, and/or chronic illness
status), but also propose mechanisms of maintenance – such
as identity (Rhodes et al., 2016) – within traditional social
cognitive frameworks.
The present study is not without limitations. First, the
desired sample size was not collected due to the restrictions
that were placed on data collection by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Continuing data collection during the pandemic was deemed
inappropriate given the contextual shifts that occurred, which
had the capacity to undermine exercise behaviors. In support
of this, 30% of individuals surveyed in the United States
reported that they exercised less than usual during April of
2020 (Gough, 2020). Second, participants in the present study
were college students who are unlikely to be representative of
the general population (Peterson, 2001; Henrich et al., 2010).
However, it is still important to understand the mechanisms
of physical activity initiation and maintenance in students
as approximately half of American college students are not
sufficiently active (Keating et al., 2005). Third, the current
study artificially dichotomized individuals based on their score
on a stage of change measure and in accordance with the
Transtheoretical Model, which may have resulted in range

2011). Second, this research compared the utility of the IBCM
for predicting behavior against the TPB for initiators.
In this first known test of the IBCM for physical activity
(Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b), the utility of the IBCM was
supported for people who were just beginning their exercise
journey (i.e., initiators), and was more highly supported for
initiators in comparison with maintainers. However, the IBCM
did not add any unique contribution to the direct prediction
of behavior in comparison with the TPB for initiators. That
is, action planning, the interaction between action planning
and intention, implicit attitudes, and implicit motivation did
not predict behavior. This is in line with previous tests of the
IBCM for other health behaviors (i.e., action planning: Hagger
et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2018). Action
planning has been shown to be a viable target to elicit behavior
change in past intervention studies and is one of the only
known techniques that leads to continued activity engagement
six months post-intervention (Gollwitzer and Sheeran, 2006;
Howlett et al., 2019). The lack of significant results concerning
action planning in present and past tests of the IBCM may be
due to the variability in the quality of plans (e.g., I will exercise
on Fridays, versus I will exercise after work on Fridays; de Vet
et al., 2011). The quality of plans may be especially problematic
when made without the guidance provided by an intervention.
Neither implicit attitudes nor implicit motivation predicted
physical activity. To that end, it is possible that implicit attitudes
and motivation are not powerful targets for an intervention
due to their null or small influence on behavior. This is likely
to be especially true for implicit motivation, which is a traitlike tendency underpinning why one performs behaviors that
is likely resistant to change. It should be noted that past
research has intervened upon implicit attitudes with success in
changing health behaviors (i.e., alcohol consumption, healthy
eating practices) over a short period of time (Houben et al.,
2010; Hollands et al., 2011). More research will be needed to
test the viability of targeting implicit attitudes for sustained
behavioral changes.
In contrast to the TPB, the IBCM adds autonomous
motivation as a new distal target of intention formation. In the
present study, this was supported through the mechanisms of
perceived behavioral control and affective attitudes. However,
greater theoretical development and empirical evaluation is
needed regarding the causal relationships between motivation
and other antecedents of behavior; namely, for physically
taxing behaviors, like physical activity engagement, it is unlikely
that initial engagement is ‘enjoyable’ or ‘fun’, especially for
individuals who do not already have good cardiorespiratory
fitness (Rhodes, 2017). Indeed, previous research has found that
physical fatigue both during and after physical activity sessions
is one of the most frequently reported barriers to engagement
(Ebben and Brudzynski, 2008). Moreover, reasons for starting
activity engagement are vast and extend beyond enjoyment—for
example improving one’s physical appearance has been shown

Frontiers in Psychology

11

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

maintenance (Schwarzer, 2016). However, dual-phase theories,
including the Health Action Process Approach, will need to
be extended to include automatic mechanisms of maintenance
(e.g., habit) in addition to the reflective determinants that are
already included. Moreover, research should assess whether
automatic determinants of initiation add a unique contribution
to behavior. However, it should be noted that in the present
study automatic determinants of initiation did not contribute to
the variance predicted in behavior.
The purpose of the present study was twofold. First, the
present research compared, two theories of health behavior
change – for exercise initiators and maintainers – which
are rooted in the link between intentions and behavior: the
IBCM (Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b) and its theoretical
predecessor, the TPB (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2011). Second, this
research compared the utility of the IBCM for predicting
behavior against the TPB for initiators. Although there
are important limitations that need to be considered when
interpreting the results, the present study highlights some
important considerations for the field of behavior change. First,
the mechanisms of behavioral engagement differed between
initiators and maintainers. This is not the first study to support
this delineation (e.g., Phillips et al., 2016), nor is it likely to be
the last. Theories such as the TPB and IBCM need to specify
these differences using a dual-phase approach to allow for more
precise behavioral prediction, but also to include appropriate
intervention targets depending on stage of change. Second,
the present study suggests that the TPB should be preferred
over the IBCM, because it is more parsimonious. Although the
IBCM adds action planning, a known technique to promote
behavioral engagement, this is not a unique contribution in and
of itself given that action planning has been added to the TPB
by others as a method of reducing the intention-behavior gap
(e.g., Norman and Conner, 2005). However, since interventions
based on the TPB and other social cognitive frameworks – with
the exclusion of the more recently added action planning –
have been shown to be sub-optimal in terms of behavior change
(e.g., Kinmonth et al., 2008; Sniehotta, 2009), it is of the utmost
importance that theory refinement and development continues.

restriction (Prochaska and DiClemente, 1982; Sackett et al.,
2007). In the current study, ‘maintainers’ engaged in more
physical activity per week and had been engaging in physical
activity for more months than ‘initiators’, which provides at
least some evidence that these groups were different with
regard to their behavior. Fourth, the current research, similar
to past studies using the IBCM as a guiding framework, was
observational. Therefore, causal inferences cannot be made
from the results based on the present data as it can only be
concluded whether variables were related. Finally, IATs were
used to measure implicit attitudes and motivation. Although
IATs are commonly used to measure implicit constructs (e.g.,
Project Implicit hosted by Harvard University), including in
previous tests of the IBCM, they are also known to have
several limitations. Specifically, the use of difference scores is
psychometrically problematic as they are subject to higher type
1 error rates than non-difference scoring procedures (Edwards,
2001; Cafri et al., 2010). Additionally, previous research has
highlighted that IAT scores tend to be weak predictors of
behavior, which could be due to the measurement procedure
itself or the scoring procedure as outlined above (Oswald
et al., 2013). Moreover, traditional IATs cannot provide the
refinement of measuring types of attitudes or motivation toward
an activity beyond a mere dichotomy. Previous research using
a single category IAT has assessed instrumental and affective
attitudes toward activity behaviors (Phipps et al., 2021) and
has found that implicit affective attitudes significantly predict
physical activity, whereas implicit instrumental attitudes do not.
Thus, it is possible that the IAT used in the present study
was not sensitive enough and that future research using the
IBCM should delineate the implicit constructs further. However,
other research has provided evidence that IAT scores are more
reliable than other implicit measures in terms of both testretest and split-half reliability (Nosek et al., 2007; Znanewitz
et al., 2018). Additionally, IAT scores also have been shown to
have both convergent and divergent validity using multi-trait,
multi-method matrices (Nosek and Smyth, 2007; Nosek et al.,
2007).
There is a need for researchers to continue to refine
and develop theories of behavior change to specify viable
intervention targets for initiators, including automatic targets,
and for including a maintenance phase of behavior change
where appropriate targets are specified (Sheeran and Webb,
2016; Rothman, 2000). The IBCM is an attempt to improve
the toolbox of targets for behavior change to include automatic
processes, action planning, and autonomous motivation
(Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2014b). However, in the present
study it was found that the IBCM did not improve upon its
theoretical predecessor – the TPB (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2011).
That is, the IBCM does not add any unique proximal predictors
of behavior. Additional theories, such as the Health Action
Process Approach, which also includes action planning, will
need to be assessed as it already delineates initiation from

Frontiers in Psychology

Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.

Ethics statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by Iowa State University Office of Research Ethics.

12

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

Conflict of interest

The participants provided their written informed consent to
participate in this study.

The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

Author contributions
KM and LP contributed to the conceptualization, design of
the study, and writing of the manuscript. KM organized the
dataset and performed the analyses. Both authors contributed
to manuscript revision and approved the current version.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.

Funding
The open access publication fees for this article were covered
by the Iowa State University Library.

References
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Org. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 50, 179–211. doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T

Garson, D. G. (2015). Missing Values Analysis & Data Imputation. Asheboro,
NC: Statistical Publishing Associates.

Banting, L. K., Dimmock, J. A., and Lay, B. S. (2009). The role of implicit
and explicit components of exerciser self-schema in the prediction of exercise
behaviour. Psychol. Sport Exerc. 10, 80–86. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2008.07.007

Gavin, J., Keough, M., Abravanel, M., Moudrakovski, T., and Mcbrearty, M.
(2014). Motivations for participation in physical activity across the lifespan. Int.
J. Wellbeing 4, 46–61. doi: 10.5502/ijw.v4i1.3

Booth, M. (2000). Assessment of physical activity: an international perspective.
Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 71, 114–120. doi: 10.1080/02701367.2000.11082794

Godin, G., and Conner, M. (2008). Intention-behavior relationship based on
epidemiologic indices: an application to physical activity. Am. J. Health Promot.
22, 180–182. doi: 10.4278/ajhp.22.3.180

Brown, D. J., Hagger, M. S., Morrissey, S., and Hamilton, K. (2018). Predicting
fruit and vegetable consumption in long-haul heavy goods vehicle drivers:
application of a multi-theory, dual-phase model and the contribution of past
behaviour. Appetite 121, 326–336. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2017.11.106

Gollwitzer, P. M., and Sheeran, P. (2006). “Implementation intentions and goal
achievement: a meta-analysis of effects and processes’,’ in Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, ed. M. P. Zanna (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 69–119. doi: 10.1016/
S0065-2601(06)38002-1

Cafri, G., van den Berg, P., and Brannick, M. T. (2010). What have the difference
scores not been telling us? a critique of the use of self-ideal discrepancy in
the assessment of body image and evaluation of an alternative data-analytic
framework. Assessment 17, 361–376. doi: 10.1177/1073191109357028

Gough, C. (2020). COVID-19: Change In Exercise Habits In The U.S. April 2020.
Available online at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1110985/covid-exercisehabits/ (accessed April 15, 2022).

Carpenter, T. P., Pogacar, R., Pullig, C., Kouril, M., Aguilar, S. J., LaBouff, J., et al.
(2019). Survey-software implicit association tests: a methodological and empirical
analysis. Behav. Res. 51, 2194–2208. doi: 10.3758/s13428-019-01293-3

Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., and Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and
using the implicit association test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 85, 197–216. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.197

Caudwell, K. M., Keech, J. J., Hamilton, K., Mullan, B. A., and Hagger, M. S.
(2019). Reducing alcohol consumption during pre-drinking sessions: testing an
integrated behaviour-change model. Psychol. Health 34, 106–127. doi: 10.1080/
08870446.2018.1518527

Hagger, M. S., and Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2014a). Integrating the theory of
planned behaviour and self-determination theory in health behaviour: a metaanalysis. Br. J. Health Psychol. 14, 275–302. doi: 10.1348/135910708X373959
Hagger, M. S., and Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2014b). An integrated behavior
change model for physical activity. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 42, 62–69. doi: 10.1249/
JES.0000000000000008

Cheng, G. W., and Rensvold, R. B. (2002). Evaluating goodness-of-fit indexes for
testing measurement invariance. Struct. Equ. Modeling 9, 233–255. doi: 10.1207/
S15328007SEM902_5

Hagger, M. S., Trost, N., Keech, J. J., Chan, D. K. C., and Hamilton, K.
(2017). Predicting sugar consumption: application of an integrated dual-process,
dual-phase model. Appetite 116, 147–156. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2017.04.032

Collado-Mateo, D., Lavin-Pérez, A. M., Peñacoba, C., Del Coso, J., LeytonRomán, M., Luque-Casado, A., et al. (2021). Key factors associated with adherence
to physical exercise in patients with chronic diseases and older adults: an umbrella
review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 18:2023. doi: 10.3390/ijerph18042023

Hamilton, K., and Johnson, B. T. (2020). “Attitudes and persuasive
communication interventions’,’ in The Handbook of Behavior Change, eds M. S.
Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton, N. Hankonen, and T. Lintunen (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press), 445–460. doi: 10.1017/9781108677318.031

Credé, M. (2010). Random responding as a threat to the validity of effect size
estimates in correlational research. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 70, 596–612. doi: 10.1177/
0013164410366686

Hamilton, K., Kirkpatrick, A., Rebar, A., and Hagger, M. S. (2017). Child sun
safety: application of an integrated behavior change model. Health Psychol. 36,
916–926. doi: 10.1037/hea0000533

de Vet, E., Oenema, A., and Brug, J. (2011). More or better: do the number
and specificity of implementation intentions matter in increasing physical activity?
Psychol. Sport and Exerc. 12, 471–477. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2011.02.008

Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., and Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the
world? Behav. Brain Sci. 33, 61–83. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X0999152X

Ebben, W., and Brudzynski, L. (2008). Motivations and barriers to exercise
among college students. J. Exerc. Physiol. Online 11, 1–11.
Edwards, J. R. (2001). Ten difference score myths. Org. Res. Methods 4, 265–287.
doi: 10.1177/109442810143005

Hollands, G. J., Prestwich, A., and Marteau, T. M. (2011). Using aversive images
to enhance healthy food choices and implicit attitudes: an experimental test of
evaluative conditioning. Health Psychol. 30, 195–203. doi: 10.1037/a0022261

Fishbein, M., and Ajzen, I. (2011). Predicting and Changing Behavior. Hove:
Psychology Press, doi: 10.4324/9780203838020

Houben, K., Havermans, R. C., and Wiers, R. W. (2010). Learning to dislike
alcohol: conditioning negative implicit attitudes toward alcohol and its effect

Frontiers in Psychology

13

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

on drinking behavior. Psychopharmacology 211, 79–86. doi: 10.1007/s00213-0101872-1

activity. Psychol. Sport Exerc. 54:102222. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2021.10
1899

Howlett, N., Trivedi, D., Troop, N. A., and Chater, A. M. (2019). Are physical
activity interventions for healthy inactive adults effective in promoting behavior
change and maintenance, and which behavior change techniques are effective? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Transl. Behav. Med. 9, 147–157. doi: 10.1093/
tbm/iby010

Prochaska, J. O., and DiClemente, C. C. (1982). Transtheoretical therapy:
toward a more integrative model of change. Psychotherapy 19, 276–288. doi: 10.
1037/h0088437
Prochaska, J. O., and Velicer, W. F. (1997). The transtheoretical model of health
behavior change. Am. J. Health Promot. 12, 38–48. doi: 10.4278/0890-1171-12.1.38

Hoyle, R. H. (2012). Handbook Of Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

Rebar, A. L., Dimmock, J. A., Jackson, B., Rhodes, R. E., Kates, A., Starling,
J., et al. (2016). A systematic review of the effects of non-conscious regulatory
processes in physical activity. Health Psychol. Rev. 10, 395–407. doi: 10.1080/
17437199.2016.1183505

Keadle, S. K., Lyden, K., Staudenmayer, J., Hickey, A., Viskochil, R., Braun,
B., et al. (2014). The independent and combined effects of exercise training and
reducing sedentary behavior on cardiometabolic risk factors. Appl. Physiol. Nutr.
Metab. 39, 770–780. doi: 10.1139/apnm-2013-0379

Rhodes, R. E. (2017). “The evolving understanding of physical activity behavior:
a multi-process action approach’,’ in Advances in Motivation Science, ed. A. J. Elliot
(Amsterdam: Elsevier), 171–205.

Keating, X. D., Guan, J., Piñero, J. C., and Bridges, D. M. (2005). A meta-analysis
of college students’ physical activity behaviors. J. Am. Coll. Health 54, 116–126.
doi: 10.3200/JACH.54.2.116-126

Rhodes, R. E., and Courneya, K. S. (2010). Investigating multiple components
of attitude, subjective norm, and perceived control: an examination of the theory
of planned behaviour in the exercise domain. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 42, 129–146.
doi: 10.1348/014466603763276162

Keatley, D. A., Clarke, D. D., Ferguson, E., and Hagger, M. S. (2014). Effects
of pretesting implicit self-determined motivation on behavioral engagement:
evidence for the mere measurement effect at the implicit level. Front. Psychol.
5:125. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00125

Rhodes, R. E., Cox, A., and Sayer, R. (2022). What predicts the physical activity
intention – behavior gap? A systematic review. Ann. Behav. Med. 56, 1–20. doi:
10.1093/abm/kaab044

Kinmonth, A.-L., Wareham, N. J., Hardeman, W., Sutton, S., Prevost, A. T.,
Fanshawe, T., et al. (2008). Efficacy of a theory-based behavioural intervention to
increase physical activity in an at-risk group in primary care (ProActive UK): a
randomised trial. Lancet 371, 41–48. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60070-7

Rhodes, R. E., and Dickau, L. (2012). Experimental evidence for the intention–
behavior relationship in the physical activity domain: a meta-analysis. Health
Psychol. 31, 724–727. doi: 10.1037/a0027290

Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles And Practice Of Structural Equation Modeling.
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Rhodes, R. E., Kaushal, N., and Quinlan, A. (2016). Is physical activity a
part of who I am? A review and meta-analysis of identity, schema and physical
activity. Health Psychol. Rev. 10, 204–224. doi: 10.1080/17437199.2016.114
3334

Markland, D., and Tobin, V. (2004). A modification to the behavioural
regulation in exercise questionnaire to include an assessment of amotivation.
J. Sport Exerc. Psychol. 26, 191–196. doi: 10.1123/jsep.26.2.191

Rhodes, R. E., La, H., Quinlan, A., and Grant, S. (2021). “Enacting physical
activity intention: a multi-process action control approach’,’ in Motivation and SelfRegulation in Sport and Exercise, eds C. Englert and I. M. Taylor (Abingdon: Taylor
& Francis), 8–19. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.797484

Mplus Discussion (2008). Comparing Non-Nested Models. Available online
at:
http://www.statmodel.com/discussion/messages/11/3521.html?1480430295
(accessed June 21, 2022).
Muthén, L. K. (2009). Standardized Coefficients And Fit Indices. Available
online at: http://www.statmodel.com/cgi-bin/discus/discus.cgi?pg=prev&topic=
11&page=4464 (accessed January 15, 2020).

Rothman, A. (2000). Toward a theory-based analysis or behavioral maintenance.
Health Psychol. 19, 64–69.
Rothman, A. J., and Sheeran, P. (2020). What is slowing us down? Six challenges
to accelerating advances in health behavior change. Ann. Behav. Med. 54, 948–959.
doi: 10.1093/abm/kaaa090

Muthén, L. K., and Muthén, B. O. (2002). How to use a monte carlo study to
decide on sample size and determine power. Struct. Equ. Modeling 9, 599–620.
doi: 10.1207/S15328007SEM0904_8

Rothman, A. J., Sheeran, P., and Wood, W. (2009). Reflective and automatic
processes in the initiation and maintenance of dietary change. Ann. Behav. Med.
38, 4–17. doi: 10.1007/s12160-009-9118-3

Muthén, L. K., and Muthén, B. O. (2012). 1998-2012. Mplus User’s Guide, 7th
Edn. Los Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén.
Norman, P., and Conner, M. (2005). The theory of planned behavior and
exercise: evidence for the mediating and moderating roles of planning on
intention-behavior relationships. J. Sport Exerc. Psychol. 27, 488–504. doi: 10.1123/
jsep.27.4.488

Ryan, R. M., and Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am.
Psychol. 55, 68–78. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
Sackett, P. R., Lievens, F., Berry, C. M., and Landers, R. N. (2007). A cautionary
note on the effects of range restriction on predictor intercorrelations. J. Appl.
Psychol. 92, 538–544. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.92.2.538

Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A., and Banaji, M. (2007). The Implicit Association Test
at Age 7: A Methodological and Conceptual Review. Undefined. Available online at:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-Implicit-Association-Test-at-Age7%3A-A-and-Nosek-Greenwald/13888d871fe7e1c097bb624d7698849a569a0339
(accessed April 11, 2022).

Schwarzer, R. (2016). Health action process approach (HAPA) as a theoretical
framework to understand behavior change. AP 30:119. doi: 10.15517/ap.v30i121.
23458

Nosek, B. A., and Smyth, F. L. (2007). A multitrait-multimethod validation
of the implicit association test. Exp. Psychol. 54, 14–29. doi: 10.1027/1618-3169.
54.1.14

Schwarzer, R., and Luszczynska, A. (2008). How to overcome healthcompromising behaviors. Eur. Psychol. 13, 141–151. doi: 10.1027/1016-9040.13.
2.141

Okun, M. A., Karoly, P., and Lutz, R. (2002). Clarifying the contribution of
subjective norm to predicting leisure-time exercise. Am. J. Health Behav. 26,
296–305. doi: 10.5993/AJHB.26.4.6

Shannon, S., Breslin, G., Haughey, T., Sarju, N., Neill, D., Lawlor, M., et al.
(2019). Predicting student-athlete and non-athletes’ intentions to self-manage
mental health: testing an integrated behaviour change model. Ment. Health
Prevent. 13, 92–99. doi: 10.1016/j.mhp.2019.01.006

Oswald, F. L., Mitchell, G., Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., and Tetlock, P. E. (2013).
Predicting ethnic and racial discrimination: a meta-analysis of IAT criterion
studies. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 105, 171–192. doi: 10.1037/a0032734

Sheeran, P., Godin, G., Conner, M., and Germain, M. (2017). Paradoxical effects
of experience: past behavior both strengthens and weakens the intention-behavior
relationship. J. Assoc. Consum. Res. 2, 309–318. doi: 10.1086/691216

Peterson, R. A. (2001). On the use of college students in social science research:
insights from a second-order meta-analysis. J. Consum. Res. 28, 450–461. doi:
10.1086/323732

Sheeran, P., and Webb, T. L. (2016). The intention-behavior gap: the intentionbehavior gap. Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass 10, 503–518. doi: 10.1111/spc3.
12265

Phillips, L. A., Chamberland, P.-É, Hekler, E. B., Abrams, J., and Eisenberg,
M. H. (2016). Intrinsic rewards predict exercise via behavioral intentions for
initiators but via habit strength for maintainers. Sport Exerc. Perform. Psychol. 5,
352–364. doi: 10.1037/spy0000071

Smedslund, G. (2000). A pragmatic basis for judging models and theories in
health psychology: the axiomatic method. J. Health Psychol. 5, 133–149. doi: 10.
1177/135910530000500202

Phillips, L. A., Leventhal, H., and Leventhal, E. A. (2013). Assessing theoretical
predictors of long-term medication adherence: patients’ treatment-related beliefs,
experiential feedback and habit development. Psychol. Health 28, 1135–1151. doi:
10.1080/08870446.2013.793798

Sniehotta, F. (2009). An experimental test of the theory of planned
behavior. Appl. Psychol. 1, 257–270. doi: 10.1111/j.1758-0854.2009.
01013.x
Sniehotta, F. F., Presseau, J., and Araújo-Soares, V. (2014). Time to retire the
theory of planned behaviour. Health Psychol. Rev. 8, 1–7. doi: 10.1080/17437199.
2013.869710

Phipps, D. J., Hannan, T. E., Rhodes, R. E., and Hamilton, K. (2021). A
dual-process model of affective and instrumental attitudes in predicting physical

Frontiers in Psychology

14

frontiersin.org

More and Phillips

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.940777

contexts1. J. Appl. Biobehav. Res. 11, 79–104. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9861.2006.tb00
021.x

Sniehotta, F. F., Scholz, U., and Schwarzer, R. (2005). Bridging the intention–
behaviour gap: planning, self-efficacy, and action control in the adoption and
maintenance of physical exercise. Psychol. Health 20, 143–160. doi: 10.1080/
08870440512331317670

World Health Organization (2020). Physical Activity. Available online at: https:
//www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/physical-activity (accessed June 21,
2022).

Steegen, S., Tuerlinckx, F., Gelman, A., and Vanpaemel, W. (2016). Increasing
transparency through a multiverse analysis. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 11, 702–712.
doi: 10.1177/1745691616658637

Znanewitz, J., Braun, L., Hensel, D., Altobelli, C. F., and Hattke,
F. (2018). A critical comparison of selected implicit measurement
methods. J. Neurosci. Psychol. Econ. 11, 249–266. doi: 10.1037/npe000
0086

Webb, T. L., and Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions
engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol.
Bull. 132, 249–268. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.249

Zwick, W. R., and Velicer, W. F. (1986). Comparison of five rules for
determining the number of components to retain. Psychol. Bull. 99, 432–442.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.99.3.432

Wilson, P. M., Rodgers, W. M., Loitz, C. C., and Scime, G. (2007).
“It’s who i a really!’ The importance of integrated regulation in exercise

Frontiers in Psychology

15

frontiersin.org

