Review 
Author(s): Allan D. Shocker 
Review by: Allan D. Shocker 
Source: 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 02-12-2015 02:20 UTC

American Marketing Association
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3172832

Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 30, No. 2 (May, 1993), pp. 256-258

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Marketing 
Research.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Wed, 02 Dec 2015 02:20:58 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
....NEW 

BOOKS 

IN 

REVIEW 

EDITOR: Donald  E. Stem, Jr. 

ASSOCIATE EDITORS: Meryl  P.  Gardner 

James  B. Wiley 
Anne  T. Coughlan 
Roy D. Howell 

MANAGING BRAND  EQUITY, David A.  Aaker. New 
York: The Free Press,  1991,  300  pages,  $24.95. 

Managing  Brand Equity is  a  highly  readable,  enter- 
taining,  and informative book  that serves  to  introduce 
readers to  one  of  the more ballyhooed  themes in  mar- 
keting  today.  Branding and brand management themes 
have been popular before in the marketing management 
literature, but have  been  in  an academic backwater for 
maybe  20  years.  The  renewed academic  interest in  the 
area has come  about largely as the consequence of  sub- 
stantial practitioner interest (and possibly also concurrent 
charges  in  the  popular press  that business  schools  are 
becoming  increasingly irrelevant by ignoring issues  im- 
portant to managers). In recognition of  this interest, the 
prestigious Marketing Science  Institute for several years 
made brand equity its highest priority research topic and 
provided  numerous research competitions  and  confer- 
ence  venues  that promised support and visibility  for ac- 
ademic efforts in this area. At least two  academic jour- 
nals  (including the JMR) have  sponsored special  issues 
emphasizing this area, providing further legitimacy and 
impetus. 

Professor Aaker (University of California at Berkeley) 
is  well  qualified  to  speak  on  this  topic.  His  previous 
writings on  advertising,  marketing strategy,  marketing 
research, product positioning,  and product quality all fit 
well  under the umbrella afforded by  the topic  of  brand 
equity  (BE).  Along  with  Kevin  Lane  Keller  (Stanford 
University), he was among the first academicians to pub- 
lish research specifically referenced to this area. His ini- 
tial  work  to  understand the  factors  that influence  suc- 
cessful  brand extensions  has led  to  a research program 
pursuing various strategic issues of  timing and sequenc- 
ing.  Aaker shows  considerable sensitivity and insight to 
the complexities of managing brand equity and this book 
is  a valued contribution to the growing literature. 

Aaker argues that managerial concern with brand eq- 
uity has arisen out of a confluence of several recent trends 
and  events.  The  substantial premium over  book  value 
paid for many packaged goods  firms during the merger- 
happy 1980s brought credibility to arguments that much 

of the price was compensation for the trademarks owned 
by  the  acquired firm.  One  major theme  is  that brands 
provide benefits to customers and the firm and thus are 
best viewed  as  assets,  assets not well  accounted for by 
traditional  accounting  valuation.  Moreover,  existing 
trademarks increase in value as the costs of  establishing 
a  new  brand name increase.  The  substantial growth of 
cable  TV  and the  popularity of  other leisure  activities 
have  reduced the role  of  network television  and made 
the establishment of  new  brands more costly.  Prolifer- 
ation of  new  products has  produced a  clutter of  infor- 
mation,  potentially  simplified  by  the  ability  of  con- 
sumers to rely on  familiar brand names. 

Another trend noted by  Aaker is  the  growing  avail- 
ability of  scanner data,  which  has enabled brand man- 
agers to obtain rapid feedback from promotional activity 
and perhaps caused them to  favor actions that produce 
short-term results. Scanner data have also provided new 
information to the trade and conceivably encouraged firms' 
reluctance to share in the risks of  new product introduc- 
tion,  again giving  increased value to the use of  familiar 
brand names to support new ventures. Aaker thus is able 
to  argue that longer term investment in  building BE  is 
discouraged by the superior ability to measure short-term 
results and by the tight economic  times,  which have re- 
stricted marketing budgets and put pressure on managers 
to produce more with less. 

As  the book's  title implies,  Aaker's primary concern 
is in helping managers understand the importance of and 
bases  for brand equity  and in providing numerous sug- 
gestions  as  to  how  it  might  be  productively managed. 
The book is written in a distinctly managerial style.  Vir- 
tually  all  chapters begin  with an extensive  case  history 
and each chapter is  sprinkled with many real-world ex- 
amples to  support Aaker's  basic  points.  The  examples 
are  invariably supportive,  and  often  represent the  au- 
thor's  rationalization for  why  things  happened as  they 
did. 

Though the text cites considerable academic research, 
one must keep in mind that very little of the recent surge 
in academic BE research had been published by the time 
the  book  was  written.  To  the  extent  that current aca- 

256 

Journal  of Marketing Research 
Vol.  XXX  (May  1993),  256-66 

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Wed, 02 Dec 2015 02:20:58 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

NEW BOOKS IN REVIEW 

257 

demic interest in the BE topic is rooted in a desire to be 
relevant, this managerial emphasis may not be amiss be- 
cause  the  same  insights  can  also  serve  to  educate aca- 
demicians  to  the  BE  concerns  of  marketing managers. 
However,  the academician seeking value from this book 
should be  prepared to spend time making translation to 
his  or her domain,  for Aaker does  little to raise needed 
research questions. 

The  book  consists  of  11  chapters.  It  begins  with  a 
chapter that defines  and argues  the  managerial impor- 
tance of BE.  A major contribution of the book is Aaker's 
model  specifying  the  sources of  BE.  Equity is  defined 
as  "a set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, 
its  name  and symbol,  that add to  or  subtract from  the 
value provided by a product or service to a firm and/or 
to that firm's customers" (p.  15).  In Aaker's conceptual 
framework,  brand loyalty,  brand awareness,  perceived 
quality, brand associations,  and "other proprietary brand 
assets"  (such  as  patents and trademarks, distributor re- 
lationships,  etc.)  are identified  as  the  sources  of  value 
to the firm and its customers. They are accepted largely 
on  the basis  of  face  validity  and no  attempt is  made to 
argue their relative importance or possible  interrelation. 
Each source (except  "other proprietary brand assets") is 
discussed  within its own  chapter. Particular attention is 
paid  to  the  measurement and  management of  associa- 
tions (seemingly,  five  chapters are devoted to aspects of 
this topic).  Among these chapters is one on measurement 
and one on creating names, symbols,  and slogans (which 
is  the  most  comprehensive  I  have  seen).  Another is  a 
discussion  of  brand extensions  based on  the Aaker and 
Keller  studies  and Aaker's  Sloan  Management Review 
article,  "Brand Extensions: The Good,  the Bad,  and the 
Ugly."  The  book  concludes  with  two  additional chap- 
ters,  one  about revitalizing a brand and the other about 
global  branding. 

Having  discussed  in  the first chapter why  BE  is  im- 
portant and laid  out  a  conceptualization of  BE  and its 
roots,  Aaker uses  several of  the  middle chapters (e.g., 
on  brand loyalty,  brand awareness,  perceived  quality, 
and even the basic chapter on brand associations) simply 
to  pursue a discussion  of  those topics that is  largely di- 
vorced  from  explicit  reference  to  the  managerial con- 
cerns raised in the opening chapter. The impression left 
is that higher brand loyalty,  increased awareness, higher 
perceived  quality,  and  so  on  are per  se  necessary  for 
creating  and  maintaining  BE.  Tradeoffs  among  these 
factors are not discussed.  In Chapter 9  on brand exten- 
sions,  Aaker adopts a  different style  and links  the  dis- 
cussion more directly to some of the BE concerns raised 
in the introductory chapter. This style  may only  be  due 
to the chapter's tie to the Sloan Management Review ar- 
ticle,  but it  affords a more managerially beneficial  pre- 
sentation. 

Aaker's  previous  writings  on  advertising,  marketing 
strategy,  marketing research,  product positioning,  and 
product quality and his research on BE  substantially in- 
fluence the book,  even though they are not always cited. 

The  chapter on  brand associations reflects  some  of  the 
earlier thinking in his oft-cited Business Horizons article 
on  product positioning.  The discussion  and many of  its 
specific  recommendations benefit from his sensitivity to 
and  knowledge  of  strategic  marketing issues.  His  re- 
search  with  Robert Jacobson  on  the  strategic  role  of 
product quality finds useful expression in the discussion 
of  perceived quality.  But there are several instances in 
which  such relationships seem  less  desirable.  A  whole 
chapter (Ch.  6)  on  methods of  measurement for  brand 
associations  could  have  fit  well  into  his  marketing re- 
search text and seems  somewhat out of  place.  (Such an 
extensive  discussion  of  measurement does  not  accom- 
pany the chapters on brand loyalty, brand awareness, and 
perceived quality.) 

Given  that measurement concerns are raised,  what is 
particularly disappointing is that the book does  not con- 
tain much critical discussion  of  the measurement of  the 
construct of brand equity itself.  The first chapter merely 
contains a description of  several proposals that have been 
put  forth  for  valuing  brands.  (And  the  discussion  of 
tradeoff  [conjoint] analysis  and dollarmetric methodol- 
ogies  is either misleading or inaccurate.) Also  lacking is 
substantial reference to  the  financial  or  accounting as- 
pects of brand equity or even to the controversy that has 
characterized attempts to value  brands as assets on  bal- 
ance sheets.  One of  the potentially important managerial 
aspects of brand equity is the opportunity it provides for 
accounting  and marketing executives  to  work  together 
more closely  to seek better means for valuing brands for 
purposes of  improved managerial control and quantifi- 
cation of  the worth from possible  strategic alliances. 

Most of  the examples used throughout the text are il- 
lustrated by  or  otherwise  relate  to  advertising,  one  of 
Aaker's areas of expertise. The text is decidedly pro ad- 
vertising and Aaker's "causes of BE" should provide much 
ammunition for that beleaguered industry in  its  attempt 
to rationalize itself.  One is  almost led  in the text to be- 
lieve  that brand equity is largely created and maintained 
by advertising alone. The argument that advertising sim- 
ply  supplies information about characteristics of  the of- 
fering that are rooted in the extended product or its pric- 
ing,  distribution, or service  support seems  downplayed 
(though  Aaker  never  suggests  that the  effect  of  other 
marketing mix  elements  on  BE  is  absent or irrelevant). 
Why does  brand loyalty exist?  Maybe higher perceived 
quality exists  because the manufacturer has selected and 
trained its  engineering  and manufacturing personnel to 
design and build more satisfying products or its channel 
members to provide superior support services. What gives 
rise to increased awareness? Is it just advertising weight 
or is it a special feature that no one else  has or a special 
value that is  now being offered? Given my  own  biases, 
I found myself frequently able to think of product-, pric- 
ing-,  or distribution-based explanations for a great many 
of  the examples  attributed to  advertising and suspect  a 
reader so  inclined could do likewise. 

In sum,  Aaker has  produced a well-written,  interest- 

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Wed, 02 Dec 2015 02:20:58 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

258 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, MAY 1993 

ing,  and valuable  work  that lends  structure to  a  man- 
ager's  thinking about brand equity  and is  filled  with  a 
great many ideas and examples for action consideration. 
It  also  provides  a  useful  base  for  aiding  academic  re- 
searchers' interests by  sensitizing  them to  some  of  the 
many dimensions of  brand equity and to the managerial 
concerns that are affected.  Many of  the conjectures that 
characterize the  recommendations made  could  be  sub- 
jected  to  rigorous investigation.  BE  as  a  field  of  intel- 
lectual inquiry contains remnants of both the old and new. 
The old  affords the opportunity for researchers to reex- 
amine prior notions about such concepts as brand loyalty 
and  imagery  and  associations.  The  Aaker  book  sum- 
marizes what is known about these traditional areas and 
offers the brand equity context as a reason for rethinking 
them.  But  it  also  hints  at  some  of  the  new  paradigms 
that are beginning to emerge in the current research lit- 
erature. Aaker's discussions provide insights supportive 
of these newer research thrusts-such  as the recognition 
of  brands as market signals,  of  products as members of 
"goal-directed" categories  and the  role  brands play  in 
affecting  categorization of  new  products, and of  brand 
strength as  affecting  the  timing  of  brand extensibility. 
These  themes  are a  part of  contemporary research and 
their usefulness  for brand equity questions suggests  BE 
will  remain a major context  for academic  inquiry. The 
Aaker text  has  done  a  fine  job  of  communicating the 
substance of BE determination. It should continue to aid 
formation of  research agendas and suggest plausible lines 
of attack in pursuit of the proper management of brands. 
ALLAN D.  SHOCKER 

University of Minnesota 

VARIANCE COMPONENTS, S.  R.  Searle, G.  Casella, 
and C.  E. McCulloch. New  York: John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc.,  1992,  501  pages,  $69.95. 
Variance  Components by  Searle,  Casella,  and  Mc- 
Culloch  (hereafter SCM)  is  a  1992  publication of  the 
Wiley  Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics. 
The  authors thoroughly develop  statistical analyses  for 
mixed  analysis of  variance (ANOVA)  models,  notably, 
as the title suggests,  the estimation of  variance compo- 
nents. 

When should a researcher be concerned about the top- 
ics  in this book? The answer is,  any time ANOVA-type 
data (data in which a response variable is related to one 
or  more  qualitative factors) are to  be  sampled or  ana- 
lyzed.  When it is  relevant to consider that the levels  of 
a factor in question come from a probability distribution, 
one  should treat the factor as random, in which case we 
have  a mixed ANOVA model.  One example is  when the 
levels  of  the factor are sampled from a population; an- 
other example  is the Bayesian model,  where one places 
a prior distribution on the effects.  (The flexibility  of the 
mixed model and the connection with Bayesian methods 
are emphasized throughout the book.  For persons inter- 
ested in applied Bayesian analysis, this book is excellent 
for study.) 

There are two  essential  issues  in  mixed  model  anal- 
ysis.  The  first  is  to  estimate  the  variance components 
(the variances of the various factors). Second, one might 
(1)  estimate the effects  of  the fixed  (nonrandom) factors 
(called fixed  effects)  and/or  (2)  estimate  the  effects  of 
the random factors. These goals are addressed very well 
by  SCM.  Estimation of  variance components  is  given 
highest priority, as it should be-the  efficiency with which 
the fixed  and random effects  are estimated depends on 
how  well  the variance components are estimated. Thus 
it  is  crucial that the  variance components be  estimated 
accurately. 

The  estimation of  random effects  via  best  linear un- 
biased prediction (BLUP) is often completely ignored in 
courses on ANOVA.  This  is unfortunate. Estimation of 
random effects  is quite similar to estimation of  factor (or 
other  latent variable)  scores,  an  application useful  for 
psychometricians.  Additionally,  as  SCM point out,  es- 
timation of  random effects  has  been  applied very  suc- 
cessfully  in animal genetics. 

As  a prerequisite, SCM recommend a course in linear 
models.  Having examined the book, I would recommend 
at least a  solid  understanding of  applied regression and 
ANOVA for understanding most of the material. The more 
advanced material will require a more mathematical course 
in linear models along the lines of Graybill (1976).  Some 
familiarity with distribution theory and maximum like- 
lihood  will  also be helpful. 

Why did SCM write this book? I believe  they wanted 
to  provide  a  complete  reference  of  the  theory  behind 
practical  mixed  model  methodology.  Admittedly,  the 
book  seems  heavy  on  theory-there  are few  examples 
with actual data and the matrix algebra can be slow read- 
ing.  However,  SCM  have  chosen  theoretical topics  to 
support a practitioner's needs for understanding the data 
analysis.  They  have  also  supplied many useful  caveats 
for  applied research workers.  The  more  esoteric  crite- 
rion-based methods of Rao and Kleffe's (1988) book have 
received much attention in the recent advanced statistics 
journals, but are given  little attention by  SCM because 
they  lack utility for practitioners. 

This book will be easy  to use for self-study.  Chapters 
1 and 2  start somewhat easily. Historical aspects of mixed 
models  and variance components are discussed,  and the 
research developments from 1861 to the present are sum- 
marized. Important caveats about the appropriateness of 
using  random versus fixed  effects  are given.  The myri- 
ads of variance component estimators are described briefly 
here, with more detailed discussions in subsequent chap- 
ters.  These  methods  include  the  ANOVA  estimates 
(Henderson's methods I,  II,  and III),  maximum likeli- 
hood (ML) and restricted maximum likelihood (REML) 
estimates,  Bayesian  estimates,  and  criteria-based esti- 
mates such as C. R. Rao's minimum norm quadratic un- 
biased  estimates  (MINQUE).  The  authors lean  toward 
the  use  of  likelihood-based  estimates  for  routine anal- 
yses,  but provide  ample  coverage  of  the  simpler  AN- 
OVA-type  estimates. 

The first two chapters ease gradually into the requisite 

This content downloaded from 128.111.121.42 on Wed, 02 Dec 2015 02:20:58 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions