Journal of Advances in Management Research
Branding effectiveness measurement in non-profit environment
Ebha Garg, Sanjeev Swami, Sunita Kumari Malhotra,

Article information:

To cite this document:
Ebha Garg, Sanjeev Swami, Sunita Kumari Malhotra, (2018) "Branding effectiveness measurement
in non-profit environment", Journal of Advances in Management Research, https://doi.org/10.1108/
JAMR-05-2018-0039
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/JAMR-05-2018-0039

Downloaded on: 25 September 2018, At: 22:34 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 35 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-
srm:320271 []

For Authors

If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald
for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission
guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com

Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as
well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and
services.

Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for
digital archive preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/0972-7981.htm

Branding effectiveness
measurement in
non-profit environment
Ebha Garg, Sanjeev Swami and Sunita Kumari Malhotra
Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, India

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

therefore,

Abstract
Purpose – Literature suggests that branding effectiveness measures are present in for-profit sectors but
lacks such comprehensive measures for the non-profit sector. Moreover, most of the branding effectiveness
measures are either based on brand image approach or on brand identity approach. The purpose of this paper
is,
to propose an integrated branding effectiveness measurement metrics for non-profit
organizations (NPOs).
Design/methodology/approach – Judgmental and simple random sampling techniques are used for data
collection. The final sample comprises 150 respondents including donors, volunteers, beneficiaries and media
who were administered interview schedules. Based on the ratings given by the respondents regarding
branding effectiveness parameters of the five NPOs of a major city in Northern India, branding effectiveness
score of each NPO is computed. The branding measures adopted by NPOs rated high are selected in the
proposed brand effectiveness metrics.
Findings – The proposed metrics encapsulates brand identity parameters such as management profile,
vision, culture, as well as brand image parameters such as brand awareness, brand understanding, brand
association of the stakeholders, etc. The metrics also link the two through brand performance parameters.
Research limitations/implications – Multiple hierarchical structures of government infested with
bureaucracy and lack of specialized staff with focused approach have reduced the effectiveness of their
socio-development programs in emerging economies. This has led to an increase in number, diversity and
impact of NPOs that compete for resource generation. Branding is a powerful tool for NPOs not only for
resource generation but also for driving the social goals. The branding effectiveness metrics would help
identity by increasing the cohesion and the capacity of the
NPO managers reinforce the internal
organization as well as create a strong brand image by garnering the support of multiple stakeholders
through mutual trust thereby creating a greater social impact.
Originality/value – The uniqueness of the study stems from the fact that the proposed branding
effectiveness measurement metrics in non-profit environment encapsulates brand image, brand identity and
brand performance parameters.
Keywords Non-profit organisations, Brand management, Branding effectiveness measurement
Paper type Research paper

1. Introduction
Non-profit organizations (NPOs) have evolved as key players in the development of every
sector of emerging economies. Areas such as education, skill development, healthcare,
environment, art and culture witness the focus of NPOs. Rapid democratization, economic
liberalization, support from for-profit sector, advent and adoption of new technologies have
led to the growth in number and diversity of NPOs. Moreover,
limited capacity of
lack of well trained employees, multilayer
government to ensure social development,
hierarchical structure and multiple developmental schemes with a lack of focused approach
have proved to be major reasons of rise in NPOs especially in developing economies.
In developed economies, NPOs are no longer small-scale actors, simply “filling up” the
vacuum left by the government. They have grown into powerful and impactful voices of
the society and act as facilitators of social and political integration. One of the major reasons
of growth of NPOs in developed economies such as USA is the rising trend of government
outsourcing more of their development aid delivery to NGOs. This rise in the number of
NPOs both in developing and developed economies and the increase in competition has
made branding a crucial factor of differentiation (Michel and Rieunier, 2012).

Journal of Advances in
Management Research
© Emerald Publishing Limited
0972-7981
DOI 10.1108/JAMR-05-2018-0039

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

Traditionally, branding was considered as an instrument of commercial organizations
but now it is widely used in the non-profit sector too due to multiple reasons (Ritchie et al.,
1999). First, brands facilitate the development of mutual trust between the organization
and its stakeholders. Second, NPOs have multiple stakeholders with different set of needs
which can be met through a consistent brand approach. Third, strong brands develop
goodwill that can protect them against “image spillover,” by preventing negative images
of other similar organizations from spilling over to their own cause (Ritchie et al., 1999).
Moreover, branding helps non-profit brands to set themselves apart from the competition
clutter when it comes to competing for funds and wooing the volunteers (Paco et al., 2014).
Branding is a powerful tool for NPOs not only for resource generation but also for driving
the social goals.

Realizing the importance of brand management

in the non-profit sector, NPO
managers have started using brand management tools. On the basis of literature review
on NPO branding, however, it is found that most of the NPOs managers take a narrow
approach to brand management. They use it as merely a fundraising tool. Only a handful
of large NPOs such as CRY, Helpage India, Red Cross, World Wildlife Fund, etc. use
integrated brand management approach to achieve long-term social goals. Moreover,
many NPO managers measure branding effectiveness either from customers’/competitors’
perspective or from internal perspective only. NPO managers measure branding
effectiveness in silos and measure effectiveness of branding activities/campaigns
separately instead of measuring branding effectiveness of the organization as a whole.
Though many researchers and brand managers in for-profit sector have tried to formulate
integrated branding effectiveness approaches, the approach remains under-researched
in the non-profit sector. Thus, there arises the need for development of an integrated
branding effectiveness measurement method focusing on the effectiveness of internal
branding in fortifying internal
identity, cohesion and capacity and focusing on
external branding in strengthening image and achieving social goals of the organization.
In the study by Kylander and Stone (2012), brand is considered as an embodiment of the
identity of the organization which evolves alongside the organization and externally
reveal the image of the organization in the minds of organization’s external stakeholders.
The present study is proposed as an important step toward a new approach to measuring
branding effectiveness in NPOs.

The next section of the paper represents a review of the approaches to branding
effectiveness measures adopted by for-profit organizations as well as by NPOs.
The subsequent section consists of identification of factors contributing to branding
effectiveness based on secondary research, and validation of these factors through
appropriate data collection and analysis. An integrated branding effectiveness model is thus
proposed based on literature review and data analysis. Managerial implications and future
scope of the study are discussed in the conclusion.

2. Background literature
A structured literature review was conducted to gain a holistic overview of the extant
research on branding effectiveness in for-profit and non-profit sectors. This led to a
categorization of major research streams into branding effectiveness of
for-profit
organizations and NPOs.

2.1 Measuring branding effectiveness of for-profit organizations
Some of the branding effectiveness measurement models/metrics which have gained
prominence in the non-profit branding environment have been included in the study.

2.1.1 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics based on the perspective of
organization’s external stakeholder(s). Majority of the branding effectiveness measurement

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)Branding
effectiveness
measurement

models propounded by the authors (Aaker, 1996; Davis and Dunn, 2002; Munoz and Kumar,
2004) are based on an outside-in perspective by focusing on consumer’s or/and competitors’
perceptions of the brand. This is the brand image approach which focuses on the perception
of external stakeholders.

Brand Equity Ten. Aaker (1996, pp. 276-277) considers analysis of a set of ten brand
equity measurement variables as the basis of measuring branding effectiveness and termed
these as “Brand Equity Ten” (refer Table I). These ten variables are classified under loyalty
indicators: the extent to which people are loyal to a brand can be measured by the premium
they are willing to pay for it and their level of satisfaction after using the product/service;
brand perceived quality indicators: the extent to which a brand is considered to provide
quality products and its popularity in relation to competitors; brand awareness indicators: the
extent to which public is aware about the brand; brand association indicators: the extent to
which consumers develop an association with the brand in terms of perceived value of the
product, differentiation/position in relation to competing brands and the organization’s level of
concern for customers by being innovative and striving for high quality; and market behavior
indicators: the level of performance of a brand as measured by market share (and/or sales) but
sometimes market share can be a deceptive brand equity measure as it may increases because
of reduction in prices or price promotions. Thus, the relative market price at which it is sold is
an important to measure of brand equity.

Brand effectiveness metrics. Brand effectiveness metrics uses contact branding concept
which means the effectiveness of brand can be evaluated through brand touch points with
the consumers. It comprises tactical and strategic metrics. Tactical metrics includes brand
awareness, brand understanding, brand promises, brand significance, brand reliability,
brand consideration, brand preference, brand impact on purchase decision, brand
satisfaction and brand recommendation (Davis and Dunn, 2002, pp. 245-252). On the other
hand, strategic metrics includes brand extension, customer acquisition, customer retention,
brand purchase, price premium for the brand and brand commitment (Davis and Dunn,
2002, p. 244).

Brand effectiveness measures. Another set of branding effectiveness measures are
identified and classified into six brand metrics (Lehmann et al., 2008). The six key brand
metrics evaluating brand performance include:

(1)

(2)

(3)

comprehension: consumer’s understanding and feelings about the brand;

comparative advantage: the level of differentiation of the brand;

inter-personal relations: strength of inter-personal relations and social aspects;

Indicators

Loyalty

Brand leadership

Brand awareness
Brand association

Market behavior

Source: Adaptation from Aaker (1996, p. 280)

Brand equity measurement variables

Price premium
Customer satisfaction
Perceived quality
Leadership/popularity
Brand awareness
Perceived value
Brand uniqueness
Association with the organization
Market share
Market price and brand representation

Table I.
Brand equity ten

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

Figure 1.
Integrated model
of branding
effectiveness
assessment

(4) history: past brand-related events;
(5) preference: consumers’ attitudes toward the brand; and
(6) attachment: strength of consumers’ connection to and interaction with the brand.

Integrated model of branding effectiveness assessment. Olga Alkanova proposed a
multidimensional metrics (modification of branding model proposed by Davis and Dunn) for
measuring branding effectiveness (refer Figure 1) which evaluates how the brand’s
representation to external stakeholders in terms of buyers’ expectations and competitors’
actions. It comprises four metrics classified on the basis of the marketing activities of the brand:

(1) Perception metrics evaluates consumer behavior before buying through
determining the extent of consumer awareness about the brand, consumers’
understanding of the benefits of buying the brand and the possibility of repeat
purchase of the product/service.

(2) Behavioral metrics determines consumer behavior aspects mainly after the
purchase, including brand preference, repeat purchases, loyalty and consumer’s
willingness to recommend the brand to others.

(3) Market metrics evaluates the position of the brand in the market relative to
competitors. The indicators of market metrics comprise market share, brand
development index, brand distribution level.

(4) Financial metrics determines the impact of brand investments on brand equity
growth in relation with the contact branding activities. It uses indicators such as
return on brand investment and the current value of the brand.

2.1.2 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics based on organization’s internal
stakeholders or/and organization’s performance. Contrary to the measurement of external
branding effectiveness, the measurement of internal branding effectiveness has received
attention only by few authors (Burmann and Zeplin, 2005; LePla et al., 2003).

Perception
metrics

Behavioral
metrics

Market
metrics

Financial
metrics

(cid:129) Purchase act
(cid:129) Trial
(cid:129) Customer acquisition
(cid:129) Preference
(cid:129) Purchase repetition
(cid:129) Price premium
(cid:129) Post purchase
(cid:129) Recommendations
(cid:129) Retention
(cid:129) Satisfaction

(cid:129) Cash flow creation
(cid:129) ROBI
(cid:129) Brand value

• Level of awareness
(cid:129) Induced awareness
(cid:129) Spontaneous awareness
(cid:129) Brand familiarity and
  consideration
(cid:129) Differentiation
(cid:129) Relevance
(cid:129) Credibility
(cid:129) Perceived quality
(cid:129) Purchase intent
(cid:129) Brand understanding

(cid:129) Behavior in the
  market
(cid:129) Market share
(cid:129) Distribution level
(cid:129) Brand development
  index

Source: Alkanova (2010)

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Components of internal brand strength. The holistic model of brand management considers
vision, personality, values, organizational capabilities, heritage as the elements of internal brand
strength which form the basis of branding effectiveness constructs (Burmann and Zeplin, 2005).
It is based on the identity-based brand management approach according to which a brand needs
to have a consistent and continuous identity. Two new behavioral constructs are developed to
ensure consistency of brand identity. First is brand citizenship behavior that delineates what it
means for employees to “live the brand” and the second construct is brand commitment which
explains the psychological processes that lead employees to exhibit brand citizenship behavior.
Leadership-driven branding approach. LePla et al. (2003) in the book Brand Driven
emphasize the responsibility of every leader at every level within the organization to create
and maintain unbreakable customer relationships. According to the authors, branding
effectiveness starts with leadership with a clear vision of the brand, and aligns the people
and the processes to support that vision internally and externally through consistent
messaging. They also underscore the importance of various tools that employees and
stakeholders can use to create a great customers’ experience.

2.1.3 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics based on organization’s performance
and internal as well as external stakeholder(s). Some researchers emphasized on the need for
establishing a link between internal and external branding. The proposed models adopt a
multidimensional approach (Sherrington, 2003; Munoz and Kumar, 2004; Chernatony, 2006;
Rajagopal, 2008) yet these fail to capture many important internal branding factors.

Key performance indicators. The study considers brand market share, key performance
indicators (KPIs) and multifactorial econometric models as a basis of measurement of
branding effectiveness. These KPIs are coupled with the organization’s long- and short-term
strategy and its vision (Sherrington, 2003, p. 220). This model assesses brand effectiveness
continuously but the assessment is based only on one dominant indicator.

Branding evaluation metrics. A more comprehensive branding evaluation metrics
(refer Figure 2) was propounded by Munoz and Kumar. It incorporates three metrics:
perception metrics comprising awareness, familiarity and consideration; performance
metrics which consists of loyalty and purchase decision and financial metrics which
includes value creation (Munoz and Kumar, 2004). This brand evaluation metrics considers
brand assessment as a continuous process and links brand management with business
performance but fails to capture market-based indicators such as brand distribution level.
Brand effectiveness evaluation. Brand effectiveness can be assessed on the basis of
business performance and customer actions (Chernatony et al., 1998). The matrix consists of two
columns for both internal and external evaluation of the brand parameters and five rows
consisting five stages of brand creation and development (Chernatony, 2006) (refer Figure 3).

Brand metrics. The brand metrics conceptualizes the inter-dependence of “Five-A” factors
which include awareness, acquaintance, allegiance, association and appraisal to measure the
qualitative parameters of brand performance in a given market and time (Rajagopal, 2008).
The metrics measures effectiveness of brand-building activity in reference to brand
investment (financial inputs) and brand impact (growth outputs) in the business. Analysis of
brand metrics will provide business growth and brand equity measures in relation to growth
in stock values, sales, profits, price premiums and employee satisfaction.

2.2 Measuring branding effectiveness of non-profit organization
The branding concept is widely known in NPOs at a superficial level but associated brand
management execution is lacking or difficult. This is mainly because NPOs lack associated
brand management execution tools (Ito, 2013) and the branding measures seem to be
borrowed from the for-profit sector (Stride and Lee, 2007). Few popular NPO branding
effectiveness measures proposed by the researchers are included in the study.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

Perception metrics

Performance metrics

Financial metrics

Awareness

- Saliency
- Brand recognition

Familiarity and
consideration
- Differentiation
- Relevance
- Credibility
- Likeability
- Perceived quality
- Purchase intent

Purchase decision

Value creation

- Customer leads
- Customer acquisition
- Trial
- Repeat
- Preference
- Price premium

- Market share
- Revenue
- Operating cash flow
- Market
  capitalization
- Analyst ratings
- Brand valuation

Loyalty
- Customer satisfaction
- Retention
- Revenue per customer
- Share of wallet
- Customer lifetime
  value

Figure 2.
Branding evaluation
metrics

Source: Adaptation from Munoz and Kumar (2004)

Brand vision

Internal brand
resource and
implementation

Organization
culture

Figure 3.
Branding effectiveness
evaluation

Brand essence

Brand
objectives

Source: Adaptation from Chernatony (2006)

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)2.2.1 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics based on the perspective of organization’s
external stakeholder(s). These models attempt to measure the perception of organization’s
external stakeholders comprising donors, beneficiaries, volunteers and all those the NPO
seeks to influence or assist.

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Charity brand index. Charity brand index (refer Figure 4) measures branding attributes
such as recognition, willingness to donate, level of understanding about the cause and the
attitudes toward the cause and trust on the brand (Third Sector, 2013).

2.2.2 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics based on organization’s performance
and internal as well as external stakeholder(s). Non-profit Brand IDEA is a conceptual
in which “IDEA” stands for
framework to measure branding effectiveness of NPOs,
integrity, democracy, ethics and affinity (Kylander and Stone, 2012). Brand IDEA considers
brand to play an integral, broader and strategic role in achieving organization’s core vision,
as well as in expressing the organization’s purposes, methods and values.

Brand integrity connects brand identity and image with the organization’s mission, sharing a
common purpose of organization’s existence with all the stakeholders. Brand democracy ensures
that organization trusts its members, employees and volunteers in their level of comprehension
of organization’s core identity, thus creating internal coherence. Brand ethics reflect the core
values of the organization and align its internal identity and external image with organization’s
core values. Brand affinity implies that the brand focus on partnerships/collaborations, and lays
importance to collective interests over individual interests.

In contrast, brand identity approach focuses on the sender of

Non-profit brands do not operate in silos, and evolve alongside the organization as it
grows as described in role of brand cycle (refer Figure 5). Brand image approach focuses
on the receivers’ side of the brand and analyzes how external stakeholders perceive the
brand.
the brand
communication and analyzes how internal stakeholders establish and perceive the brand.
Brand is an alignment between brand identity and brand image. When all the employees
and volunteers of an organization embrace a common brand identity reinforced by visual
identity symbols, culture and values, internally it creates organizational cohesion and
externally it results in greater transparency and trust among multiple stakeholders
including donors, beneficiaries and participants, etc. A cohesive organization is better apt
in using organizational resources efficiently which in turn increases its capacity. NPOs, by
leveraging the trust of beneficiaries and other stakeholders, can create a greater social

Media and advertising effectiveness

Brand
recognition

Understanding
charity’s work

Trusting charity
brand

Willingness to
donate

C
o
n
s
u
m
e
r

b
r
a
n
d

r
e
s
o
n
a
n
c
e

Media and advertising effectiveness

Source: Adaptation from Third Sector (2013)

Figure 4.
Charity brand index

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT) 
 
JAMR

Result

Brand 
identity

Enable

Result

Brand image

Enable

Organizational 
capacity

Internal 
cohesion

Social impact

External trust

Alignment

Drive

Drive

Figure 5.
Role of brand cycle

Source: Adaptation from Kylander and Stone (2012)

impact. Over a period of time, the reputation achieved in turn enhances brand identity as
well as the brand image (refer Figure 5).

To summarise, the present considers that branding effectiveness can be established
through the correspondence between brand identity and brand image. Based on the
literature review, the internal brand factors contributing to branding effectiveness in
NPOs considered in the current study include: visual identity symbols (Hankinson, 2000),
organization vision (Bridson and Evans, 2004; Napoli, 2006), management/leadership
(Burmann and Zeplin, 2005; Bridson and Evans, 2004; Napoli, 2006), values (Burmann and
Zeplin, 2005; Voeth and Herbst, 2008) and work culture (Chernatony, 2006). The brand
image parameters considered in the study include: brand awareness (Aaker, 1996; Munoz
and Kumar, 2004), brand understanding (Lehmann et al., 2008), perceived quality of
services (Aaker, 1996; Munoz and Kumar), regard for the NPO (Munoz and Kumar, 2004),
frequency to donate/volunteer (Third Sector, 2013),
frequency of recommendation
(Rajagopal, 2008), perceived branding and promotional events/history (Lehmann et al.,
2008), presence in media (Third Sector, 2013), inter-personal relations with management
(Lehmann et al., 2008), etc. Brand performance parameters needed to achieve the NPO’s
vision include frequency and effectiveness of branding and promotional activities
(Parthasarathy, 2013), communication (Napoli, 2006; Parthasarathy, 2013; Sargeant, 2013),
focus on quality of services/processes (Sargeant, 2013), intention to donate in future
(Michel and Rieunier, 2012), updated website (Huang and Ku, 2016).

The importance of these parameters in branding effectiveness is assessed from the
perspective of various stakeholders including donors, volunteers, beneficiaries, media
and management.

3. Research objectives
Having reviewed frameworks and metrics measuring branding effectiveness by tracing its
development in for-profit and non-profit sectors, the present paper analyzes the divergences
in the existing frameworks to identify branding effectiveness parameters of NPOs.
The brand parameters adopted by the NPOs ranked high in branding effectiveness
are selected for the study and validation of the parameters is done by assessing the
branding effectiveness of the NPOs from the perspective of donors, employees, volunteers,
beneficiaries and media. The most effective metrics can only be developed if there is a link
between brand identity and brand image. Branding effectiveness gives sustained
competitive advantage to NPOs and helps in garnering support of multiple stakeholders

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)including employees, volunteers, donors, beneficiaries, media, government bodies, etc. Thus
the paper aims to develop a holistic branding effectiveness measurement metrics focusing
on internal branding that contributes in fortifying internal identity, cohesion and capacity of
NPOs as well as emphasizing on external branding that helps in strengthening external
image, increasing their impact and achieving long-term social goals of the organization.

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

4. Overview of the NPOs
For the purpose of the study, five NPOs of a major city in Northern India having diverse
welfare missions are selected to assess their branding effectiveness:

(1) NPO A was established in 2008 with the primary aim to provide health services to
the economically deprived section of society. Some of the services of the NPO include
ambulance service, Medicare services, city mental health clinic, help pharmacy
(cost price medical store), among others.

(2) NPO B was established in 2009 by a team of youngsters to educate, enrich and
empower underprivileged children. The NPO runs a primary school wherein currently
220 children belonging to the marginalized section of the society are given free of cost,
high quality education, free study material, one-time meal and vocational training.

(3) NPO C was established in 2012 for the upliftment and development of women belonging
to the marginalized section of the society. One of the main objectives of the organization
is self-reliance of women and their economic independence through welfare activities.
The organization runs craft centers, stitching courses and beautician courses in different
geographic areas. The NPO also organizes awareness campaigns on social issues such
as “self-protection and safety for women,” “gender sensitization,” etc.

(4) NPO D was established in 2006 to implement sustainable and holistic solutions for the
environmental and ecological needs of Agra. The NPO organizes seminars and
in which environmentalists,
workshops on different aspects of environment;
engineers/technology experts, administrators/policy makers are invited as speakers
and panelists. Besides, the society also organizes environment theme-based rallies,
essay writing/drawing–painting competition for school students and tree
plantation drives.

(5) NPO E was started in 2001 to impart high-quality education to hearing-impaired
children and provide guidance to their families. Currently, there are 70 students
studying in the NGO’s senior secondary school.

5. Methodology
5.1 Sampling
The study attempts to validate the branding effectiveness parameters identified through
literature review by appropriate data collection and analysis.

Population of the study includes all donors, volunteers, beneficiaries, management/
employees of NPOs in the city as well as media since the effectiveness of branding of NPOs
is assessed through multiple stakeholders approach. Based on Godden’s (2004) formula, the
sample size (n) came out to be 160. Judgmental sampling and simple random sampling
techniques are used. The sample is then divided into various stakeholders including donors,
volunteers, beneficiaries, employees of all five NPOs and media (refer Table II). We tried to
cover all types of media houses in the city including print media comprising local dailies and
national newspaper and electronic media consisting of local cable TV and radio to get an
overall media’s perspective.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

5.2 Data collection
The schedule comprising 30 items measuring branding effectiveness of five NPOs was
administered, wherein the respondents were asked to rate their perceptions on various
brand-related aspects of the NPOs. Responses were measured on a five-point Likert scale,
ranging from negative to positive.

In the first stage of data collection, the data from management and employees were
collected at the NPO office/premises. Then, data from beneficiaries and volunteers were
obtained at the services delivery centers such as schools, dispensaries, etc. Once the list of
donors was obtained from the management, data from donors were collected through
interview schedules by visiting them in person at their residence or working place.
Actual data were collected from a sample size of 150 because of reluctance of response
of five donors and five volunteers. Secondary data were collected through journals,
brochures, annual reports, reports published by marketing research agencies and
NGO websites.

5.3 Data analysis
Data are analyzed using SPSS software through various statistical tools. Based on the
analyses of the convergence and divergence in brand concept and branding effectiveness
between for-profit and non-profit environments, the study adapts the branding effectiveness
measurement metrics for for-profit environment and proposes a new metrics for branding
effectiveness measurement in non-profit sector. Data analysis revolves around the following
four key themes:

(1)

Identification of branding effectiveness parameters

On the basis of literature reviewed, 15 parameters are identified contributing to
NPO branding effectiveness. The parameters are modified according to the type of
respondent that is donors, volunteers, beneficiaries, media, etc. (refer Table III).
Based on the ratings given by the respondents on these parameters, branding
effectiveness score of the NPO is computed.

(2) Branding effectiveness score and ranking of NPOs

Branding effectiveness of the five NPOs is computed by the mean of the ratings
given by the different stakeholders including donors/volunteers, beneficiaries and media
on the branding parameters (refer Table IV). Final ranking of the five NPOs
(refer Table V) was then calculated by the weighted mean of the branding effectiveness
scores of the NPOs computed from the perspective of donors and volunteers,
beneficiaries and media. NPO A is ranked 1, NPO B is ranked 2, NPO D is ranked 3,
NPO C is ranked 4 and NPO E is 5.

Sample
composition
Category of
respondent

Donors
Volunteers
Beneficiaries
Employees/
management
Media
Total

Sample size from NPOs with varied development focus

Healthcare
NPO A

Education
NPO B

Woman welfare
NPO C

Environment
NPO D

Child welfare
NPO E

Total
sample size

10
10
5

5
10

10
10
5

5

10
10
5

5

10
10
5

5

10
10
5

5

50
50
25

25
10
160

Table II.
Sample composition
and sample size

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)S. No. Donors/volunteers

Beneficiaries

Media

1
2

3
4

5

6

7

8
9
10

11

12

13

14

15

Visual identity symbols
Well-defined vision and
objectives
Work culture
Inter-personal relation
with management
Frequency of branding and
promotional events
Recognition of contributions

Media presence and
effectiveness
Regard for the NPO
Perceived social responsibility
Impact of branding and
promotional activities
Perceived quality of
services/processes
Frequency of donation/
volunteering
Frequency of recommendation
to friends and family
Intention to donate/volunteer
in future
Communication through
website and other mediums

Visual identity symbols
Well-defined vision and
objectives
Work culture
Inter-personal relation
with management
Frequency of branding and
promotional events
Takes feedback of the
services delivered
Media presence and
effectiveness
Regard for the NPO
Perceived social responsibility
Impact of branding and
promotional activities
Perceived quality of services/
processes
Years of association

Visual identity symbols
Well-defined vision and
objectives
Perceived work culture
Inter-personal relation
with management
Frequency of branding and
promotional events
Recognition of contribution
of media
Frequency of coverage of
activities by the media
Regard for the NPO
Perceived social responsibility
Impact of branding and
promotional activities
Perceived quality of
services/processes
Years of association

Frequency of recommendation
to friends and family
Likelihood to avail services of
the NPO in future
Communication of
developmental programs

Frequency of recommendation
to friends and family
Likelihood to provide coverage
to NPO events
Communication through
website and other mediums

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Table III.
Branding effectiveness
parameters

Branding effectiveness (donors
and volunteers)

Branding effectiveness
(beneficiaries)

NPOs

Branding
effectiveness
(media)

Overall branding
effectiveness
(weighted average)

A
B
C
D
E

3.47
3.37
3.22
3.25
3.01

3.65
3.53
2.95
3.49
3.11

3.78
4.51
3.75
2.40
2.54

3.53
3.49
3.21
3.23
2.99

Table IV.
Branding effectiveness
scores of NPOs

Stakeholders
NPOs

Donors and volunteers (A) Beneficiaries (B) Media (C)

Overall (weighted average of A, B
and C)

A
B
C
D
E

1
2
4
3
5

1
2
5
3
4

2
1
3
5
4

1
2
4
3
5

Table V.
Ranking of NPOs
from the perspective
of stakeholders

(3) Branding and promotional measures by NPOs

In order to assess the gap between the investment done by the management
in branding and promotion of the NPO and the branding effectiveness score
obtained for that NPO (refer Figure 6 and Table IV ), We collected data from the

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

employees/managers of the NPOs to assess branding and promotional measures
taken by the NPO. It is found that amongst the five NPOs, out of the amount
raised, the percentage spent annually on branding and promotion by the NPO is
the highest for NPO C with the mean of 3.6 followed by NPO B and NPO D with the
mean of 3.2 and 2, respectively then by NPO A with the mean of 1.6 and the lowest
for NPO E with the mean of 1.4. This means that despite investments in branding,
NPO C is not able to create desired brand impact whereas NPO A, NPO B and NPO
D are able to achieve branding effectiveness.

Also it is found that promotional measures taken by the management of the
NPO (computed by the mean of promotional measures such as use of events,
association/networking, communication through letters/e-mailers, personal visit to
donors, coverage in print and electronic media, presence in social media) are the
highest for NPO B followed by E then by C and A and the lowest for D. However A,
B and D are ranked high for branding effectiveness which suggests that B may
have achieved high branding effectiveness because of promotional measures but A
and C have achieved branding effectiveness through other internal and external
branding measures other than promotional measures (refer Table VI).

From Table AII, it is evident that NPO A invests the maximum amount of resources
in quality through training and development and in recognizing contribution of
stakeholders. This could be a possible reason for its highest branding effectiveness
amongst all NPOs. NPO B has the most well-defined vision and objectives and has the
most friendly work culture amongst all. NPO C has the most informative and updated
website but is average on other branding parameters. This could be the reason for NPO
C ranked third on branding effectiveness. NPO D is rated highest in taking feedback of
stakeholders and average on friendly work culture and NPO E is rated the least on all
the parameters.

(4) Significance of differences between branding effectiveness scores of the five NPOs.

The cumulative branding effectiveness scores of the five NPOs are very close to each other
(as evident from Table IV). Thus, it is important to assess whether the difference between the

Figure 6.
Percentage of amount
raised spent on
branding and
promotion

s
n
a
e
M

4

3

2

1

0

Percentage of amount raised
spent on branding and promotion

A

B

C

D

E

NPOs

Percentage of
amount raised
spent on branding
and promotion
(Means)

Well-defined
vision and
objectives

Informative
and updated
website

Focus
on
quality

Friendly
work
culture

Recognition of
contributions of
stakeholders

Frequency of
taking feedbacks
from stakeholders

NPOs

Promotional
measures

Table VI.
Internal and external
branding measures
taken by NPOs

A
B
C
D
E

3.4
4.8
3
3.2
3.4

3.8
4.2
3.2
5
2.8

4.6
2.8
2.8
3.2
3.2

3.6
4
3.8
3.6
3.2

4.2
3.8
3.6
3.8
3.6

2.8
2.6
3
2.8
2.6

3.85
4.23
4.03
3.53
4.22

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)rankings of the five NPOs has occurred by chance or there exists a significant difference between
the five groups because if the difference is not significant then it can be implied that branding
parameters adopted by various NPOs does not actually contribute in the brand effectiveness.
Since one of the assumption of using ANOVA (parametric test): “normality of the population
distribution” is not fulfilled by the sample, Kruskal–Wallis test is employed to test the
significance of difference between the NPOs. Since the obtained value of 27.59, at 4 degrees of
freedom (refer Tables AI and AII in the Appendix) was higher than the critical value of 9.49, it
can be concluded that the differences in rating between the five groups are significant.

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

6. Findings and discussion
6.1 Identification of branding effectiveness parameters
Since NPO A, NPO B and NPO D are ranked first, second and third, respectively amongst
the five NPOs included in the study, therefore, branding effectiveness parameters adopted
by these three NPOs are included in the proposed branding effectiveness metrics. These
parameters are high outreach, direct citizen connect as most of the donors/volunteers of the
NPO are beneficiaries also. Profile of the management committee of the NPO is another
important factor as high profile management are able to support the NPO financially and
also garner the support of other people in their network easily. High transparency in
financials, focus on training and development to ensure quality, friendly work culture and
recognition of contributions of stakeholders are some important branding parameters. High
print, electronic and social media presence, well-defined and promoted vision and objectives,
visual identity symbols, high frequency of branding and promotional activities, level of the
programs/activities of the NPO and updated and exhaustive website are other important
parameters adopted by these NPOs.

6.2 Gap analysis between branding effectiveness of an NPO and the branding and
promotional measures by the management of the NPO
Though NPOs E and C take considerable branding and promotion measures, they are
ranked fourth and fifth in branding effectiveness. Thus, there is a gap between the efforts
taken by the management and branding effectiveness score of the two NPOs. The possible
reasons of this gap can be explained as:

(cid:129) NPO C

Most of the donors and supporters are non-working women with no financial
independence, therefore, they are not able to contribute much to the cause
financially. The NPO relies on print and electronic media and has minimal presence
on social media and also lacks an updated website. The services provided by the
NPO generally include one-day awareness sessions and two-to-three-month
vocational training programs. Due to this temporary nature of services of the NPO,
most of the beneficiaries are temporarily associated with the NPO and hence rated
it low. Moreover, the quality of services provided is low as compared to that of
other NPOs.

(cid:129) NPO E

First, there is a lack of transparency regarding the financial matters of NPO and
all financial data are managed by a single person. Second, the website of the NPO is
not updated and social media presence of the NPO is scant. Third, frequency of
requests for donations is quite high which creates negative image in the minds of
donors. The ranking of the NPO from beneficiaries’ perspective is low because
beneficiaries are special children who are not able to understand and answer all
the questions.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

6.3 Branding effectiveness measurement metrics
Considering the multiplicity of stakeholders in non-profit brand environment as well as
broader and diverse objectives which the NPOs have, the study proposes brand metrics for
evaluating the effectiveness of non-profit brand. The brand effectiveness measurement metrics
proposed in the study includes three major constructs: brand identity, brand performance and
brand image (refer Figure 7). These three constructs constitute various components that can be
assessed to measure branding effectiveness of an NPO (refer Table VII).

6.4 Brand identity
The organization should strive to establish brand identity and clearly articulate it internally to
ensure consistency of the brand identity across the organization. Internal factors such as
vision, shared values,
facilitate the construction of brand identity.
NPOs should develop and promote work culture that reflects their mission and approach.
They should make use of brand symbols to create and reinforce the visual identity. Visual
elements such as logo, website, graphics should speak about the organization culture and
identity brand (refer Figure 7 and Table VII):

leadership, etc.

(cid:129) Brand image

Once all the internal constituents of the organization share the same brand identity,
it should be consistently yet distinctively communicated to all external stakeholders.
Brand image is the image of the brand in the minds of stakeholders such as donors,
volunteers, beneficiaries, media which is manifested in their level of brand familiarity,
brand understanding, level of association and loyalty toward the brand, their perception
regarding the quality of services, regard for the NPO. This is reflected in the level of
financial and non-financial support extended by them, awards and accolades given to
the NPO, amongst others. The perceived level of differentiation achieved by the NPO is
another important component of brand image brand (refer Figure 7 and Table VII).

(cid:129) Brand performance

A measurement metrics that aligns internal identity and external image better
equips the organization to manage the brand. This alignment can be brought about by
the branding efforts and performance of the organization. Brand performance is rooted
in brand identity parameters such as skills, vision and leadership qualities of the
management, communication structure of the organization, available financial and
human resources, processes, quality control techniques, etc. Thus, establishing internal
brand identity is a precursor to brand performance because strong brand identity
brings about cohesion in the organization which enables efficient utilization of existing
resources and acquisition of new ones, thereby enhancing the capacity, performance of
the organization. Externally, the strong brand performance is able to create high level
of trust with the stakeholders, garner greater support of donors, volunteers, media, etc.
leading to sustainable growth and increased social impact of the organization. Over a
period of time, the resulting reputation in turn contributes in improving the identity
and image of the brand (refer Figure 7 and Table VII).

Branding effectiveness measurement

Brand
identity

Brand
performance

Brand
image

Figure 7.
Brand effectiveness
measurement

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)Brand identity

Branding effectiveness measurement metrics

Brand performance

Brand image

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Brand awareness
Name and logo
Brand knowledge/comprehension
Vision, mission and objectives
Brand recall
Social media exposure
Growth in website traffic
Frequency of branding and
promotional activities
Brand perceived quality
Perceived quality of processes/
services/developmental programs
Brand association
Level of support
Social media engagement
Perceived regard for NPO
Brand loyalty
Frequency to donate/volunteer
-Perceived social responsibility/trust
Recommendation to friends and family
Overall satisfaction
Testimonials

Financials/resources
Willingness of donors and volunteers
to donate/volunteer

Vision
Management
qualifications/experience
Leadership
Profile of founding/core members

Branding and promotion
Presence in media
Promotion of brand symbols
Frequency of website updates
Frequency of branding and
promotional activities

Work culture
Shared vision and objectives
Recognition of contributions of
employees/volunteers
Transparency
Focus on quality
Internal communication
Values
Visual identity symbols
Logo and other brand symbols

Quality control resources
Quality of processes/services/
developmental programs
Brand association
Recognition of contributions of
donors/volunteers/media

Brand loyalty
Frequency of communication
Frequency of taking feedbacks
Testimonials
Overall performance
Transparency in sharing financial
information
Financials
Direct/indirect income
(Subscriptions/donations/sale
proceeds/investment income)
Public and private funding
Assets
Membership growth
Overhead cost
Spendings on promotion
Social behavior
No. of beneficiaries served
No. of donors/volunteers
Sustainability of impact
No. of projects/programs launched
Differentiation
Outreach
Direct citizen connect

6.5 Practical implications
The unique characteristics of non-profit environment necessitate the need for branding
effectiveness measures different from those in for-profit environment. Also it is important to
understand that “branding” in NPOs should not be used as hard promotion rather as a tool to
reinforce internal identity, driving long-term social goals and creating a strong brand image by
addressing the challenges of non-profit environment.

The proposed branding effectiveness measurement metrics establishes correspondence
between brand identity, brand image and brand performance. It would help management
in garnering support of different stakeholders by assessing their needs and meeting them
consistently yet distinctively. The metrics would enable managers to control the switching
or lapsing behavior of donors and volunteers through effective branding. Thus, the
proposed metrics would significantly increase the effectiveness of NPOs.

Social behavior
awards and accolades
Analyst ratings
Perceived social impact

Differentiation
Word of mouth publicity

Table VII.
Brand effectiveness
measurement metrics

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

6.6 Research limitations and future research directions
While this research has produced some interesting findings but it is an initial piece of
research in the area of integrated brand effectiveness measurement. The current research
did not consider the perception of government for measuring the branding effectiveness of
the NPOs. Also the research did not quantify the degree of importance of different
parameters in measuring branding effectiveness.

This branding effectiveness metrics can serve as a base for future quantitative research
works for quantifying the degree of importance of various branding effectiveness parameters in
non-profit environment. Similar study could be conducted in other cities with larger NPOs to find
how the results vary with the change in economic reality. Another challenging area of research
could be the implementation of branding effectiveness metrics amidst various challenges such as
lack of adequate financial resources, lack of brand management expertise, justification of
branding to the stakeholders, amongst others.

6.7 Recommendations and suggestions
Organizations should endeavor to comprehend from which aspects of the organization the
stakeholders such as donors, volunteers, media, etc., derive the most value and then tailor
their measures to satisfy their needs. The management should clearly articulate the brand
identity of the organization and communicate it with external stakeholders distinctively yet
consistently. In order to attract and retain employees, volunteers and donors, organizations
should focus on quality control measures, create a pleasant work culture, recognize the
contributions made by them and ensure transparency in utilization of funds to build
credibility and to stand out from the competition clutter, the NPO management should focus
on establishing direct citizen connect, add high profile members with good social network.

7. Conclusion
Lack of research in branding effectiveness in the non-profit sector, and use of branding merely
as a fundraising tool by the NPO managers led to this study. The major issues discussed in
the study include identification and verification of parameters for branding effectiveness
measurement of NPOs and development of branding effectiveness measurement metrics.

Five NPOS of a major city in Northern India were selected for the study and were ranked
according to mean branding effectiveness score, arrived by computing the mean of the ratings
given by the respondents on branding parameters on five-point Likert scale items. Parameters
such as sustainable social impact, direct citizen connect, profile of the founders/members,
focus on quality, amongst others are identified as important contributors to branding
effectiveness. The metrics encapsulates brand identity parameters such as management,
leadership, vision, culture as well as brand image parameters such as brand awareness, brand
understanding, brand association and loyalty of the stakeholders, perceived quality and
regard for the NPO, etc. The metrics also establishes the link between the two through
performance parameters such as quality of processes, beneficiaries served, branding and
promotional measures by the NPO, adequacy of resources to achieve social mission and meet
the needs of the stakeholders amongst others. The current study would not only be a
conceptual contribution to NPO branding but also broaden the concept of branding in a
non-profit context considering it much more than a fundraising tool, reinforcing the brand
identity and simultaneously contributing to the achievement of social mission.

References
Aaker, D.A. (1996), Building Strong Brands, Free Press, New York, NY.
Alkanova, O.N.

(2010),

“Integrated model of branding effectiveness assessment”, 26th

IMP-Conference, Budapest, May 10, 2018.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)Bridson, K. and Evans, J. (2004), “The secret to a fashion advantage is brand orientation”, International

Journal of Retail and Distribution Management, Vol. 32 No. 8, pp. 403-411.

Burmann, C. and Zeplin, S. (2005), “Building brand commitment: a behavioural approach to internal

brand management”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 279-300.

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Chernatony, L. (2006), From Brand Vision to Brand Evaluation: The Strategic Process of Growing and

Strengthening Brands, Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.

Chernatony, L., Riley, F. and Harris, F. (1998), “Criteria to assess brand success”, Journal of Marketing

Management, Vol. 14 No. 7, pp. 765-781.

Davis, S. and Dunn, M. (2002), Building the Brand-Driven Business: Operationalize Your Brand to Drive

Profitable Growth, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.

Godden, B.

(2004), “Sample size formulas”, available at: http://williamgodden.com/samplesizef

ormula.pdf (accessed June 14, 2018).

Hankinson, P.

(2000), “Brand orientation in charity organizations: qualitative research into key
charity sectors”, International Journal of Non-Profit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 3,
pp. 207-219.

Huang, S.L. and Ku, H.H. (2016), “Brand image management for nonprofit organizations: exploring the
relationships between websites, brand images and donations”, Journal of Electronic Commerce
Research, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 80-96.

Ito, H. (2013), “Exploring a new marketing strategy for non-profit organizations: an international

perspective”, International Journal of Marketing Studies, Vol. 5 No. 6, pp. 8-14.

Kylander, N. and Stone, C. (2012), “The role of brand in non-profit sector”, Stanford Social Innovation

Review, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 35-41.

LePla, F.J., Davis, V.S. and Parker, M.L. (2003), Brand Driven: the Route to Integrated Branding

Through Great Leadership, Kogan Page.

Lehmann, D., Keller, K. and Farley, J. (2008), “The structure of survey-based brand metrics”, Journal of

International Marketing, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 29-56.

Michel, G. and Rieunier, S. (2012), “Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable

giving”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 65 No. 5, pp. 701-707.

Munoz, T. and Kumar, S.

(2004), “Brand metrics: gauging and linking brands with business

performance”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 11 No. 5, pp. 381-387.

Napoli, J. (2006), “The impact of non-profit brand orientation on organizational performance”, Journal of

Marketing Management, Vol. 22 Nos 7-8, pp. 673-694.

Paco, A., Rodrigues, R.G. and Rodrigues, L. (2014), “Branding in NGOs – its influence on intention to

donate”, Economics and Sociology, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 11-21.

Rajagopal (2008), “Measuring brand performance through metrics application”, Measuring Business

Excellence, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 29-38.

Ritchie, R.J., Swami, S. and Weinberg, C.B. (1999), “A brand new world for non-profits”, International

Journal of Non-Profit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 26-42.

Sargeant, A. (2013), “Donor retention: what do we know and what can we do about it?”, The Non-Profit

Quarterly, pp. 12-23.

Sherrington, M. (2003), Added Value: The Alchemy of Brand-Led Growth, Palgrave Macmillan.
Stride, H. and Lee, S. (2007), “No logo? No way. Branding in the non-profit sector”, Journal of Marketing

Management, Vol. 23 Nos 1-2, pp. 107-122.

Parthasarathy, V. (2013), “Social marketing strategies of successful NGOs – a strategic perspective
with reference to selected NGOs in the States of Karnataka & Tamil Nadu”, International Journal
of Business, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 28-62.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)JAMR

Third Sector (2013), available at: www.thirdsector.co.uk www.thirdsector.co.uk/charity-brand-index

(accessed April 5, 2018).

Voeth, M. and Herbst, U. (2008), “The concept of brand personality as an instrument for advanced non-
profit branding – an empirical analysis”, Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 19
No. 1, pp. 71-97.

Further reading
Andreasen, A.R., Goodstein, R.C. and Wilson, J.W. (2005), “Transferring marketing knowledge to

non-profit sector”, California Management Review, Vol. 47 No. 4, pp. 46-47.

Apaydin, F. (2011), “A proposed model of antecedents and outcomes of brand orientation for non-profit

sector”, Asian Social Science, Vol. 7 No. 9, pp. 194-202.

Chapleo, C. (2015), “Brand ‘infrastructure’ in non-profit organizations: challenges to successful brand

building?”, Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 199-209.

Ewing, M.T. and Napoli, J. (2005), “Developing and validating a multidimensional non-profit brand

orientation scale”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 841-853.

Hina, K. and Donna, E. (2009), “How do not-for-profit SMEs attempt to develop a strong brand in an
increasingly saturated market?”, Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, Vol. 16
No. 2, pp. 335-354.

Hyojin, K. (2002), “Branding of non-profit organizations”, LBJ Journal of Public Affairs: A Potential

Solution for Competitive Marketing, Vol. 15, pp. 47-57.

Keller, K.L. (1993), “Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity”, Journal

of Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 1-22.

Kotler, P. (1979), “Strategies for introducing marketing into non-profit organizations”, The Journal of

Marketing, Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 37-44.

Tapp, A. (1996), “Charity brands: a qualitative study of current practice”, Journal of Non-Profit and

Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 1 No. 4, pp. 327-336.

Appendix

(cid:129) Group 1: NPO A

(cid:129) Group 2: NPO B

(cid:129) Group 3: NPO C

(cid:129) Group 4: NPO D

(cid:129) Group 5: NPO E

Group

1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Total

Table AI.
Kruskal–Wallis test
ranks – all NPOs

Ranks
n

125
125
125
125
125
625

Mean rank

348.99
362.31
294.32
300.90
258.48

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)Test statisticsa,b

χ2
df
Asymop. Sig.

Branding
effectiveness
measurement

Rank

27.594
4
0.000

Monte Carlo Sig.
Sig.
95% confidence interval

0.000
0.000
0.000
Notes: aKruskal–Wallis test statistics; bgrouping variable; cbased on 10,000 sampled tables with starting
seed 926214481

Lower bound
Upper bound

Table AII.
Kruskal–Wallis test
statistics – all NPOs

About the authors
Ebha Garg is PhD Scholar at Department of Management, Faculty of Social Sciences, Dayalbagh
Educational Institute, Agra. She previously worked as a Guest Lecturer with RBS College, Agra in
Management Division and Distance Learning Centre of Dayalbagh Educational Institute (DEI), Agra.
She also has two years of work experience in Branding in Communications with leading IT companies:
HCL Infosystems and Birlasoft India Pvt. Ltd. She holds an MPhil Degree, a Master’s Degree in
Management from DEI and a Bachelor’s Degree in Management from DEI. Her research interests
include sustainability and impact of non-profit organizations, branding of non-profit organizations,
managing product harm crisis and gauging consumers’ attitude toward crisis situations.

Sanjeev Swami is Professor and the Head of Department of Management, DEI, Agra, India. His PhD
Degree is in Business Administration from the UBC, Canada, MTech Degree in Industrial Management
from IIT Kanpur and BE Degree in Industrial Engineering from Allahabad. He has consulted
international organizations like Pathe (Holland), EWW (USA), TERI and BHEL (India). He has been
associated as the Faculty with UBC Canada, IIT Kanpur, IIM Bangalore, IITM Gwalior and Rotterdam
School of Management. He has published several research papers in prestigious journals like
Marketing Science, M&SOM, Marketing Letters, IJPE, Vikalpa, DEIJSER, AOR, JOR and Journal of
Cleaner Production. He has received career research awards by AICTE and DST, India. He has won
Fellowships by American Marketing Association and UBC. His research contributions have been
recognized in the form of Emerald Literati Network Awards, The European Marketing Academy
(EMAC) and Elsevier Award, AIMS International Award, and an honorable mention as productive
Indian management research in Economic Times. Sanjeev Swami is the corresponding author and can
be contacted at: sswami1853@gmail.com

Sunita Kumari Malhotra is Associate Professor at the Department of Management, Dayalbagh
Educational Institute (DEI), Agra. She is MBM from DEI, NET Qualified, PhD Degree from
Jiwaji University, Gwalior. She has served as Senior Assistant Professor at IITM (deemed university),
Gwalior (under collaborative program in International Business with University of Greenwich, London)
and also served as Lecturer in Aryan Institute of Management, Agra. Sunita Kumari has written books
on “Management Accounting”, “Financial Accounting” and Quantitative Techniques for Decision
Making, Operations Management, and Financial Services” published by Distance Education Program,
DEI. She has published various papers in reputed management journals such as European Journal of
Intercontinental Journal of Finance Research Review, Advances in
Business and Management,
Economics and Business Management ( JNU, New Delhi), Indian Journal of Management, etc.

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 22:34 25 September 2018 (PT)