Individual Donors’ Giving Intention and Behavior:
Effect of Their Perceptual Determinants on the
Nonprofit Organization
Jundong Hou, Jun Lü

Lanying Du

School of Economics & Management
China University of Geosciences, CUG
Wuhan, China
houjundong@163.com, lvjun@cug.edu.cn

School of Management
Huazhong University of S & T, HUST
Wuhan, China
lanyingdu@163.com

Abstract—The dimensions of each construct of individual
perception on nonprofit organization and their effects on
individual giving intention and behavior were studied by using
survey to selected 393 valid respondents. The authors report the
result that three distinct categories of two perceptual level
(nonprofit organization specific and cause specific) can impact on
giving intention and behavior, namely perceptions of the benefits
(if any) that might accrue from support, perceptions of the
operational performance for the specific nonprofit organizations,
and perceptions of nonprofit brand equity. And then the authors
examined the effects of the components (e.g. perceptions of
demonstrable benefit, emotional benefit and familial benefit;
perceptual effectiveness, perceptual efficiency; the perceptions of
brand personality, brand image and brand awareness) of each
perceptual category on individual giving intention and behavior
respectively. And a positive casual link between individual giving
intention and giving behavior is also revealed.

RMB [1]. With the increase of Chinese rich class, mature of
charitable organizations and the improvement of Chinese
individual donors, domestic donations would increase
somehow. But facing to the former situations, new problems
would be emerged: lack of funds makes “grassroots’
organizations” hard to develop. According to the survey by
Chen et al. (2007) from McKinsey, 85% existing donor
resources are occupied by only 7% nonprofit originations
holding support from governments, while the grassroots
especially with the smaller size are very difficult to generate
enough donations [4]. Why in the same donation situation there
is significant difference between them?

Keywords- perceptual benefit; perceptual performance;
perceptual brand equity; giving intention; giving behavior

I.

Based on this, from the perspective of individual donor’s
conception to nonprofits, this paper tries to explain and test:
why many people still choose not to donate to the nonprofit
organization; and for those donated yet, why they choose those
bigger or government initiated nonprofits only? And what are
their key determinants in their decision making of donation?
II.

INTRODUCTION

In China, although it is reported that the individual donors
gave 42.8 billion RMB to the charity to develop nonprofit
service in 2008 and it exceeds the firms’ donation amount
firstly [1], it is still insignificant compared with the fastgrowing of nonprofit organizations. Wang & Jia (2002)
addressed that with the continually increasing of the number of
the NPO; lack of resources is still one of the main barriers for
many nonprofits’ further development in China [2].
Furthermore, cutting down of government financial support,
changing of individual donors’ living styles and self-concepts,
constraint of resources limitation and aggravation of
competition, which has been worsen the nonprofit
organization’s resource plight. Correspondent from Worker
Daily Zhang (2006) found there remained a great funding gap
in the development of Beijing Children’s Welfare Institution,
Relief Stations, Red Cross and other charitable organizations
[3]. However, some other nonprofit organizations in China,
especially those with “China” or “Chinese” in the name, raise
more than 10 million RMB or even billion per year from
individual donations. For instance, in the year 2008, China
Foundation for Poverty Alleviation raised 283 million RMB,
and China Charity Federation Foundation raised 408 million

LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES

Many researches support correlations between attitude and
behavior while few studied on attitude of individual giving [5].
Therefore, some authors have researched the impacts of
demographic, socio-economic, psychological variables on
individual donation behaviors. Based on variables effects in
individual choice of nonprofit organization, researchers divided
these influential factors into extrinsic factor and intrinsic factor,
where extrinsic factors refer to those existences independent
from human beings, and intrinsic factors are the underlying
motives for selecting to support a nonprofit organization [6].
About the former, variables such as age, gender, income, social
class, social norms and the degree of religious conviction have
all been shown to impact on donation behavior. Findings
suggested these factors do effect on individual donation
making. In respect of the latter, factors shown to be significant
indicators of giving including empathy, sympathy, nostalgia, as
well as feelings of fear, guilt and other emotions. Sargeant &
Woodliffe (2007) based on literature reviews, summed up
determinants of individual donations and also carried out many
propositions from sources, external factors, motivation, and the
process determining factor, output, personal characteristics,
feedbacks and other aspects [7]. By reviews of existing

This study was conducted with support from Natural Science Foundation
of China (Project No. 70872038 )

978-1-4244-5326-9/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

literatures, the reasons about why individuals are willing to
donate to a certain nonprofit have been empirically examined
from a widely perspective (e.g. sociology, psychology etc.).
However, donation is an interactive choosing process
actually, and it is incomplete to neglect the impacts of the
recipient organization on the potential donors’ behaviors. Thus,
authors such as Glaser (1994) and Sargeant et al. (2004) have
examined how donors perceive the management of the
organization, its performance and a variety of benefits that
might accrue to the individual from giving, but empirical
examination of the impact of these factors has yet to be
attempted[8]-[9]. This is an issue of considerable practical
importance since these are variables over which fundraisers
may exert some control. It is, therefore, Sargeant et al.(2008)
report the results of a large-scale postal survey of donors to
nine national nonprofits and conclude that brands personality
traits associated with emotional engagement, service, voice,
and tradition are capable of serving as the basis for
differentiation and are also linked to facets of individual giving
behavior[10]. Hou et al (2009) have to delineate brand equity
of the support of nonprofits, to explore the nature of the
relationship between these and individual donor giving
intention, and to discuss the mediating role of self-concept
between two constructs [11]. However, there is, little empirical
work on donor perceptions of the recipient organization and the
role that might play in stimulating giving behavior [6].
Thus, to explore and test the impacts more integrally and
precisely, in the first phase, some correlated and measurable
perceptual factors of individual donors’ behavior have been
established. Then, two focus groups each containing 8-10
members of potential donors are formed randomly and
stratified by a cross-section of age, gender and educational
level. Discussion of each group lasts for around one hour and is
taped all the time. Discussions are held mainly on the questions
like “what kind of nonprofits you would choose to donate,
what kind of perceptual factors of nonprofits may attract you
mostly?” and so on. After discussions, recordings of two
groups are transcribed and analyzed. Results show there are
three distinct categories of perceptual constructs f from two
levels (nonprofit organization specific and cause specific)
respectively, namely perceptions of the benefits that might
accrue from support’s cause, perception of performance and
brand equity of specific organization, the latter two belongs to
nonprofit organization specific.
A. Benefit perception
Social Exchange Theory suggests that donors will often
be motivated to give because they perceive that some benefits
will accrue to them as a consequence of their gift [12].
Sargeant et al.(2006) suggested these benefits may be
categorized as demonstrable benefits, emotional benefits and
family benefits[6].
For some donors, the donation process has often been
viewed as the consequence of selfish acts, and their donation
behaviors have been proved as to wish to achieve some certain
kinds of individual returns. Therefore, donors will select
nonprofit organization to support on the basis of whether they
have benefited in the past or believe that they will do so in the
future [13]. These benefits perceived are always demonstrable.

And for some other donors, they can also obtain benefit from a
nonprofit donation because of the emotions experienced in so
doing, rather than from any tangible benefits they might
receive [14]. Sargeant et al.(2006), for example, if a nonprofit
reply to the people whose dog was die from cancer, then, this
people may feel his/her donation may help the others dogs
from cancer, and tend to choose to donate to this
organization[6].
Alternatively, for some donors, the motivation to support a
nonprofit derives from the need to assist or demonstrate an
affinity with one’s friends or loved ones [15]. They believe
their donations may benefit their friends or loved ones who are
suffered from this disease and their donation may be in the
name of their relatives past away [16]. Therefore, hypotheses
can be carried out:
H1:There is a significantly positive impact of the degree of
perceived benefit to a cause on individual donor giving
intention and behavior.
B.

Operational performance perception
Besides the benefits that may accrue from giving, it
became apparent that a donor’s perception of a nonprofit
operational performance would also impact on giving behavior.
Indeed it was apparent that perceived performance was the key
issue at both the level of the sector in determining giving and at
the level of the organization in determining which specific
charities would be supported. Thus the perception of nonprofit
operational performance can be divided into effectiveness and
efficiency.
Products quality information could be transferred by
advertisements in private market. Similarly, a nonprofit
organization could publish their former situations about its
annual fundraising and its fund operation through various
information channels. Saxton (1996) stressed that the extent to
which charities achieve useful goals for society and are thus
seen to be fulfilling their mission is a critical contributory
factor in giving [17].
Many researchers have identified that the perceived
efficiency of nonprofit organizations is a key determinant of
giving behavior [18]. For example, after scandal of president of
united Way in 1992, public felt they had been hurt by
misappropriation of this organization and as the result, they
stop to donate to United Way. Warwick (1994) suggested
donors expect this proportion to be 20:80 while most donors
believe this could be 50:50 in fact[19]. If a nonprofit spends
this ration of funds on its cause campaign, then this
organization would receive greater donation. Thus, hypotheses
are developed:
H2:There is a positive causal link between the degree of
perceived performance of NPOs and donor giving intention and
behavior.
C.

Brand equity perception
In fact, donors’ decision-making is similar as ordinary
consume decision, product brand may effect on final choice.
Brand equity provides a uniqueness that can help individual
donors to distinguish a nonprofit brand from its competitors
[20]. Therefore, the better the perception of nonprofit brand
equity, the more likely attracted potential donors to donate to

this organization. According to the research of Faircloth (2005)
on nonprofit brand equity, it formed by three dimensions
including personality, image and awareness of a brand [21].
Consumers may be inclined to purchase products and
services that match their own sense of self according to brand
congruence theory [21]. Additionally, a brand personality that
is strong, favorable, and/or unique to the consumer legitimates
the brand as partner and can result in more positive reciprocal
exchanges. Similarly, a nonprofit brand personality allows
donors to feel more comfortable with the brand and form brand
preferences or intentions of giving.
Researchers reported more positive brand image is
positively related to willingness to pay premium prices and
higher brand equity [21]. Communicating a brand image to
resource providers is important, since identification with
nonprofit targets and values is a significant contributor to
positively biased support behavior toward the nonprofits by
consumers. Therefore, donors inclined to donate to those
nonprofits with strengthened brand image they perceived. And
one would expect memory recall and greater organizational
familiarity by individual donors to increase supportive
behavior toward the nonprofit. Thus:
H3:There is a significantly positive relationship between
perceived brand equity of a NPO and individual giving
intention and behavior.
H4:There is a positive cause link between individual
intention giving to a NPO and one’s giving behavior.
III.

METHODOLOGY

A.

Questionnaire design
In the second stage, based on the results of first stage and
reviewing the relative literatures, 31 items are with high
frequency in measuring the constructs. Then, by using of
Delphi method, each expert classified these items according to
their definitions, and also evaluated items from their
appropriation in measuring and clarity by scoring from 1 to 5.
28 scored 4 or higher items were kept finally, which are to
measure demonstrable benefit, emotional benefit, familial
Benefit, effectiveness, efficiency, brand personality, brand
image and brand awareness. In the forming of this scale, two
result variables–giving intention, giving behavior and
demographic variables are added.
B. Assessing the measures
Small scaled pre-test has been done to evaluate the quality
of this questionnaire. We sent 100 questionnaires to a
university in Chongqing randomly while 68 valid respondents
were received. Quality analysis is mainly on those items be
marked with “unclear in meaning”; while quantity analysis are
done by using of item analysis between high score group and
low score group. Then independent variable T-test was done to
evaluate the difference. The results shows two items not
significant are eliminated including “the nonprofit “X” you
donate to wastes too many resources” and “the nonprofit “X”
you donate to always make people to feel exiting”. Then
consistency analysis and factor analysis are employed to test
the structural validity and consistency of this scale.

In exploring factor analysis, 10 factors explain 77.52%
variance. Factor loading each item is higher than 0.6 except
BP2, and all items loaded heavily on the hypothesized a priori
factors (p<0.01). Next we proceeded to test internal
consistency of our measures using Cronbach’s alpha. All of
them are higher than 0.7, and the general consistency value of
this scale is 0.880. Then confirmatory factor analysis is
employed by Lisrel 8.7, the results shows that model is good fit
with data (χ2/df =1.48, RMSEA=0.080), and the each factor in
the measurement scale has the better convergent and
discriminant validity. These in turn suggest that items in this
scale are suitable to measure the related constructs.
C.

Samples and Data Collection
We can not sample only those active donors, but also those
potential and lapsed. Then, we sent our questionnaire randomly
by QQ, E-mail and also record their QQ number, E-mail
address to avoid overlap. Thus, 1000 questionnaires are sent
out while 516 answers are received during Mar.-Apr., 2008 in
China. To make sure the respondents are with enough ability in
judgment and perception, 88 by those whose age are less than
20 are thrown away. Then, in analyzing of kept samples, 35 are
found could not distinguish from key nonprofits, so they are
eliminated also. Thus, 393 samples are valid. The sample
demographics were 59.8% male, 57.3% a range of 25-35years,
53.6% master above, 28.9% employee of firms, 25.2%
government officials, 20.3 % teachers, 19.5% students.
IV.

RESULTS

A. Correlation Analysis
Through the correlation analysis, the results show the
means of all variables are from 2.62 to 5.19, their S.Ds. are
from 0.98 to 1.24, and the coefficients are from 0 to 0.63.
A regression model requires compliance with
assumptions of normality, linearity, collinearity. The results
suggested normality (p>0.05) tested with a KolmogorovSmimov statistic. Examination of P-P Plot and scatterplot of
each dependent variable. Giving intention and behavior
indicated a linear model. Although there are certain levels of
correlations between dependent and independent variables,
even some of the measure correlations reached 0.50,
consideration of the collinearity diagnostics indicated no
Condition Index greater than 20, thus, collinearity was not
detected .
B. Hierarchical Regression Analysis
1) Take giving intention as dependent variable: When
selecting regression equation of demographical variables and
individual giving intention as benchmark, regression equation
was not significant (F=1.005, Sig. =0.418). After perceived
nonprofit brand equity, benefit and performance were
introduced step by step, explaining capability is increased, and
all of them are significant at the level 0.001. Thus, the
regression results indicate that three perceptual dimensions of
brand equity – brand personality (β=0.256, Sig. =0.046), brand
image (β=0.348, Sig. =0.007) and brand awareness (β=0.320,

Sig.=0.002) can be identified as explanative variables in
predicting individual giving intention significantly; for three
dimension of perceptual benefits, demonstrable benefit(β=0.025,Sig.=0.796)and
emotional
benefit(β=-0.040,
Sig.=0.679)are negatively correlated to individual giving
intention but not at a significant level, while familial
benefit(β=0.282,Sig.=0.003) is positively related to giving
intention; and for two dimensions of perceptual performance
perceptive, organizational operational effectiveness(β=0.379,
Sig.=0.008) is significantly positive correlated to giving
intention while the effect of organizational efficiency is not
positive and significant (β=-0.170, Sig.=0.189).
2) Take giving behavior as dependent variable: When
selecting regression equation of demographical variables and
giving behavior as benchmark, regression equation was
significant (F=7.036, Sig. =0.000). After perceived nonprofit
brand equity, benefit and performance were introduced step by
step, explaining capability of models increased, and all of them
are significant (R2=0.414, F=5.651, Sig. =0.000). Regression
results indicate: for three perceptual dimensions of brand
equity, brand personality(β=0.058, Sig.=0.620), brand
image(β=0.091, Sig.=0.443) and brand awareness(β=0.021,
Sig.=0.865) might impact individual giving behavior positively
but not significantly; for three dimension of benefit perceptive,
demonstrable benefit (β=-0.079, Sig.=0.366) and emotional
benefit(β=-0.048, Sig.=0.583) are negatively related to
individual giving behavior while the effect of familial benefit is
positive (β=0.131, Sig.=0.140), but all of them are not
significant; for two dimensions of performance perceptive,
organizational operational effectiveness(β=0.227, Sig.=0.045)
is significantly positive correlated to giving behavior while
organizational efficiency(β=-0.065, Sig.=0.636) is negative and
not significant; and individual giving intention to certain
nonprofit is significantly positive correlated to one’s actual
giving behavior (β= 0.263, Sig.=0.003).
V.

CONLUSION

Empirical results in this research indicate that for individual
donors, demonstrable benefit and emotional benefit do not
significantly impact giving intention and behavior while
familial benefit is significantly positive correlated to giving
intention but not significantly influential on actual giving
behavior; perceptual effectiveness of certain nonprofit is both
positive in giving intention and giving behavior while
efficiency might negatively impact giving intention and giving
behavior but not significantly; for three dimensions of brand
equity, all are positive correlated to giving intention while their
positive effects on actual giving behavior are not significant;
there is a positive link between giving intention and giving
behavior. These suggest that perceptual factors of individual
donors to nonprofits can influence their giving intention and
then generate giving behavior.
Generally speaking, Chinese donors do not agree with the
idea to acquire benefits from donation. In fact, many donors
given anonymously, they do not to want to acquire
demonstrable benefits but to help the others. And for recalling

loved ones or family members may benefit from their
donations, people are always with strong giving intention. But
these factors do not influence on their actual giving behavior to
certain nonprofit directly.
REFERENCES
[1]

Ministry of Civic Affairs of P.R. China, “Statistic data of civic affairs of
China”, http://www.mca.gov.cn, 2009.
[2] M. Wang, X.J. Jia, “Development of Chinese NGO”, Management
World, 2002, no.8, pp.30-45.
[3] M. Zhang, “Public involvement is essence of philanthropy: survey of
Chinese philanthropy”, Worker Daily, 2006.
[4] Y. T. Chen, P L. F.an, H. Wu ,”How do the firms drive the development
of philanthropy?” http://www.51cmc.com., 2007.
[5] S. K. Ranganathan, W. H. Henley, “Determinants of charitable donation
intentions: A structural equation model”, International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 2008, vol.13, no.1,pp.1-11.
[6] A. Sargeant, J. B. Ford, D. C. West, “Perceptual determinants of
nonprofit giving behavior”, Journal of Business Research, 2006, vol.59,
pp.155-165.
[7] A. Sargeant, L. Woodliffe, “Gift giving: an interdisciplinary review”,
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
2007, vol. 12, pp. 275-307.
[8] J.S. Glaser, The United Way Scandal – An Insiders Account of What
Went Wrong and Why. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1994.
[9] A. Sargeant, D. C West, J. B. Ford, “Does perception matter?: An
empirical analysis of donor behavior”, The Service Industries Journal,
2004, vol.24 , no.6, pp.19-36.
[10] A Sargeant, J. B. Ford, J. Hudson, “Charity Brand Personality: The
Relationship With Giving Behavior”, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly, 2008, vol. 37, no.3, pp.468-491.
[11] J. D. Hou, L. Y. Du, Z. L. Tian, “The effects of nonprofit brand equity
on individual giving intention: Mediating by the self-concept of
individual donor”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, 2009, vol.14, no.3, pp. 215-229.
[12] M. Amos, “Empirical analysis of motives underlying contributions to
charity”, Atlantic Economic Journal, 1982, vol.10, pp.45–52.
[13] S.E. Beatty, L.R. Kahl., P. Homer, “Personal values and gift giving
behaviors: A study across cultures”, Journal of Business Research, 1991,
vol.22, pp.149–157.
[14] J. Andreoni, “The Economics of Philanthropy”, In International
Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, Smelser N.J.,
Baltes P.B. Eds. London: Elsevier, 2001.
[15] A. Sargeant, “Charity giving: Towards a model of donor behavior”,
Journal of Marketing Management, 1999, vol.15, pp. 215–238.
[16] P. Kotler, R.N. Clarke, Marketing for Health Care Organizations, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1987.
[17] J. Saxton, “A strong charity brand comes from strong beliefs and
values”, Journal of Brand Management, 1996, vol.2, pp.4, pp.211–220.
[18] J.W Harvey, K.F. McCrohan, “Fundraising costs – Societal implications
for philanthropies and their supporters”, Business and Society, 1988,
vol.27, no.1, pp.15–22.
[19] M. Warwick, Raising Money by Mail: Strategies for Growth and
Financial Stability, Berkeley, CA: Strathmoor Press, 1994.
[20] B. T. Venable, G. M. Rose, V. D. Bush, F.W. Gilbert, “The role of brand
personality in charitable giving: An assessment and validation”, Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 2005, vol. 33, pp.295-312.
[21] J. B. Faircloth, “Factors influencing nonprofit resource provider support
decisions: Applying the brand equity concept to nonprofits”, Journal of
Marketing, 2005, vol. 13, pp. 1-15.

