What is brand equity anyway, and how do you
measure it?

Paul Feldwick
Source: Int. Journal of Market Research, Vol. 38, No. 2, 1996

This paper examines what is meant by the term 'brand equity'. It identifies three distinct uses of the
expression; brand value - the total value of a brand as a separable asset; brand strength - a measure
of the strength of consumers' attachment to a brand and brand description - a description of the
associations and beliefs the consumer has about the brand. Each of these concepts is discussed with
reference to the literature on the subject.

Paul Feldwick,
BMP DDB

'What is the answer to the question being asked in cocktail lounges, all the time, all over America –
'What is brand equity anyway, and how do you measure it?'

Thornton C. Lockwood, Communications Research Manager, AT&T

INTRODUCTION - FROM BRAND IMAGE TO BRAND EQUITY

Brands have been a major aspect of marketing reality now for over a hundred years. The theory of branding
came some time later. David Ogilvy was talking about the importance of brand image as early as 1951 (quoted
in Biel 1993). It was first fully articulated, as far as I know, by Burleigh Gardner & Sidney Levy in their classic
Harvard Business Review paper of 1955. But despite such distinguished origins, the concept of ‘brand image’
remained – until recently – peripheral to the mainstream of advertising theory and evaluation. Although it was
endorsed from the 1960s onward by the British Account Planning movement (for example King 1970; Cowley
1989), it was also seen by many advertisers and researchers (especially in the United States) as a rather woolly
theory – the sort of thing advertising agency people talked airily about when they failed to ‘get a hard product

message across or to convert prospects’ or to ‘make sales’, as they were supposed to be doing. ‘Brand image’
was associated with expressions like the ‘soft sell’ (Reeves 1961, pp 77-86) and the ‘weak theory of advertising’
(Jones 1991), which gave it, for many, the air of a whimsical luxury that a businesslike advertiser could hardly
afford.

Then, in the 1980s, the hardnosed business people began to notice that brands appeared to be changing hands
for huge sums of money!

As take-over fever spread, the difference between balance sheet valuations and the prices paid by predators
was substantially attributed to ‘the value of brands’. Suddenly, the brand stopped being an obscure
metaphysical concept of dubious relevance. It was something that was worth money.

This shift of perception was reflected in the way that the traditional expression ‘brand image’ (with its suggestion
of a ghostly illusion), was increasingly displaced by its solid financial equivalent, ‘brand equity’. It is not clear
who invented the expression, but few uses of it have been traced before the mid-80s (Ambler & Styles 1995). It
achieved respectability when it was taken up by the prestigious Marketing Science Institute, which held a major
seminar on the subject in 1988, and has been going strong ever since.

In fact, the last few years have seen brand equity become one of the hottest topics in business. In America,
there is a now an influential body called the Coalition for Brand Equity (founded 1991), which evangelises for the
importance of building brand relationships and brand loyalty. Excellent (and very different) books have been
published on the subject (Aaker 1991; Kapferer 1992). It has spawned numerous conferences and seminars. It
has attracted a lot of interest from academic researchers, although the greatest part of their work has been
connected with brand equity as applied to brand extensions (Barwise 1993). Meanwhile commercial researchers
have been busily designing and selling methods for measuring, tracking, and optimising brand equity.

All of this, in my view, is fundamentally a good thing. It represents a long overdue shift in business and
advertising thinking: from focus on making a sale, to creating and keeping a customer; from a purely short-term
perspective to one that includes the longer term profitability of the business; away from volume alone to
recognise the importance of price and loyalty. (The brand equity movement, especially in the States, comes as a
necessary reaction to a decade of ever greater dependence on sales promotion.) It has legitimised the idea that
the consumer’s perceptions are more important than objective reality. And it raises serious questions about the
adequacy of ways of evaluating advertising that focuses purely on message communication, conversion, or
short-term incremental sales response.

But while I joined the cheering crowds lining the great brand equity parade, I was still bothered by two questions
which it did not seem to me had clear enough answers. I have written this paper as an attempt to answer them to
myself, and perhaps for anyone else who has ever wondered about them.

These are the questions:

What exactly do we mean by the term brand equity – and do we all mean the same thing?
How far can we expect to measure brand equity in an objective way?

WHAT IS BRAND EQUITY ANYWAY?

Karl Popper warned against a common mistake made by philosophers which he called ‘nominalism’. The
mistake is supposing that you will find the truth by starting with a word and arguing about what it ‘really’ means.
But words, as Humpty Dumpty suggested, mean just what their users want them to mean. They can have
various different meanings, and it is pointless to argue about which is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’. When a common
expression does have distinct meanings, however, it is as well to be aware of the fact so as to avoid
unnecessary confusion. This is true of the expression ‘brand equity’, which seems to be used in three quite
distinct senses (and each of these three has several further nuances of meaning). These are:

a = the total value of a brand as a separable asset – when it is sold, or included on a balance sheet

b = a measure of the strength of consumers’ attachment to a brand.

c = a description of the associations and beliefs the consumer has about the brand.

Of these three concepts, the first could less ambiguously be called ‘brand valuation’ (and often is). For the
present argument I shall refer to it as ‘brand value’.

The concept of measuring the consumer’s level of attachment to a brand can be called ‘brand loyalty’ – although
this phrase is almost as ambiguous as ‘brand equity’ itself. I prefer ‘brand strength’ for this sense, and, although I
am aware that this is also potentially confusing, that is what I shall call it in this paper.

The third could be called by the traditional name of ‘brand image’, but for clarity I shall here call it ‘brand
description’. This reflects its fundamental difference from the other two senses of ‘brand equity’; it is unlike them
because we would not expect it to be represented by a single number.

Brand value could also be seen as the odd one out in another way, as it refers to an actual or notional business
transaction while the other two focus on the consumer. In fact, brand strength and brand description are
sometimes referred to as ‘consumer brand equity’ to distinguish them from the asset valuation meaning.

We would not expect these three concepts to be completely independent of each other. Brand strength should
be one of the factors affecting the overall brand value; brand description might be expected to affect, or at least
to explain, some of the brand strength. Underlying much of the talk about brand equity, and some of the more
elaborate proposals for measuring it, such as the Yankelovich methodology (Taylor 1992), seems to be the
assumption of a causal chain along the lines of Figure 1 

It may become apparent in this paper why I consider both the links in this chain are weak, or at best, obscure. I
worry about the dangers of using the same name for all three (or even any two) of these concepts – it gives the
impression (deliberately or through carelessness) that they are all aspects of the same thins Like the arrows in
the above diagram, it is an easy way to create the illusion that an operational relationship exists which, in reality,
cannot be demonstrated.

So I intend to treat these three meanings of ‘brand equity’ as distinct concepts which require separate
discussion. For each one, the questions of definition and measurement are closely linked; an ‘operational
definition’, after all, means just knowing (or at least agreeing) on how something is to be measured. Brand
strength will be the one I examine at the greatest length because it is the most relevant to my current interest in
advertising evaluation and, for what it is worth, because it seems to me the central meaning of ‘brand equity’.
The issue of brand valuation has been written about at great length by people better qualified to do so than
myself (Kapferer 1992; Barwise et al 1989), while a full discussion of brand description would raise other
questions beyond the scope of what this paper should attempt.

SENSE 1. BRAND EQUITY = BRAND VALUE

The need to put a value on a brand arises for two main reasons:

1.   to set a price when the brand is sold
2.   to include it as an intangible asset on a balance sheet, a practice which is now possible in the UK but not

everywhere

It has been suggested, following from this, that the balance sheet valuation of a brand should become one of the
measures by which the management of the brand (and various inputs such as advertising) can be evaluated.

Consultants have devised formulae which are now widely used for creating brand valuations, foremost among
these being Interbrand and management consultancies such as Arthur Andersen (Murphy 1990; Barrett &
Bertoloti 1992). However, there remain a number of difficulties of which we should be aware, particularly if using
these formulae as indications of a brand’s overall strength or health, or as a basis for evaluating performance.

First of all there is the significant difference between an ‘objective’ valuation created for balance sheet purposes,
and the actual price that a brand might fetch in a real sale.

If we think of brands like houses, it seems reasonable to us that an expert should be able to say, within quite
narrow limits, what a particular one might fetch – its market value.

However, estate agents and surveyors are able to do this for property (no always, but most of the time) because
they have many points of comparison. They have seen similar houses sold and with a little experience can form
a sound idea of a ‘market price’. But brands are both more different and less frequently sold than houses, so the
norms needed to estimate a market price do not usually exist.

More importantly, a brand is likely to have a much higher value to one purchaser than another. If a company
already owns factories, manufacturing skills, means of distribution, or indeed other brands (Barwise & Robertson
1992), there may be synergies that make it worth paying a great deal for a particular brand. To a company
without the same assets, the same name could be worth relatively little. For acquisition purposes, the value of a
brand to a particular purchaser is best estimated by scenario planning – what future cash flows could this
company achieve if it owned and exploited that brand? Takeover prices can be higher than current valuations
because these incremental cash flows might be far greater than the brand could ever deliver to the existing user.

We can think of brands in this sense as being like properties on the Monopoly board. The face value of
Coventry Street is 280: but if you own the other two streets in the yellow set, and have plenty of cash to develop
the set when complete, its value to you will be far more. Another player, even paying face value, would never be
able to recoup his or her investment.

There is therefore no such thing as an absolute value for a brand. What it might actually realise, if sold, depends
a great deal on who might be interested in buying it at the time, and why. If two companies both want it, this
might inflate the price considerably more as, in addition to the cash one could generate from the brand is added
the strategic advantage of keeping it out of the hands of a competitor. The battle between Nestl and Jacob
Suchard to own Rowntree (perhaps the most often quoted example of ‘the value of brands’) is a good example
of this.

Another unresolved difficulty surrounding brand valuation is the issue of separability. John Stuart, when
Chairman of Quaker Oats Ltd., was famously quoted: ‘If this business were to be split up, I would be glad to take

the brands, trademarks, and goodwill, and you could have all the bricks and mortar – and I would fare better
than you.’ He may, in his particular case, have been right, but the claim would not always apply. And a
successful business has other assets besides trademarks and bricks and mortar. Many brand names, removed
from the management, the skills, the culture, the support that they normally enjoy, would rapidly lose their
customer base. Again, this makes the point that a brand – essentially, the right to a particular name or identity –
has a value that fluctuates according to who uses it.

Balance sheet valuations can only concern themselves with the current user and on this basis they try to
estimate the future profit stream derived from the brand and within this how much can be attributed to the brand
name itself. The main motives for having balance sheet valuations at all are financial, with which I shall not
concern myself here. But it has also been argued that the act of valuing brands formally is a good discipline for a
company, which will shift its attention away from a concentration on the immediate profit and loss account to a
consideration of the longer term.

This sounds as if it should be the case, but how far it really works depends on the formula used to create the
brand’s value. The preferred methods commonly in use start by considering the brand’s current profitability.
They then apply probabilities to the current situation growing or continuing, based on various measures of
‘brand strength’, which in this sense may include consumer research and also other factors such as competitive
position (Murphy 1990). The in-depth analysis of all aspects of the brand which is involved is likely to be a
valuable exercise. What is questionable is whether such approaches are looking at ‘brand value’ in a pure
sense, or at the business unit as a whole. As sales and, particularly, profitability can be manipulated faster and
more easily than the underlying measures of brand strength (which are in any case necessarily subjective), the
simplest way to increase a brand’s valuation on this basis could by continuing a short-term focus on profits;
which is exactly what many advocates of brand equity are keen to get away from.

This raises another crucial issue which we shall return to again – that of separating ‘brand strength’ from ‘brand
size’. Coca-Cola will appear a stronger brand than Pepsi, on most usual measures, because it is a bigger brand
than Pepsi. One of the key issues in the whole field of brand equity measurement is finding an indication of
brand strength which is not simply a tautology for brand size. One extreme view is that the two are, in fact, the
same (Ehrenberg 1993). While I disagree with this, it is certainly true that large brands, particularly market
leaders, derive a great deal of competitive strength from their relative size, and that many measures of ‘brand
strength’ are strongly affected by brand size.

In summary then, a valuation for balance sheet purposes is not the same as a valuation made on behalf of a
particular purchaser. Neither of these is objective and, while the valuation process may have usefulness, it is
questionable whether it is practical or desirable to treat such figures as the ultimate criterion of marketing
success.

SENSE 2. BRAND EQUITY = BRAND STRENGTH: A MEASURE OF
RELATIVE CONSUMER DEMAND FOR THE BRAND

David Aaker (1991) describes brand equity as having five components:

 Brand loyalty
 Awareness
 Perceived quality

 Other associations
 Other brand assets

This is a pragmatic recognition of the different concepts that have been associated with brand strength, and
which can be measured. It can be criticised for lacking an underlying theory that relates these five ideas together
(McWilliam 1993), but by the same token we may have to be prepared for the fact that no such underlying theory
really exists – in which case the concept of brand equity can hardly be said to be a scientific one.

The many different methods that have been published can, for the most part, be described as using one or a
combination of the following basic types of measure.

Price/demand measures (including modelling approaches);
Behavioural measures of loyalty (buying behaviour);
Attitudinal measures of loyalty;
Awareness/salience measures.

Of these, the second is similar to Aaker’s loyalty component, the third to his awareness component, while the
last is related to - but not the same as – his concept of ‘perceived quality’.

Aaker’s ‘brand associations’ broadly describes the area I have chosen to separate out as the third principal
sense of brand equity, that is, brand description. Aaker is quite right to include it as one of the dimensions on
which a brand should be appraised; I have dealt with it separately because it seems to me essentially
descriptive, rather than evaluative.

He is also right, I think, not to include price premium as a core dimension of ‘brand equity’, though he discusses
it briefly (pp 22-23). I would agree that this is best seen as a measurable output of brand equity, rather than a
part of brand equity itself (which raises another possible debate about what the phrase actually means). I start
with it because it has nevertheless formed one of the most popular approaches to measuring brand equity.

PRICE/DEMAND MEASURES (INCLUDING MODELLING APPROACHES)

One of the frequent benefits of a strong brand is its ability to command a higher price and/or less sensitivity to
price increases than its competitors. It follows from this, that two dimensions on which the strength of a brand
can be measured are its price premium and its price elasticity.

In other words, a brand is strong if people are prepared to pay more for it.

Each of these can be measured in one of two ways: using market data and using experimental data.

Price 1. Using market data

Suppose we consider that an improvement in price premium, while sustaining share, (or in share while
sustaining price) is an improvement in brand equity. This has the merit of simplicity and needs no special

research beyond reliable data on relative price and share, such as can be had from a good retail audit. The
simplest way to imagine this is by plotting brand share and relative price on two axes of a graph. For each
brand, we expect to see a relationship between price and share, popularly referred to as the ‘demand curve’.
‘Changing the shape of the demand curve’ or ‘moving the demand curve to the right’ have long been recognised
as possible desired outcomes of advertising (Jones 1986, pp 95-96). This increase in demand could also be
seen as an increase in the brand’s equity (Figure 2).

In this diagram the Brand Q has a higher share than P when they both charge the same price premium over the
market average, or can charge a higher price when they both have the same share. Also, Q loses less share
than P when the price goes up; the slope of the line is steeper. These could be seen as two measures of Q’s
greater brand strength. If P and Q represent the same brand at different time periods, Q later than P, this could
be taken as evidence of improved brand equity, caused, for instance, by advertising.

Price elasticity can also be estimated using econometric modelling; in the PG Tips case history (Grand Prix
winner in the 1990 IPA Advertising Effectiveness Awards) there is an example of relative price elasticity quoted
as evidence of brand strength/ advertising effect (Feldwick 1991).

A refinement of the price premium approach is offered by Longman Moran Analytics in the US (Moran 1994).
Here the definition of brand equity is: market share, times price premium, times a ‘durability’ factor. This last is
an estimate of price elasticity based on market data. Crucial to this method (which makes it less easy than it
sounds) is the importance of correctly defining the competitive set on which to base share and price differences,
so that an apparently small brand may really need to be considered as a dominant niche player in a smaller
category.

A further development of this approach is also to take distribution into account. Distribution and price are thus
regarded as two ‘contaminating’ factors which disguise the ‘real’ underlying demand for competing brands.
Simon Broadbent has developed a measure of consumer brand equity which he defines as: ‘The sales share we
would get, if we were at average price and had average distribution – and average price and distribution
elasticities applied. Equity is, in effect, the residual after price and distribution effects have been allowed for’.

It is conceptually a short step from this to identifying equity with the underlying ‘base’ or constant in an
econometric model of sales or share. Broadbent has also been very active in exploring the idea that the constant
in such equations can, and does, move over time, reflecting the underlying strength of a brand when all short
term factors – price, distribution, advertising, competitive activity or whatever – have been allowed for. This is
referred to as the ‘floating base’. (Broadbent 1992, 1993). A similar concept can be found in the modelling
approach to brand equity measurement offered by The Consumer Affinity Company in the US (Eubank 1993).

The idea of searching for brand equity (brand strength) by factoring out all influences on market performance
other than the brand name itself can lead into some complex procedures, such as that of Kamakura & Russell
(1993). However, it is interesting that these American academic researchers validate their highly sophisticated
approach by comparing results against a simple plotting of price premium versus brand share. In fact, this
scatter plot approach remains one of the simplest and most practical ways to consider a brand’s strength in the
market-place; for most purposes the use of multinomial logit models to estimate something similar may be using
a complicated sledgehammer to crack a fairly simple nut.

Price 2. Experimental approaches

Other approaches based on price take a different route. Instead of using market data, they use various forms of
pricing research to estimate what share the brand would have at various different relative price levels. The
equity measure is basically a calculation of the relative price at which each brand would have an equal share.
(This is recognisable as the inversion of Broadbent’s definition, given above.)

Joel Axelrod (1992) defines brand equity as ‘the incremental amount your customer will pay to obtain your brand
rather than a physically comparable product without your brand name’. In order to measure this, customers are
divided into different cells and shown different combinations of the test brand and competitors at different price
levels, and express preference using a constant sum technique.

Jim Crimmins of DDB Needham (1992) has a somewhat similar approach to measuring ‘the amount of value
added by a brand name’ (to his credit, he avoids the dreaded E word!) The interviewing approach sounds
similar to Axelrod’s. The output is an estimation of the price at which the test brand and each competitor are
equally likely to be chosen. Notice that this measure of ‘brand value added’ is not absolute, but varies according
to which competitor is taken as the comparison. Crimmins reports that the value added by the number one brand
in a market averages at 40% compared with store brands, but only averages 10% compared with the number
two brand; in both cases there is a wide variation around this median figure.

Steve Roth (1991) describes the use of Brand Price Trade-Off analysis to estimate brand equity. In this
approach respondents choose their preferred brand at various different sets of price levels. By pooling all the
respondents’ individual decision processes the computer can simulate market outcomes at any set of prices.
From a brand equity viewpoint, this micro modelling approach shows that a brand can have different ‘equity’ for
different respondents.

As we shall see in looking at behavioural or attitudinal loyalty measures, any serious investigation into
quantifying consumers’ degree of ‘attachment’ to a brand is likely to discover this unsurprising truth – that some
customers will be far more attached to the brand than others. It follows from this that figures which average all
customers to provide a total brand score may be misleading.

Conversely, the process of decomposing a brand’s user base into more or less loyal users may be valuable in
itself in planning marketing strategy. It may be that one of the main benefits of some ‘brand equity research’ lies
in this area, rather than the quest for a single yardstick for measuring brand strength.

Trade-off or conjoint approaches make it appear quite easy to separate brand name effects from other factors,
which may make us forget that in real life separability is not always so clear cut. Can one really separate the
Mercedes Benz name, for example, from the reality of the Mercedes Benz car?

Price: some general observations

The merits of using price as an indication of brand strength are that it relates closely to one of the main business
benefits of branding. It is valuable in that it takes the focus off volume and adds the dimension of commanding a
fair price for a trusted product. Certainly it is a dangerous error to look for evidence of brand strength or
advertising effect by considering volumes alone.

However, there is more to brand equity than price premiums. There are strong brands which do not command a
premium price, either because they are examples of ‘scale economy branding’ or because there is no directly
substitutable product in the market. Mars Bars would be an example of both. It is possible that relatively low

price elasticity would still be an indication of brand strength, but if the policy of the manufacturer were to keep
prices low – for example to keep competitors out of the market – this would be a somewhat hypothetical
measure.

Another danger is a possible lag effect between price rises and share loss. It is a dangerous game to suppose
that a brand can be made ‘stronger’ by increasing its price premium, but this could be one logical outcome of a
system which measures brand equity in this way. The story of Marlboro in the period leading up to Marlboro
Friday illustrates the risks (Feldwick & Bonnal 1995).

This raises another question fundamental to defining what we mean by brand equity. Is it enough to consider a
‘snapshot’ of the brand’s relative position at one point in time? Or are we really interested in its future potential
for growth, its future resilience against attack? If we want to predict the likelihood of future profit streams, price
premiums may be a legacy of past strength, (or present greed), more than they are a guarantee of future
performance. Many brands in the UK grocery market might be seen as illustrating this uncertainty.

BEHAVIOURAL MEASURES OF BRAND LOYALTY

‘Brand loyalty’, as mentioned before, is another expression whose meaning can vary. It is sometimes used, for
instance, to describe the consumer’s attitudinal orientation towards the brand (to be covered later). Its narrower
sense, however, is based on records of actual purchasing behaviour as gathered in consumer panels.

One common method of using panel data to generate a measure of loyalty has been the concept of ‘Share of
Category Requirements’, often abbreviated as Share of Requirements (SOR or SCR). The SOR for Nescaf is all
Nescaf volume expressed as share of all instant coffee bought by respondents who bought Nescaf during the
analysis period. This overall figure disguises a wide variation between individual buyers, some of whom will
have bought no other coffee in the period (SOR100%), to those who only bought it once out of n coffee
purchases (SOR l/n*100%).

On this basis the more loyal customer is the one for whom the brand represents a higher share of category
requirements; for instance, someone who buys seven jars of Nescaf in ten coffee purchasing occasions is more
‘loyal’ than someone who buys only three.

A good deal of attention has been paid to this behavioural definition of loyalty as an indicator of brand equity,
especially in America. The idea is that the buyer with a higher share of category requirements is, obviously, far
more important to the business (overall weight of purchase being equal) – also, implicitly, more emotionally
attached to the brand and less willing to accept a substitute. (It does not, in fact, follow that this should always
be the case and I am not sure what evidence exists for this assumption.) Therefore, if a brand’s buyers show,
overall, a higher average SOR, this could be seen as a sign of brand strength. (More usually nowadays the
criterion is a higher proportion of buyers with a SOR above a certain level, rather than the average. Crimmins
(1992) suggests the proportion of buyers with an SOR over 60%; Christiani (1993) argues for considering the
whole distribution.)

Larry Light (1994), a distinguished American researcher and Chairman of the Coalition for Brand Equity, uses
the following example to demonstrate that brands with the same market shares can differ in loyalty as measured
by SOR. He posits three imaginary brands: Brand A, which 100% of the user population buy 15% of the time;
Brand B, which 15% buy 100% of the time; and Brand C, which half of the population buy 30% of the time. It will
be seen that each of these brands has an identical 15% market share; but in terms of profitability, Brand B is

claimed to be the most profitable (and the most secure?), and Brand A the least.

The problem with this (admittedly hypothetical) example is that brands like A, B and C are not known to exist in
normal markets. We have already observed that every brand shows a distribution of different loyalty levels
ranging from 100% loyalists to those who only bought the brand once. Andrew Ehrenberg and his colleagues
have shown repeatedly that, over any time period, this distribution follows a standard pattern, which can be
predicted within fairly narrow limits from three parameters. Two of these are market specific and can be
estimated from knowing the category rate of purchase and the number of brands in the market; the third is
simply the brand’s market share. Hence any brand’s average ‘share of category requirements’ can also be
predicted, within narrow limits, from the same three parameters. Ehrenberg also shows that average Share of
Requirements actually varies little between brands in a market, though it is normally higher for brands with a
larger share, an instance of the so-called ‘Double Jeopardy’. (Ehrenberg 1988; Ehrenberg et al 1990; Ehrenberg
& Scriven 1995). Table 1 illustrates a typical finding.

TABLE 1

US instant coffee (annual)

Market Share

Share of category
requirements

Maxwell House
Sanka 
Taster’s Choice
High Point 
All other brands
Folgers
Nescaf
Brim
Maxim
Source Ehrenberg & Scriven 1995

 19
16
 14
13
 12
 11
8 
 4
 3

 39
 36
 32
 31
 32
 29
 28
 21
 23

There is an apparent conflict between Ehrenberg’s findings (which have never been seriously disputed, though
often ignored) and much American research based on SOR. The logic following from Ehrenberg’s data is that
brand equity measures based on share of category requirements are, once again, mere tautologies for brand
share; share of category requirements will only go up if brand share goes up.

An alternative to SOR as a way of defining loyalty is to look at patterns of purchasing over time, and use this to
estimate the probability of each panel member buying the brand on the next purchase occasion. Alain Pioche of
Nielsen describes such a system, and illustrates how it can be more sensitive than SOR by the following three
purchasing sequences, where 1 = a purchase of the brand and 0 = purchase of another brand:

1, 1, 1,1, 1,0,0,0,0,0

 
1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0

0,0,0,0,0, 1, 1, 1, 1,1

The SOR here is identical for all three at 50%. On the basis that past buying is the best single predictor of future
buying behaviour, Pioche estimates the probability of each respondent buying the brand next time as A~.21,
B=.43, and C=.79. The results must be aggregated to create an overall measure for loyalty to a brand. This
would then have the potential to vary continuously in time (Pioche 1992).

This idea has an intuitive appeal – it is like reading the form at a horse race. We might think, however, that at
the aggregate level it will be unlikely to tell us anything new about the brand’s health – if more people are buying
the brand more often, this should be reflected in its overall brand share!

What both SOR and this ‘stochastic’ approach show us is that any brand is bought by different groups of people,
some very loyal (in behavioural terms), some not at all so. This mode of analysis is valuable in that it recognises
that some customers are far more important to the brand than others, and that if these can be identified and
targeted there can be significant improvements in marketing efficiency. This is the reverse of traditional
‘conversion’ models of marketing where the target was essentially conceived of as a non-user; it reflects a new
and proper emphasis on the importance of the existing customer base.

Once the attempt is made to decompose the customer base in this way, a number of interlocking segmentations
become possible which can make the process a complex one. Three common divisions are as follows:

Weight of category purchase. Here we should expect a wide distribution from heavy to very light users,
where (at least) the 80:20 rule generally applies – a minority of buyers account for a majority of total
category consumption;
Share of Category Requirements (SOR) cuts across this, so that some of a brand’s more loyal users will be
heavy category users, and some very light. (Ehrenberg (e.g. 1988, p 174) pointed out that customers
whose share of category requirements is 100% are likely to include a lot of very light users, as the easiest
way to be classified as 100% loyal is to have only bought the category on a single occasion in the analysis
period. This will also apply to others with a high SOR. Nevertheless there will be some heavy category
users who are 80%-100% loyal and these will account for a disproportionate volume of the business.);
 In America, where deep price discounting has become a major force in packaged goods markets, there
have been attempts to find general consumer segmentations that hold true across categories – so that
some individuals are more brand loyal, some buy across a wide repertoire, and some are particularly likely
to buy on deal (McQueen et al 1993). Discussion then arises as to whether an occasional buyer of your
brand is a more or less attractive prospect if he/she is a loyal buyer of a competing brand or a ‘deal
selective’.

All this may seem to be straying far away from our particular inquiry, and so in a way it is. However, the
relevance of this to an overall measurement of brand equity is that a buyer whose 50% SOR is based on
preference would constitute a greater brand asset than a buyer whose same SOR was based on deal buying.
This suggests that analysis of buying patterns alone can be misleading unless it also includes some information
about price.

Behavioural loyalty measures attempt to use consistency of behaviour as a proxy for attitude, or what we might
call commitment. Given the influence of other factors such as inertia, availability and price it is not obvious that

this is entirely sound. Another way of looking at brand equity is to get a fix attitudinally on the number of buyers
who are strongly committed to your brand, compared with the number who simply buy it because of price,
because of habit or inertia, or just because it is the only one there. We shall describe some of these now.

ATTITUDINAL MEASURES OF BRAND LOYALTY

In this section we concern ourselves with general evaluative measures (affective or ‘liking’) more than with
specific associations and beliefs about the brand (cognitive or ‘thinking’), which belong more properly under our
third main definition of brand equity as brand description.

These can take various forms, which we need not describe in detail: scales ranging from ‘the only one I would
ever consider’ to ‘I would never consider’; constant sum preference scales; brand ‘for me’ – ‘not for me’. Any
form of experimental price testing (as Axelrod or Crimmins, above) can be seen as a form of attitudinal research
which takes claimed willingness to pay a price as its scale (hence it has been whimsically called ‘dollarmetric
scaling’). General measures of ‘esteem’ or ‘quality’ are intended to be sufficiently vague to cover all types of
product or service, so we can include them under general affective measures.

In a way such attitudinal measures take the most direct approach to the underlying concept which we suppose
we want to measure – the relative preference, ‘wantability’, or attachment the consumer has for the brand,
separated from ‘external’ factors such as price or distribution. Brand strength defined in this way is essentially
attitudinal, following Gordon Allport’s classic definition:

Attitude: ‘A mental and neural state of readiness, organised through experience, exerting a directive or dynamic
influence upon the individual’s response to all objects and situations with which it is related.’

If brand attitudes are handled crudely on the ‘eight out of ten cats prefer’ basis or, worse still, as a single
averaged figure, we need to be careful – again – that we are confounding numbers of a brand’s devotees with
the degree of their individual devotion to it. If we do this, then larger brands will tend to get the higher scores,
and once again, we will learn nothing other than the fact they are big (Barwise & Ehrenberg 1985). In fact, the
use of preference and other measures to stand for ‘brand equity’ has led to renewed interest in trying to
understand how they represent different parts of the customer base by disaggregating them into groups (as in
the analysis of loyalty, with which some researchers have tried to combine it).

One method of attitudinal segmentation is the conceptually very simple one proposed by Cramphorn (1992).
This segments buyers of a brand into two groups, the discriminating and the undiscriminating, on the basis of a
validated series of attitudinal statements. The percentage of discriminating buyers, plotted against brand share
on the other axis, positions a brand as relatively stronger or weaker than others the same size.

A more complex attitudinal segmentation is Market Facts Inc’s Conversion Model (Ceurvost 1994). This
segments buyers and non-buyers into four groups each: users are entrenched, average, shallow, or convertible,
while non-users can be available, ambivalent, weakly unavailable or strongly unavailable. It is claimed that
trends in movements between these groups anticipate and predict market share movements; in particular, that
as early as April 1991 the model predicted the decline in Marlboro share which led to Marlboro Friday.

If this is true, it means that the questions are a major advance on the traditional ‘intention to buy’ question which
was used for many years as a predictor of future behaviour. In fact, as Bird & Ehrenberg found, claimed intention
to buy reflects past behaviour much more than future behaviour (Bird & Ehrenberg 1967; 1968; Barnard 1990).

So a brand with a higher intention to buy than its present brand share would imply is generally not, as you might
expect, a brand that is about to grow, but a brand that is probably in decline. The number of respondents
expecting to buy it is merely a reflection of past glories.

The proponents of the Conversion Model argue that behavioural loyalty alone can misrepresent consumers level
of emotional attachment to a brand, quoting evidence that many buyers with a high SOR have low emotional
commitment. They also point out that in infrequent purchase choices, such as banks, cars, or credit cards, SOR
is not a practically useful concept (Ceurvost 1994).

AWARENESS/SALIENCY MEASURES

Brand awareness is one of Aaker’s five dimensions of brand equity. He defines it as ‘the ability to identify a
brand as associated with a product category' – an important qualification. There is a difference between ‘mere’
awareness of a name, and associating it with a particular product. Being the first name to come to mind when
thinking of coffee, hand drills, mouthwash is one indication that a brand ‘owns’ that particular category. Such
associations can persist for a long time.

Brand awareness has a long pedigree as a desired outcome of marketing activity, deriving from the very earliest
models of advertising effectiveness such as St Elmo Lewis’ AIDA in 1907. In most markets, recognition or a
sense of familiarity with a brand name is considered a step towards improving acceptability and preference,
other things being equal.

Awareness can be measured as recognition (prompted by the brand name), or spontaneous (prompted by some
definition of the product field), with a further refinement in collecting the first name mentioned.

One of the best known general measures of brand equity, the Landor Image Power study, consists of two
measures; one is a simple measure of brand awareness, the other a more complex factor called ‘esteem’ (a
general quality rating) (Owen 1993). The findings of this survey indicate that these two measures are
substantially independent of each other, showing that brands that are well known or easily called to mind are not
always highly thought of or likely to be preferred (although more so in America than in Europe!).

Another major cross category survey of relative brand strength, the Young and Rubicam Brand Asset Valuator
(1994), includes ‘familiarity’ as one of four key dimensions of brand strength (the others being esteem, relevance
and differentiation). Even here they are careful to point out that their definition of ‘familiarity’ embraces more than
mere name awareness.

In fact it is arguable that high levels of awareness are created by a brand’s size, ubiquity, and/or scale of
promotional activity, while they tell us relatively little about the brand’s ‘strength’ in the sense of the consumer’s
attachment to it or preference for it. Such measures tend to favour brands that are relatively or absolutely large,
so that once more we are in danger of confounding size with strength.

SENSE 3. BRAND EQUITY = BRAND DESCRIPTION: DESCRIPTIVE
ASSOCIATIONS/ATTRIBUTES OF THE BRAND

Some researchers talk about the collection of brand image data, positioning mapping and the like as if this is
‘brand equity’. David Aaker includes this as one of his dimensions of brand equity. It is widely assumed that the
associations or attributes which a brand acquires are the main creators of the brand’s strength, as when Alex
Biel (1992) argues that ‘Brand image drives brand equity’.

A wide variety of techniques, qualitative and quantitative, exist for eliciting consumers' associations with and
perceptions of a brand, by inviting the respondent to link each brand with words or pictures, or in multi-
dimensional scaling, to position them relative to each other.

More relevant to the brand equity debate are attempts to relate this kind of data, which are essentially
descriptive, to dimensions of attitudinal or behavioural loyalty, that is, brand strength, as described above. It is
through this linkage that what we might call brand image data have attached themselves to the brand equity
concept, in procedures which are often known in America as ‘brand equity modelling’.

Attempts to model general affective attitudes to brands in this way can follow two main approaches, which I shall
call cross sectional or time series. Cross sectional is to look for correlations between the individuals in the
sample – so that if the strongest preferrers show a strong tendency to rate the brand on attribute Y, the
inference is that associating the brand with attribute Y creates preference. This procedure is not new; it goes
back to the St James model of the 1960s and the objections made against it at the time, that it is impossible to
distinguish cause and effect in such correlations, is still a matter for debate. Time series analysis requires a set
of such data over time from a tracking study; if a sudden decline in one particular attribute happens at the same
time as a decline in general favourability scores, that attribute is assumed to be an important ‘driver’. Both
approaches can be and often are combined with the loyalty segmentations described, so that the ‘drivers’ for
each brand’s loyalists or rejectors (including competitive brands) can be computed. All these procedures are
controversial, but undeniably attractive for many reasons that go beyond the measurement aspect of brand
equity; they offer guidance for advertising and marketing strategy, and an appearance, at least, of controlling
complexity – ‘If we can improve this image dimension for these people, our brand equity – and profit – will go up
this much’. In their favour it must be said that they grapple with the complexity of a real user base, where
different individuals vary. Not everyone will be convinced they deliver all they promise.

SO WHAT IS BRAND EQUITY?

All the research methodologies described above have been linked with the attempt to measure ‘brand equity’. I
will not attempt to pontificate on their relative ‘validity’ or usefulness. But what is clear that they are far from
measuring the same thing. For example:

A brand’s ability to command a price premium is different from its SOR. (The brand leader may have 40%
more ‘equity’ than the store brand measured as price premium, but the same SOR among its buyers, or
less.)
‘Loyalty’ as shown by probability models is different from attitudinal measures (Pioche pp 37-39); also, as
mentioned, different from SOR.
 Different price measures give quite different results. (Crimmins is explicit (p 18) in pointing out that his
measure of brand value is not the same as the price premium in the market.)
Ceurvost points out that the Conversion Model’s measure of ‘commitment’ is not related to SOR.

And no doubt others.

What we have, in fact, is an array of different dimensions. Any of these might be considered a relevant measure
of a brand’s health, strength, (or even ‘equity’), depending on the brand’s individual circumstances – and
depending, importantly, on the use to which the findings will be put. Some measures, such as the basic
combination of share and price difference, are obviously useful as a general retrospective indication of the
brand’s competitive performance (and add something to other standard measures such as brand shares).
Others, for instance the attempts to measure levels of consumer ‘commitment’ to the brand, can act as early
warning systems to detect future defections – and the same research can often add diagnostic information
suggesting the necessary action to avoid this. Brand awareness may be relevant when considering extending a
brand into a new category. Price premium may be important to some brands, not at all to others.

But as Barwise (1993) points out, none of these short term measures of brand loyalty has yet been shown to
have any long-term predictive power; so there is an element of judgement involved in their use. And there is no
reason to suppose that any of these measures – or even a cocktail of different ones – represent an objective
and absolute measure of something called ‘brand equity’, still less that this is equivalent to the value which a
brand should be sold or accounted for.

When we look for an operational definition of brand equity, we are asking the wrong question. Brand equity is
necessarily a vague concept, like ‘personal health and fitness’, or ‘a sound economy’. These concepts imply
general questions: how well are we doing now? how well can we expect to do in the future? Such questions are
not answered fully by any one measure. At certain points in time, one or more measures may be of crucial
importance – such as cholesterol level or inflation. But there is also a danger that continuing to concentrate on
one measure to the exclusion of other creates its own problems (low inflation leads to unemployment; low
cholesterol diets cause depression). Brand equity needs to be approached in the same spirit.

REFERENCES

Aaker, D. & Biel, A. (1993). Brand equity and advertising. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Aaker, David (1991). Managing brand equity: capitalizing on the value of a brand name. New York: The Free
Press.

Ambler, Tim & Styles, Chris (1995). Brand equity: towards measures that matter. Pan’agra Working Paper no 9
5-902, London Business School.

Axelrod, Joel N. (1992). The use of experimental design in monitoring brand equity. Proceedings of the
ESOMAR Seminar, The challenge of branding today and in the future. Brussels, October, pp 13-26.

Barnard, Neil (1990). What can you do with tracking studies and what are their limitations? Admap, 295, April, p
23.

Barrett, Howard & Bertolotti, Nick P. (1992). Brand evaluation. Proceedings of the ESOMAR Seminar, The
challenge of branding today and in the future. Brussels, October, pp 1-12.

Barwise, Patrick & Ehrenberg, A.S.C. (1985). Consumer beliefs and brand usage. Journal of the Market
Research Society, 27, 2, April, pp 8 1-93.

Barwise, Patrick; Higson, Christopher; Likierman, Andrew & Marsh, Paul (1989). Accounting for brands. London
Business School and the Institute of Chartered Accountants.

Barwise, Patrick & Robertson, Thomas (1992). Brand portfolios. European Management Journal, 10, 3,
September, pp 277-285.

Barwise, Patrick (1993). Brand equity: snark or boojum. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 1,
March, pp 93-104.

Biel, Alexander L. (1992). How brand image drives brand equity. ARE Workshop, New York, February, in
Exploring brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995.

Biel, Alexander L. (1993). Converting image into equity. In Aaker & Biel, p 67.

Bird, Michael & Ehrenberg A.S.C. (1966; 1967). Intentions to buy and claimed brand usage. Operational
Research Quarterly, 17, pp 27-46 and 18, pp 65-66.

Brand Asset Valuator Prospectus (1994). Young and Rubicam Limited

Broadbent, Simon (1992). Using data better – a new approach to sales analyses. Admap, January, pp 48-54.

Broadbent, Simon (1993). Advertising effects: more than short term. Journal of the Market Research Society,
35, 1, January, pp 37-49.

Ceurvost, Robert W. (1994). A brand equity measure based on consumer commitment to brands. ARE Brand
Equity Workshop, New York, February, in Exploring brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995.

Christiani, Arthur (1993). Measuring and monitoring brand loyalty and its role in managing brand equity, ARE
Research Day, New York October, in Exploring brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995.

Cowley, Don (Ed.) (1989). Understanding brands. London: Kogan Page with the Account Planning Group.

Cramphorn, Michael F. (1992). Are there bounds on brand equity? Proceedings of the ESOMAR Seminar, The
challenge of branding today and in the future, Brussels, October, pp 4 1-54.

Crimmins, James C. (1992). Better measurement and management of brand value. Journal of Advertising
Research, 32, 4, July-August, pp 11-19.

Ehrenberg, Andrew S.C. (1988). Repeat buying. London: Charles Griffin & Company; New York: OUP.

Ehrenberg, Andrew S.C.; Goodhart, Gerald J. & Barwise, T. Patrick (1990).Double Jeopardy revisited. Journal
of Marketing, 54, July, pp 82-91. 

Ehrenberg, Andrew S.C. (1993). If you’re so strong, why aren’t you bigger? Making the case against brand
equity. Admap, October, pp 13-14. (See also Admap, December 1993 for comments by Ambler and Feldwick
and Ehrenberg’s reply.) 

Ehrenberg, Andrew S.C. & Scriven, John (1995). Joab Report 1 Added values or propensities to buy. South
Bank Business School.

Eubank, Sandra K. (1993). Understanding brand equity: a volumetric model. ARE brand equity Research Day,
New York, October, in Exploring brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995

Feldwick, Paul (Ed.) (1991). Advertising Works 6. Henley on Thames: NTC Publications, p 13.

Feldwick, Paul & Bonnal, Franoise (1995). Reports of the death of brands have been greatly exaggerated.
Marketing and Research Today, 23, 2, May, pp 86-95. 

Gardner, Burleigh B. & Levy, Sidney J. (1955). The product and the brand. Harvard Business Review, March-
April, pp 33-3 9.

Jones, John P. (1986). What’s in a name: advertising and the concept of brands. Lexington, Mass: Lexington
Books, pp 95-96.

Jones, John P. (1991). Over-promise and under delivery. Proceedings of the ESOMAR Seminar, What do we
know about how advertising works and how promotions work? Amsterdam, April, pp l3-27.

Kamakura, W.A. & Russel G.J. (1993). Measuring brand value with scanner data. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 10, 1, March pp 9-22.

Kapferer, J. N. (1992). Strategic brand management: new approaches to creating and evaluating brand equity.
London: Kogan Page. Translated from Les Marques, Capital de l’Entreprise. Paris: Les Editions D’Organisation,
Paris, 1991.

King, Stephen (1970). What is a brand? London: J Walter Thompson. 

Light, Larry (1994). The fourth wave: brand loyalty marketing. New York: Coalition for Brand Equity, p 28.

Lockwood, Thornton C (1994). The confessions of a brand equity junkie. ARE Annual Conference, in Exploring
brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995.

McQueen, Josh; Foley, Carol & Deighton, John (1993). Decomposing a brand’s consumer franchise into buyer
types. In Aaker & Biel pp 235-246.

McWilliam, Gil (1993). A tale of two gurus. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 1, March, pp
105-111.

Moran, William T. (1994). Brand equity: the durability of brand value. ARE Brand Equity Workshop, New York,
February, in Exploring brand equity. New York: ARE, 1995. 

Murphy, John (1990). Assessing the value of brands. Long Range Planning, 23, 3, pp23-29.

Owen, Stewart (1993). The Landor Image Power Survey: a global assessment of brand strength. In Aaker & Biel
pp 11-30.

Pioche, Alain (1992). A definition of brand equity relying on attitudes and validated by behaviour. Proceedings of
the ESOMAR Seminar, The challenge of branding today and in the future, Brussels, October, pp 2740.

Reeves, Rosser (1961). Reality in advertising. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, pp 77-86.

Roth, Steve (1991). Pricing, profits and equity. 3rd ARE Advertising and Promotions Workshop, New York,
February, in Exploring brand equity, ARE, New York, 1995.

Taylor, James A. (1992). Brand equity; its meaning, measurement and management. Proceedings of the
ESOMAR Seminar, The challenge of branding today and in the future, Brussels, October pp 55-75.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am very grateful to Patrick Barwise and Simon Broadbent who read a draft of this paper and made many
helpful comments.

This paper won the Best Paper Award at The Market Research Society Conference 1996<

NOTES & EXHIBITS

FIGURE 2

FIGURE 2

© Copyright WARC 1996
WARC Ltd.
Americas: 2233 Wisconsin Ave NW, Suite 535, Washington, DC 20007, United States - Tel: +1 202 778 0680
APAC: 20A Teck Lim Road, 088391, Singapore - Tel: +65 3157 6200
EMEA: 85 Newman Street, London, United Kingdom, W1T 3EU - Tel: +44 (0)20 7467 8100

www.warc.com

All rights reserved including database rights. This electronic file is for the personal use of authorised users based at the subscribing
company's office location. It may not be reproduced, posted on intranets, extranets or the internet, e-mailed, archived or shared electronically
either within the purchaser's organisation or externally without express written permission from Warc.