Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865-024-00545-8

Progress on theory of planned behavior research: advances in research
synthesis and agenda for future research
Martin S. Hagger1,2,3,4,5

· Kyra Hamilton2,3,4

Received: 18 November 2024 / Accepted: 17 December 2024 / Published online: 20 January 2025
© The Author(s) 2024

Abstract
The theory of planned behavior is a social cognition theory that has been widely applied to identify the psychological
determinants of intentions and behavior in health contexts. Our 2015 meta-analysis of theory applications in chronic illness
contributed to a burgeoning evidence base comprising syntheses supporting theory predictions in health behavior. In this
review, we identify limitations of prior meta-analyses of theory applications in health behavior and highlight salient evidence gaps, summarize how recent meta-analyses of the theory have addressed some of the limitations, outline outstanding research questions, and suggest future research syntheses, including those currently in progress, to resolve them. We
point to recent and ongoing meta-analyses addressing theory hypotheses and assumptions not tested in previous syntheses,
such as perceived behavioral control moderating effects and indirect effects of environmental (e.g., sociostructural variables) and intrapersonal (e.g., personality traits) determinants on health behavior mediated by theory constructs. We also
highlight meta-analyses examining behavioral effects of constructs representing extended processes (e.g., habit, implicit
cognition) in the context of the theory. Further, we summarize recent meta-analyses addressing directional and causal
inferences in theory effects, including meta-analyses of longitudinal studies and experimental and intervention research.
We also highlight attempts to test the mechanisms of action of interventions based on the theory including the change
meta-analysis method and mediation analyses. We conclude by summarizing the advances that recent meta-analyses of
the theory have made to the evidence base of health behavior determinants and interventions and highlighting suggestions
for meta-analyses that will further progress the evidence base.
Keywords Research synthesis · Social cognition theory · Behavior change intervention · Mechanisms of action ·
Mediation and moderation · Meta-analytic structural equation modelling

Martin S. Hagger
mhagger@ucmerced.edu
1

Department of Psychological Sciences, University of
California, Merced, USA

2

Health Sciences Research Institute, University of California,
Merced, USA

3

Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of
Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland

4

School of Applied Psychology, Griffith University, Mount
Gravatt, Australia

5

Social and Health Psychology Behavioral Research for
Prevention and Promotion (SHARPP) Lab, Department of
Psychological Sciences, University of California, Merced,
5200 N. Lake Rd, Merced, CA 95343, USA

Despite epidemiological research reporting associations
between regular participation in health promoting behaviors
and avoidance of health risk behaviors (e.g., smoking, alcohol consumption) and adaptive health outcomes, particularly
markedly lower chronic disease risk (e.g., cardiovascular
disease, cancers, diabetes; Adams et al., 2019), a substantive
proportion of the population does not meet guideline levels
of health behavior participation necessary to confer benefits
(Liu et al., 2016). State and federal health departments and
advocates have, therefore, identified the development and
promulgation of interventions aimed at promoting health
behavior change as a key public health priority (Glanz
& Bishop, 2010; Michie & West, 2013; Oldenburg et al.,
2010). At the individual level, theorists and researchers
have suggested that such interventions should be based on
behavioral theory to optimize their efficacy and effectiveness (Kok et al., 2016; Michie et al., 2018; Prestwich et

13

44

al., 2015). Such theories enable specification of potentially
modifiable health behavior determinants that represent the
psychological processes underpinning action and may serve
as targets for change as a result of exposure to techniques
adopted in interventions (Hagger et al., 2020a; Johnston et
al., 2021; Sheeran et al., 2017). Research on the theoretical determinants of health behavior is expected, therefore,
to provide formative evidence that may guide intervention
(Hagger, 2025).
Social cognition theories, which assume individuals’
behavioral decisions are informed by their reasoned processing of social information, are a prominent class of
theory that have been consistently adopted in health behavior determinants research (Conner & Norman, 2015). The
theory of planned behavior, prototypical of the social cognition approach, is a well-specified, general theory purposed
to predict social behavior (Ajzen, 1991). The theory predicts that individuals’ behavioral, normative, and capacity
beliefs, captured by the attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control constructs, respectively, are key
determinants of intentions to perform a target behavior in
future, and intentions are hypothesized to mediate effects
of these constructs on subsequent behavior (Hagger, 2019).
The theory has been widely applied in health behavior
determinants research – predictive studies have supported
its hypotheses and its capacity to account for unique variance in multiple health behaviors across a range of contexts
and populations (e.g., Ajzen, 2011; Ajzen & Schmidt, 2020;
Hagger, 2019). Meta-analyses synthesizing evidence from
hundreds of applications of the theory in health behavior
contexts have provided converging evidence for its proposed effects and indicated that they hold across behaviors
and other sociodemographic and methodological moderators (e.g., Albarracín et al., 2001; Hagger et al., 2002; Hamilton et al., 2020; McEachan et al., 2011; Rich et al., 2015).
As an example, we offer our 2015 meta-analysis of studies applying the theory to predict adherence to treatment
for chronic illness prevention and management (Rich et
al., 2015). Our findings indicated that the theory not only
accounted for unique variance in intentions and behavioral
adherence and lent support to independent effects of each
theory construct on intention, and of intention on behavior,
across eligible studies, but also confirmed a key mechanistic role of intention as a mediator of belief-behavior
relations. Also important was our tests of candidate moderators of theory effects in this context that indicated consistency regardless of behavior (e.g., diet, exercise, self-care
activities, medication adherence), behavioral measure type
(self-report, non-self-report), and population type (e.g.,
socio-demographic variables). In sum, our analysis represents one of many relatively robust data points derived from

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

meta-analyses of theory tests that support to its predictive
validity in health behavior contexts.
In the intervening 10 years since the publication of our
analysis, there have been a number of notable conceptual
and methodological advances on the theory of planned
behavior, and others of its class, in health behavior contexts.
These advances have addressed some identified limitations
in research that has applied it that have furthered knowledge on health behavior determinants and the mechanisms
involved. The advances have also had important ramifications for informing health behavior change interventions.
In the current article, we provide a selective summary of
salient conceptual and methodological advances in research
applying the theory in health behavior contexts with a focus
on meta-analytic syntheses, outline the contribution these
advances have made to the furtherment of knowledge on
health behavior determinants and health behavior change
interventions, and discuss some of the most pertinent
research questions arising from this evidence that should set
an agenda for future research inquiry in this domain. We
begin by identifying some conceptual shortcomings of prior
research syntheses of the theory in health behavior contexts:
(a) failure to test some central theory predictions such as
perceived behavioral control moderating effects and conceptually-related hypotheses such as construct correspondence and patterns of effects of indirect and direct measures
of theory constructs on intention and behavior; (b) lack of
account for the effects of variables representing the broader
environmental and intrapersonal determinants of health
behavior; and (c) failure to consider the unique role of constructs representing other salient processes likely implicated
in health behavior participation such as non-conscious or
implicit processes. Next, we focus on some methodological issues that delimit the inferences that can be made from
research syntheses: (a) limitations relating to causal and
directional inferences in theory effects; and (b) a lack of
account for the mechanisms by which interventions based
on the theory operate. In each case, we outline how recent
meta-analyses of the theory address these shortcomings and
how they have contributed to augmenting the evidence base
of health behavior determinants based on the theory. We
present the diagram in Fig. 1 as an accompaniment to our
review, which illustrates some of issues identified and suggested directions for future research.

Comprehensive tests and additional
processes in research syntheses
Prior meta-analyses of research applying the theory of
planned behavior in health behavior (e.g., Albarracín et al.,
2001; Hagger et al., 2002; McEachan et al., 2011), including

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

45

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of theory of planned behavior constructs and its predicted effects augmented to include effects of additional variables, constructs, and moderators

our 2015 analysis (Rich et al., 2015), have lent support for
some of its key hypotheses, such as unique effects of its constructs on intentions and behavior, and the mediating role of
intentions. These syntheses have done so by applying multivariate analyses to meta-analytically synthesized data that
mirror those typically used in primary research testing the
theory, such as multiple regression, path analysis, and structural equation modelling1. However, these tests have not
typically synthesized and tested key hypotheses central to
the theory including the role of perceived behavioral control
and measurement correspondence as moderators of theory
1

It should be noted that recent commentaries have identified limitations in the use of some implementations of these analytic approaches
in meta-analyses of the theory of planned behavior and offered potential solutions (e.g., Cheung & Hong, 2017; Hagger & Hamilton, 2024b;
Jak & W.-L. Cheung, 2024).

effects and effects of global and belief-based measures of
theory constructs. Further, prior syntheses have not typically examined the role of broader environmental and dispositional variables and constructs, or effects of constructs
that represent other processes implicated in health behavior
enactment. In this section, we visit each of these issues in
turn and outline how recent meta-analyses have sought to
address these limitations, their contribution, and potential
avenues for future research.

Comprehensive tests of theory hypotheses
The theory of planned behavior is, essentially, an integrated
theory incorporating a key construct, perceived behavioral
control, into its predecessor, the theory of reasoned action
(Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980). Perceived behavioral control

13

46

summarizes individuals’ beliefs with respect to their capacity to perform the behavior in future and has been explicitly
aligned with other control-related constructs such as selfefficacy from social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986). Ajzen
(1991) proposed that effects of attitudes and subjective
norms on intention, and intention on behavior, were conditional on an individual having high control over the behavior. As such, individuals with higher beliefs in their control
over performing a given target behavior in future would cite
fewer barriers and more facilitating conditions with respect
to future behavioral performance. Under such conditions,
individuals were expected to be more likely to form intentions to perform the behavior in accordance with their utility
and normative beliefs, summarized in the attitude and subjective norm constructs, and would be more likely to follow
through in enacting their intentions. Perceived behavioral
control was, therefore, conceptualized as a moderator the
attitude-intention, subjective norm-intention, and intentionbehavior relationships. Further, to the extent that individuals reported their control over the behavior to be complete,
attitude, subjective norm, and intention effects would be
maximized, and the theory would, effectively, reduce to the
theory of reasoned action. The perceived moderating effects
are illustrated in Fig. 1 by the arrowed effects of perceived
behavioral control on the effects of attitude and subjective
norm on intention, and of intention on behavior.
The moderating effects were tested in Ajzen’s and colleagues’ early studies on the theory (e.g., Ajzen & Driver,
1992; Schifter & Ajzen, 1985). However, subsequent
research tended to fixate on perceived behavioral control
an indirect behavioral determinant mediated by intentions,
and, when control perfectly aligned with behavior, a direct
determinant. This means that fewer studies tested these
moderating effects, and it was neglected in previous syntheses of research applying the theory in health behavior
contexts (e.g., McEachan et al., 2011), including our previous analysis (Rich et al., 2015). Effectively, this rendered
syntheses of research on the theory incomplete. The lack of
meta-analyses of perceived behavioral control moderating
effects could be attributed to the general lack of studies testing these effects, as well as a general tendency for researchers to not report sufficient data to provide a fit-for-purpose
synthesis of these effects.
We recently addressed this evidence gap in a synthesis
of existing primary data sets from two programs of research
(Hagger et al., 2022). This enabled us to capitalize on the
availability of sufficient data to test direct and interactive
moderating effects of perceived behavioral control, consistent with Ajzen’s (1991) original hypotheses. Our research
also employed recent advances in meta-analytic structural
equation modeling which enable tests of moderation on
individual effects in a model representing theory predictions

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

(Jak & Cheung, 2020). Our analysis provided robust support
for the moderation of the intention-behavior relationship by
perceived behavioral control, consistent with the theory
across 39 independent tests in ten health behaviors. Larger
intention-behavior relations were observed among individuals reporting high control over their behavior. However, the
analysis revealed much smaller moderating effects that were
not distinguishable from the null for perceived behavioral
control on attitude-intention and subjective norm-intention,
so did not corroborate these predictions. Taken together,
these findings provide the most comprehensive data yet in
support of this hypothesized moderating effect for the intention-behavior relationship and moves the cumulative evidence supporting them in health behavior contexts beyond
that provided in previous syntheses.
The moderating effect of perceived behavioral control
aside, prior meta-analyses of the theory have tested effects
of other conceptual and methodological moderator variables
on theory effects in health behaviors. For example, metaanalyses have consistently tested the moderating role of
measurement lag on intention-behavior relations (Hagger et
al., 2002; Hamilton et al., 2020; McEachan et al., 2011).
Findings have tended to confirm that a proximal (shorter)
lag between measurement of theory constructs and behavior leads to larger intention-behavior effect sizes, consistent
with the original theory hypothesis. Such moderator tests
illustrate the power of meta-analyses to provide robust tests
of theory predictions. However, prior meta-analyses of the
theory have not tested a number of other key moderators
rendering them somewhat incomplete and represent key
gaps in current evidence syntheses of the theory.
A prominent untested moderator is measurement correspondence. Ajzen (1991) indicated that effective prediction
of intentions and behavior in the theory is dependent on
adoption of measures that capture the specific target behavior of interest precisely, consistent with the classic observation in attitude research that poor correspondence between
attitude measures and behavior tends to attenuate or extinguish attitude-behavior associations (e.g., Wicker, 1969).
Ajzen (1991) therefore proposed that measures of constructs
such as attitudes and subjective norms should correspond
with measures of intention and behavior in terms of target
(i.e., the subject performing the behavior), action (i.e., the
specific behavior of interest), context (i.e., the specific location or situation in which the behavior is to be performed),
and time (i.e., the temporal period in which the behavior is
to be performed). This moderating effect is illustrated by
the direct arrowed effect on the intention-behavior effect in
Fig. 1. Primary studies have indicated that measures that
meet these correspondence standards lead to larger effects of
the theory constructs on intentions and behavior (e.g., Ajzen
& Timko, 1986). Future meta-analyses would do well to

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

consider testing the moderating effects of measurement correspondence in studies applying the theory in health behavior contexts. This could be done by coding studies included
in the meta-analysis according to the extent to which the
adopted measures conformed to Ajzen’s correspondence
standards. Accordingly, we are currently working on a large
pre-registered meta-analysis of the theory applied in physical activity contexts to test this moderation effect (Simpson-Rojas & Hagger, 2021). We have developed a coding
scheme that scores study measures according to the number
of correspondence standards they meet. We will test the correspondence hypothesis by using scores as a moderator of
averaged theory effects across studies. We expect to observe
larger averaged effects of theory constructs on intention and
behavior in studies adopting measures with high correspondence relative to those with lower correspondence.
A further fundamental set of predictions of the theory
of planned behavior is the importance of salient beliefs as
indirect indicators of the theory constructs. Ajzen (1991)
proposed that the attitude, subjective norm, and perceived
behavioral control constructs represent global summaries of
specific sets of behavioral, normative, and control beliefs,
respectively, that individuals hold regarding their future
performance of the target behavior. In addition, individuals
were also proposed to qualify each belief by a corresponding value, termed outcome evaluations, motivation to comply, and control belief strength, respectively, and applied
an expectancy-value scoring model in which each belief
measure was weighted by its corresponding value measure2. Salient beliefs were expected to vary across behavior,
population, and context, and could be elicited through openended surveys administered in the population of interest.
Most important, the belief-based constructs were expected
to predict their respective global construct and each global
construct expected to serve as a mediator of their respective
belief-based construct effects on intentions and behavior.
Although prior meta-analyses have supported associations
between the belief-based and the global construct measures
(Armitage & Conner, 2001), no meta-analysis to date has
tested the proposed indirect effects. Previously, the relative
dearth of studies incorporating measures of both beliefbased and global constructs in health behavior contexts has
been a key impediment to such an analysis. However, there
now exists a critical mass of studies applying the theory
in health behavior contexts that include measures of both
2

Ajzen (1991) referred to the broad, summary measures of the attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control constructs as
direct construct measures while measures of the specific behavioral,
normative, and control beliefs were referred to as indirect measures.
Here were refer to the direct construct measures as global measures
and the indirect measures as belief-based measures in order to avoid
confusion when discussing direct and indirect (mediated) effects of
these constructs in tests of the theory.

47

construct forms to conduct this analysis. Accordingly, we
propose to do so in our proposed updated meta-analysis
of applications of the theory in physical activity contexts
(Simpson-Rojas & Hagger, 2021). We expect the analysis
will provide further formative evidence for interventions
based on the theory given that it is the salient beliefs that
should serve as primary targets for change in interventions
(Ajzen & Schmidt, 2020).

Environmental and intrapersonal determinants
A fundamental, although often overlooked, assumption of
the theory of planned behavior is that its constructs should
account for the effects of variables that represent sociostructural influences, and dispositional constructs that represent
intrapersonal influences, on health intentions and behavior.
Ajzen (1991) proposed that such constructs represent potentially-salient sources of information that individuals account
for when estimating their beliefs with respect to their future
behavioral performance. For example, sociostructural variables that represent barriers to performing the behavior
(e.g., lack of facilities, low access to inexpensive healthy
food options, poor access to healthcare) should be reflected
in individuals’ estimates of their capacity to perform behavior, that is, their perceived behavioral control. Similarly,
individuals who tend to endorse measures of intrapersonal
dispositional constructs, such as the conscientiousness trait
from the five-factor model of personality (Digman, 1990),
are more likely to align their beliefs regarding the utility
of the behavior toward servicing salient goals and are more
likely to invest effort in pursuing them, which would be
expected to be reflected in their attitudes and intentions,
respectively. Consistent with this proposal, the theory constructs should mediate effects of sociostructural variables
and intrapersonal constructs on behavior, providing a mechanistic explanation for observed associations between these
factors and behavior. The proposed mediated effects are
illustrated in Fig. 1 comprising the direct arrowed effects of
the sociostructural (e.g., age, education, income, race, sex)
and intrapersonal (e.g., personality, trait self-control) on the
global measures of attitude, subjective norms, and perceived
behavioral control, the direct effects of these constructs on
intention, and the direct effect of intention on behavior.
Primary studies have lent support for hypotheses based
on this assumption. For example, sociostructural variables
such as indices of socio-economic status (e.g., income, education) and sociodemographic factors (e.g., age, sex, race;
Godin et al., 2010; Orbell et al., 2017). Similarly, personality traits such as conscientiousness (Conner & Abraham,
2001), agreeableness and openness to experience (Bogg
& Milad, 2020), and extroversion (Rhodes & Courneya,
2003), and sub-facets such as self-control (Conner et al.,

13

48

2023; Hagger et al., 2019) have been shown to be indirectly
related to health behavior mediated by the attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral control constructs.
However, it is only relatively recently that researchers have
synthesized research testing these hypotheses in health
behavior contexts. Such analyses are likely to have previously been precluded due to insufficient data reporting or
availability – sociostructural variables, for example, have
often considered mere covariates rather than as integral to
the processes underpinning health intentions and behavior
(Schüz, 2017). We recently capitalized in the proliferation
of available studies encompassing these constructs, as well
our own programs of research, to conduct meta-analyses
corroborating primary research findings on the proposed
mediation effects. Consistent with those prior findings, our
analyses revealed averaged indirect effects of sociostructural variables such as sex and age (Hagger & Hamilton,
2021) and health literacy (McAnally & Hagger, 2023) on
health behaviors. These analyses provide a mechanistic
explanation for observed disparities in health behavior participation and, ultimately, health outcomes. For example,
our meta-analysis indicated that relations between health
literacy and health behavior participation were mediated
by attitudes (McAnally & Hagger, 2023). Individuals with
inadequate health literacy may not know of, or fully comprehend, health-behavior links. Limitations in knowledge or
comprehension are likely reflected in beliefs in the utility of
health behaviors to promote health outcomes, represented
by the attitude construct. Overall, these analyses provide
important corroboration of a key theory prediction.
However, there is considerable scope to extend evidence
for this process-related effect in future research syntheses.
For example, we are currently conducting pre-registered
meta-analyses aimed at examining indirect effects of personality traits from the five-factor model (Hagger, 2018)
and trait self-control (Hagger & Hamilton, 2024c; Primoceri et al., 2018) on health behaviors mediated by the theory
constructs. Findings are expected to not only corroborate observed associations between these traits and health
behavior, but provide further confirmation of the mediation hypotheses, particularly the constructs responsible for
accounting for effects of these intrapersonal dispositional
constructs. For example, relations between traits such as
conscientiousness and self-control that reflect capacities
to engage in goal-directed behavior likely positively orient individuals’ beliefs in capacity toward future health
behavior participation. Such findings are important because
although there is evidence that traits are malleable through
intervention, effect sizes are small and may not be enduring (Roberts et al., 2017). By contrast, evidence suggests
that the attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioral
control constructs from the theory are more malleable and

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

can be changed through the techniques used in behavior
change interventions (Ajzen & Schmidt, 2020; Sheeran et
al., 2016b). As a consequence, such research may provide
some formative evidence of candidate constructs that could
be targeted in studies evaluating the efficacy of theory-based
behavior change interventions.

Extending the theory to account for other processes
A prominent critique of the theory of planned behavior is the
exclusive focus on constructs that represent reasoned, deliberative decision making. Such processes are captured by the
intention-mediated effects of the attitude, subjective norms,
and perceived behavioral control constructs on behavior
that reflect utility, normative, and capacity considerations,
respectively, with respect to performing a target health
behavior in future. Theorists have suggested that such an
approach neglects non-conscious, automatic, implicit processes that determine behavior beyond individuals’ attention with little or no deliberation (Hagger, 2016; Sheeran et
al., 2013). As a consequence, researchers have proposed and
tested integrated models that augment the theory of planned
behavior with additional constructs that reflect the non-conscious processes implicated in health behavior (Hagger &
Hamilton, 2020). These integrated models draw their inspiration from dual process models of cognition and social
behavior (e.g., Deutsch & Strack, 2020). Such research
has increased in intensity since our 2015 meta-analysis.
Examples include studies that encompass measures of the
habit construct (e.g., behavior frequency x context stability,
response frequency, and self-report habit index measures;
Verplanken et al., 1994; Verplanken & Orbell, 2003; Wood
et al., 2002) and implicit cognition, such as implicit attitudes, identity, and motives (e.g., implicit association test,
extrinsic affective Simon test; De Houwer, 2003; Greenwald et al., 1998). Studies testing integrated models have
demonstrated that such constructs have unique effects on
health behavior independent of intentions (e.g., Howell et
al., 2016; Lindgren et al., 2015; Phipps et al., 2020). Critically, they have also identified conditions that determine
when such measures tend to serve as the predominant determinant, such as when the behavior has been performed regularly and in the presence of stable contexts or cue in the
case of habit (e.g., Ebert & Lin, 2024; Orbell & Verplanken,
2010), or when cognitive resources are low particularly in
the face of high temptation or impulse to perform the behavior in the case of implicit cognition (e.g., Ellis et al., 2016;
Friese et al., 2008). Consistent with this research, there is
also intriguing evidence that interventions adopting techniques purposed to target these constructs leads to behavior
change (e.g., Folkvord et al., 2016; Forscher et al., 2019;
Kaushal et al., 2017). Studies such as these have advanced

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

knowledge on health behavioral determinants and the processes involved (Sheeran et al., 2016).
Proliferation of research testing integrated models that
extend the theory of planned behavior to encompass constructs representing non-conscious processes in health
behavior contexts, has also inspired research syntheses to
provide robust tests of these effects and evaluate their variability and generalizability. Here we offer our meta-analysis
of research examining effects of measures of the habit construct as an example (Hagger et al., 2023). We synthesized
studies reporting associations between habit measures,
intentions, and behavior. We used meta-analysis to estimate the relative effects of habit and intention on behavior
and effects of salient moderators such as likelihood of the
behavior to be formed as a habit and behavioral complexity.
Findings indicated that both habit and intentions predicted
habit in multiple health behaviors across studies, and that
averaged habit effects were larger in studies on behaviors
likely to be formed as habits and behaviors low in complexity, corroborating habit theory. The analysis is the first
to provide a comprehensive synthesis of these effects and
provides important evidence in support of extending the
theory to encompass habits as an independent behavioral
determinant.
Prior meta-analyses have examined effects of implicit
cognition such as implicit attitudes or identity on specific
health behaviors (e.g., Rooke et al., 2008). This has been
accompanied by a systematic review of research on implicit
cognition across health behaviors (Rebar et al., 2016). However, there has been no comparable meta-analysis to date
of research examining the relative effects of social cognition constructs such as those from the theory of planned
behavior measured using explicit and implicit methods
(e.g., explicit attitudes measured using survey measures and
implicit attitudes measured using the implicit association
test) on health behavior. To address this, we are currently
conducting a large-scale pre-registered meta-analysis that
reports independent effects of explicit and implicit attitudes
on multiple behaviors, including health behaviors (Phipps et
al., 2024). Preliminary findings indicate averaged independent effects of implicit and explicit attitudes on behavior,
but no differences in the relative effects of the forms of attitude on behavior in behaviors that are more likely to be consciously controlled. However, a limitation of this analysis is
that it will not account for intention effects and, therefore,
precludes examination of the relative effects of the attitude
forms and intentions on behavior consistent with the theory
of planned behavior. We look to future research syntheses to
investigate these effects.

49

Inferences and mechanism tests in research
syntheses
A frequent criticism levelled at research on theory-based
determinants of health behavior, including studies based
on the theory of planned behavior, is the preponderance of
studies that adopt correlational designs (Hagger & Hamilton, 2021a; Hagger, 2025). These designs do not permit
inference of direction or cause in theory effects, nor do they
account for construct change over time. Given that theories
such as the theory of planned behavior explicitly frame their
predictions in causal terms (e.g., attitudes cause intentions,
intentions cause behavior), direction and cause in effects
from such studies are inferred from theory alone, not the
data. Overreliance on correlational study designs has meant
that the studies included in most meta-analyses of theory of
planned behavior effects in health behavior, including our
2015 analysis (Rich et al., 2015), tend to be predominately
or exclusively correlational in design. As a consequence,
the same criticisms apply to these research syntheses. Solutions lie in the adoption of alternative designs better suited
to make directional and causal inferences in theory effects,
particularly longitudinal cross-lagged panel designs and
randomized controlled designs, respectively.
Alongside this, concerns have been raised over the use
of theory in developing and testing interventions purposed
to change behavior. Specifically, researchers have suggested
that many interventions do not explicitly match techniques
that form intervention content with the targeted theoretical
constructs the represent the psychological mechanisms by
which the intervention is purported to operate in changing
the behavior (e.g., Hagger et al., 2020; Kok et al., 2016;
Michie et al., 2018; Sheeran et al., 2017). Further, studies
evaluating the efficacy of theory-based interventions do not
routinely test these mechanisms, often referred to as intervention mechanisms of action (Hagger et al., 2020a, b). In
this section, we outline research that addresses these two
key limitations. We initially outline how researchers have
employed innovative research synthesis methods to provide robust estimates of theory of planned behavior effects,
including syntheses of theory effects in studies adopting
longitudinal and randomized controlled designs. We then
examine how recent methodological developments could
be utilized to test the mechanisms of action of interventions based on the theory. Specifically, we outline how
advances in research synthesis methods and the expanding
research literature employing appropriate designs enable
such syntheses and evaluate their potential to contribute to
knowledge on how interventions ‘work’ in changing health
behavior.

13

50

Directional and causal inferences
Although most studies testing predictions of the theory of
planned behavior in health behavior contexts have employed
correlational designs, there is a broadening body of research
testing its predictions using designs that enable better directional and causal inferences. For example, researchers have
tested theory effects using cross-lagged panel designs that
provide better support for directional inferences of theory
predictions while controlling for temporal construct change,
and in some implementations, intraindividual construct
change (e.g., Prati et al., 2014; Reinecke et al., 1996). Such
designs also have the added advantage of testing auxiliary
hypotheses such as reciprocal effects among constructs
through cross-lagged effects. For instance, these designs
enable tests of prior behavioral participation effects on
social cognition constructs, such as attitudes, in addition to
construct effects on subsequent behavior, consistent with
received theory (see Liska, 1984). Similarly, researchers
have adopted experimental and intervention studies using
randomized controlled designs to test the effects of manipulations (e.g., messages, persuasive communication) aimed
at activating or changing one or more constructs from the
theory on health behavior (e.g., Norman et al., 2018; Sniehotta, 2009). Randomization to conditions provides a better
basis for causal inference by minimizing potential influences of extraneous factors that partially or entirely account
for the effects3. Findings from these studies have provided
some convergence in support for theory effects and extend
primary research findings adopting correlational designs
and prior meta-analyses based on studies adopting correlational designs.
The availability of a critical mass of studies employing
longitudinal and randomized designs to test the theory in
health behavior since our 2015 meta-analysis (Rich et al.,
2015), together with some methodological innovations, has
permitted new syntheses of this research. Focusing first on
longitudinal designs, we conducted a meta-analysis of 87
longitudinal tests of the theory of planned behavior (Hagger & Hamilton, 2024a). The study also capitalized on
innovations in meta-analytic structural equation modelling
(e.g., Cheung & Hong, 2017), which allowed us to conduct
a cross-lagged panel analysis of theory predictions that
included all eligible studies even if they did not report a full
panel design or measure all the theory constructs4. Findings
3

It should be noted that such designs do no entirely obviate issues
relating to causal inference and other considerations need to be taken
into account, for a review see Rohrer (2024).
4

For a discussion of analytic issues including meta-analyzing data
from studies where the numbers of effect sizes in the analyzed matrix
of correlations among theory constructs vary and its use to estimate
novel models, see Hagger and Hamilton (2024b).

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

supported hypothesized theory effects over time while
controlling for temporal construct stability and provided
little evidence for reciprocal effects among its constructs.
Although the analysis provided further robust support for
the proposed directional effects of constructs as propose in
the theory, the analysis was still based on correlational data
and did not employ advanced implementations to analyze
panel designs (e.g., random intercept cross-lagged panel
analyses) that permit modelling of intraindividual change in
addition to temporal change in constructs (e.g., Orth et al.,
2021). These are avenues for future research, but analyses
adopting random intercept analyses are dependent on gaining access to the raw data sets of included studies, which
has, hitherto, presented challenges for research syntheses
despite calls for data sharing.
Turning to application of experimental and intervention
study designs to test theory predictions, two meta-analyses
have been conducted (Sheeran et al., 2016b; Steinmetz et
al., 2016). These analyses focused exclusively on studies
employing randomized designs including experimental,
quasi-experimental, and intervention designs in which participants were randomly assigned to either treatment group
exposed to manipulations or techniques aimed at changing one or more theory constructs or a control or comparison group that did not receive the treatment. An important
innovation of Sheeran et al. (2016a, b) analysis was the
application of a selection method to ensure that included
studies sufficiently engaged the targeted theory construct.
Specifically, studies had to report statistically significant
post-intervention change in a measure of the targeted construct in addition to testing for subsequent change in intentions toward, and actual participation in, the targeted health
behavior. This approach has been described as the change
meta-analysis method (Sheeran et al., 2021). An important
feature of the Steinmetz et al. (2016) analysis was to code
studies according to the behavior change methods or techniques used, although they did not segregate their analysis
into studies targeting change in each individual theory construct. Sheeran et al. (2016a, b) analysis indicated unique
change in health behavior intentions and behavior in studies that targeted change in attitudes, intention, and behavior, with effect sizes on intentions larger than effect sizes on
behavior, consistent with previous analyses (e.g., Webb &
Sheeran, 2006). Similarly, Steinmetz et al. (2016) identified
changes in theory constructs (attitude, subjective norm, and
perceived behavioral control) and intentions and behavior
in interventions based on the theory. They also identified
persuasion, increasing skill use, and motivational strategies were most effective in changing selected theory constructs and intentions, but with few differences on behavior.
Taken together, findings from these analyses provide the
most robust evidence to date for causal effects of theory

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

constructs on intention and behavior change in the theory of
planned behavior, and point to candidate methods that may
be effectively employed in behavior change interventions
based on the theory. The syntheses also provide evidence
that interventions with a basis in theories like the theory of
planned behavior can lead to effective behavior change.

Mechanisms of action of theory-based interventions
Although researchers have used theories such as the theory
of planned behavior as a basis for interventions to change
health behavior, studies evaluating these interventions have
not routinely tested whether the methods or techniques that
form the content of interventions operate to change behavior as specified in theory (Hagger et al., 2020a, b; Sheeran
et al., 2017). Specifically, researchers have not been sufficiently explicit or consistent in describing how the techniques used match the targeted theory construct (Kok et
al., 2016; Michie et al., 2018). Furthermore, researchers
adopting randomized controlled studies to test intervention
effects have not tended to include measures or analyses to
evaluate whether technique exposure leads to change both
the theoretical constructs and behavioral outcome (Hagger, 2025). Advances in research in the science of behavior
change has led to the development of systematic definitions
and descriptions of the techniques used in behavior change
interventions organized into structured classifications –
referred to as taxonomies and ontologies (e.g.,Marques et
al., 2023). Alongside this, there have been evidence-based
efforts to match these techniques with theory-based constructs that represent the mental processes proposed to be
changed or activated by the technique (Carey et al., 2019;
Connell et al., 2019; Kok et al., 2016), with accompanying
protocols for researchers to do so (Birk et al., 2023; Johnston et al., 2021; Michie et al., 2018). Finally, researchers
have also specified the kinds of designs and analyses necessary to provide fit-for-purpose evidence to support the proposed process by which such techniques operate to change
behavior by engaging the targeted theory-based construct,
known as the intervention mechanism of action (Birk et al.,
2023; Hagger, 2025; Sheeran et al., 2017). Taken together,
this research has provided the clearest guidance yet on how
researchers can test how their interventions work in changing behavior.
However, meta-reviews of behavior change interventions
have indicated that evidence testing theory-based mechanisms of action is relatively sparse (Hagger et al., 2020a, b;
Hennessy et al., 2020). As a consequence researchers have
been comparatively limited in their capacity to conduct
syntheses of intervention mechanisms of action such that
cumulative evidence on such mechanisms is a recognized
need (Hennessy et al., 2022). Such an evidence base will

51

provide interventionists with knowledge of the techniques
likely to have efficacy in changing behavior, how they operate, and the conditions that may determine their efficacy
(e.g., behavior, context, population characteristics). The
meta-analyses of experimental and intervention research
based on the theory of planned behavior outlined in the previous section provide important advances that contribute to
this evidence based insofar as their efficacy, their engagement of the theoretical constructs, and the techniques used
(Sheeran et al., 2016b; Steinmetz et al., 2016). However,
they do not provide formal tests of mechanisms of action,
that necessitate studies reporting sufficient data to conduct
mediation analyses to confirm indirect effects of strategies
or manipulations on change in behavioral outcomes through
change in the theory construct proposed to be implicated in
the change. Recent syntheses have advanced this research
by providing such analyses. For example, Rhodes et al.
(2021) demonstrated indirect effects of multiple techniques
on physical activity behavior change mediated by constructs
from multiple theories and Sheeran et al. (2020) demonstrated indirect effects of strategies from self-determination
theory, a humanistic, needs-based theory of motivation, on
health behavior change mediated by the autonomy and competence constructs from the theory. Both analyses revealed
indirect effects that yielded cumulative evidence in support
of their respective theory-based mechanism of action.
However, both analyses were limited insofar as the data
used did not account for change in the behavioral outcome
resulting from change in the theory-based construct itself,
that is, the mediator (for a discussion see Bullock & Green,
2021). Such effects were, instead, based on correlational
data (Sheeran et al., 2021). In future, meta-analyses need to
conduct syntheses of intervention studies that report effect
size data in which the intervention techniques used lead to
demonstrable change in both the behavior and the targeted
theoretical construct post-intervention, and, importantly,
that change in the construct leads to change in the behavior
post-intervention. This essentially extends Sheeran et al.’s
(2021) change meta-analysis method to a full mediation
analysis. However, few studies provide sufficient data to
compute such analyses. There have been calls for researchers to report such data and methods to identify and archive
such data that may feed into future evidence syntheses (Hagger, 2025; Hennessy et al., 2022). Such endeavors will serve
to iteratively develop a cumulative evidence base of intervention mechanisms of action in health behavior research.

13

52

Summary and conclusion
Our 2015 meta-analysis of the theory of planned behavior
provided cumulative evidence for associations between
theory constructs and health-related intentions and behavior in populations with chronic illness (Rich et al., 2015).
Our analysis contributed further to the evidence of psychological determinants of health behavior together with other
meta-analyses of the theory (e.g., Albarracín et al., 2001;
Hagger et al., 2002; Hamilton et al., 2020; McEachan et al.,
2011). Since that time, new meta-analyses of research applying the theory in health behavior contexts have capitalized
on theoretical, methodological, and analytic innovations to
address limitations and fill evidence gaps of the prior syntheses. These analyses have made important contributions
to knowledge on health behavior determinants research and
behavior change interventions based on the theory. In this
review, we summarized the findings of these meta-analyses,
evaluated their contribution, highlighted arising limitations
and evidence gaps, and suggested avenues for research.
We began by highlighting limitations and gaps in knowledge on the theory and how prior research syntheses have
fallen short of providing sufficient evidence to address them.
Specifically, we outlined theory predictions that our study,
and other contemporary meta-analyses, had not sufficiently
addressed or tested, including (a) moderating effects of perceived behavioral control and construct correspondence
and the mediated effects of indirect and direct measures
of theory constructs on direct theory constructs, intention
and behavior; (b) effects of variables and constructs representing sociostructural and intrapersonal health behavior determinants; and (c) effects of constructs representing
non-conscious processes. We highlighted the contributions
of new meta-analyses that capitalized on methodological
innovations and evidence proliferation that lend support
for perceived behavioral control moderating effects (Hagger et al., 2022), and effects of sociostructural variables
(Hagger & Hamilton, 2021; McAnally & Hagger, 2023),
and constructs representing non-conscious processes (e.g.,
habit), on behavior (Hagger et al., 2023). We highlighted
how these syntheses have also shed light on proposed theory-based assumptions and mechanisms (e.g., mediation of
sociostructural variable effects on behavior by theory constructs; conditions determining relative contributions habit
and intention on behavior). We also highlighted the need for
additional syntheses addressing further theory-relevant limitations, and offered our currently in-progress meta-analyses
of the theory incorporating personality traits (Hagger, 2018)
and implicit attitudes (Phipps et al., 2024) as examples and
discussed their implications.
Next, we outlined key methodological issues that placed
limits on the inferences that could be drawn from prior

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56

meta-analyses of the theory in health behavior contexts: (a)
including inferences of direction and cause in theory effects;
and (b) tests of intervention mechanisms of action in the
theory. We highlighted recent syntheses that capitalized
on recent advances in methods and advances in data availability that partially addressed these limitations. Our recent
meta-analysis of longitudinal research that tested directional
and reciprocal effects in the theory (Hagger & Hamilton,
2024a), and two recent meta-analyses of experimental and
intervention research (Sheeran et al., 2016b; Steinmetz et
al., 2016), were presented as examples of these innovations.
We also highlighted the limitations of these analyses, and
proposed recommendations for future meta-analyses testing
the mechanisms of action of interventions based on the theory. Specifically, we suggested modifications to the mediation analyses used to test mechanisms of action of behavior
change techniques in other theories as starting points for
these proposed syntheses and how they might be modified
to do so (Rhodes et al., 2021; Sheeran et al., 2020).
Overall, the current review of new meta-analyses conducted since our 2015 analysis are indicative of the considerable progress that has been made in cumulative evidence
on applications of theory in health behavior contexts.
However, we have also highlighted ongoing deficiencies
and gaps in available syntheses and signaled need for new
syntheses to address them. We have offered our ongoing
work and suggestions of new syntheses, particularly metaanalyses of experimental and intervention research and tests
of mechanisms of action of behavior change, as possible
avenues for future research and expect them to inform an
agenda for new syntheses that advance knowledge on the
theory in health behavior contexts.
Author contributions Martin S. Hagger and Kyra Hamilton: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review
and Editing.
Funding The work reported in this article received no funding.
Data availability Not applicable.

Declarations
Ethical approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​​p​:​/​/​​c​r​e​​a​t​i​​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​
r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​/​4​.​0​/​​​​.​ ​​

References
Adams, M. L., Grandpre, J., Katz, D. L., & Shenson, D. (2019). The
impact of key modifiable risk factors on leading chronic conditions. Preventive Medicine, 120, 113–118. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​
6​/​j​.​y​p​m​e​d​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​1​.​0​0​6​​​​​​​
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–211. https:/​
/doi.or​g/10.10​16/07​49-5978(91)90020-T
Ajzen, I. (2011). The theory of planned behaviour: Reactions and
reflections. Psychology & Health, 26(9), 1113–1127. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​
.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​8​8​7​0​4​4​6​.​2​0​1​1​.​6​1​3​9​9​5​​​​​​​
Ajzen, I., & Driver, B. E. (1991). Prediction of leisure participation
from behavioral, normative, and control beliefs: An application of
the theory of planned behavior. Leisure Sciences, 13(3), 185–204.
https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/01​490409109513137
Ajzen, I., & Driver, B. L. (1992). Application of the theory of planned
behavior to leisure choice. Journal of Leisure Research, 24(3),
207–224. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/00​222216.1992.11969889
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior. Prentice Hall.
Ajzen, I., & Schmidt, P. (2020). Changing behavior using the theory of
planned behavior. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton,
N. Hankonen & T. Lintunen (Eds.), The handbook of behavior
change (pp. 17–31). Cambridge University Press. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​1​7​/​9​7​8​1​1​0​8​6​7​7​3​1​8​0​.​0​0​2​​​​​​​
Ajzen, I., & Timko, C. (1986). Correspondence between health, attitudes and behavior. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 4(4),
259–275. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.12​07/s1​5324834basp0704_2
Albarracín, D., Johnson, B. T., Fishbein, M., & Muellerleile, P. A.
(2001). Theories of reasoned action and planned behavior as
models of condom use: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
127(1), 142–161. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/00​33-2909.127.1.142
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. T. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of
planned behaviour: A meta-analytic review. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 40(4), 471–499. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​4​8​/​0​1​4​
4​6​6​6​0​1​1​6​4​9​3​9​​​​​​​
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A
social-cognitive theory. Prentice-Hall.
Birk, J. L., Otto, M. W., Cornelius, T., Poldrack, R. A., & Edmondson,
D. (2023). Improving the rigor of mechanistic behavioral science:
The introduction of the Checklist for investigating mechanisms
in Behavior-Change Research (CLIMBR). Behavior Therapy,
54(4), 708–713. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​16/j.​beth.2022.12.008
Bogg, T., & Milad, E. (2020). Demographic, personality, and social
cognition correlates of coronavirus guideline adherence in a U.S.
sample. Health Psychology, 39(12), 1026–1036. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​3​7​/​h​e​a​0​0​0​0​8​9​1​​​​​​​
Bullock, J. G., & Green, D. P. (2021). The failings of conventional
mediation analysis and a design-based alternative. Advances in
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 4(4). ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​
i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​2​5​1​5​2​4​5​9​2​1​1​0​4​7​2​2​7​​​​​​​
Carey, R. N., Connell, L. E., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., de Bruin,
M., Kelly, M. P., & Michie, S. (2019). Behavior change techniques
and their mechanisms of action: A synthesis of links described in
published intervention literature. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
53(8), 693–707. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​93/ab​m/kay078

53
Cheung, M. W. L., & Hong, R. Y. (2017). Applications of meta-analytic structural equation modeling in health psychology: Examples, issues, and recommendations. Health Psychology Review,
11(3), 265–279. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2017.1343678
Connell, L. E., Carey, R. N., de Bruin, M., Rothman, A. J., Johnston,
M., Kelly, M. P., & Michie, S. (2019). Links between behavior
change techniques and mechanisms of action: An expert consensus study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 53(8), 708–720. https:/​
/doi.or​g/10.10​93/ab​m/kay082
Conner, M. T., & Abraham, C. (2001). Conscientiousness and the
theory of planned behavior: Toward a more complete model of
the antecedents of intentions and behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 27(11), 1547–1561. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​
/​0​1​4​6​1​6​7​2​0​1​2​7​1​1​0​1​4​​​​​​​
Conner, M. T., & Norman, P. (2015). Predicting and changing health
behaviour: Research and practice with social cognition models
(3rd ed.). Open University.
Conner, M. T., Wilding, S., Wright, C. E., & Sheeran, P. (2023). How
does self-control promote health behaviors? A multi-behavior test
of five potential pathways. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 57(4),
313–322. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​93/ab​m/kaac053
De Houwer, J. (2003). The extrinsic affective Simon task. Experimental Psychology, 50(2), 77–85. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​2​6​/​/​1​6​1​8​-​3​1​6​
9​.​5​0​.​2​.​7​7​​​​​​​
Deutsch, R., & Strack, F. (2020). Changing behavior using the reflective-impulsive model. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton, N. Hankonen & T. Lintunen (Eds.), Handbook of behavior
change (pp. 164–177). Cambridge University Press. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​7​/​9​7​8​1​1​0​8​6​7​7​3​1​8​0​.​0​1​2​​​​​​​
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the fivefactor model. Annual Review of Psychology, 41(1), 417–440.
https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​46/an​nurev.ps.41.020190.002221
Ebert, J. E. J., & Lin, X. Y. (2024). Confirming the causal rrole of
consistent contexts in developing a walking habit: A randomized
comparison with varied contexts. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
58(11), 741–751. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​93/ab​m/kaae045
Ellis, E. M., Collins, R. L., Homish, G. G., Parks, K. A., & Kiviniemi,
M. T. (2016). Perceived controllability of condom use shifts reliance on implicit versus explicit affect. Health Psychology, 35(8),
842–846. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0000336
Folkvord, F., Veling, H., & Hoeken, H. (2016). Targeting implicit
approach reactions to snack food in children: Effects on intake.
Health Psychology, 35(8), 919–922. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​h​e​a​
0​0​0​0​3​6​5​​​​​​​
Forscher, P. S., Lai, C. K., Axt, J. R., Ebersole, C. R., Herman, M.,
Devine, P. G., & Nosek, B. A. (2019). A meta-analysis of procedures to change implicit measures. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 117(3), 522–559. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​p​s​p​
a​0​0​0​0​1​6​0​​​​​​​
Friese, M., Hofmann, W., & Wänke, M. (2008). When impulses take
over: Moderated predictive validity of explicit and implicit attitude measures in predicting food choice and consumption behaviour. British Journal of Social Psychology, 47(3), 397–419. https:/​
/doi.or​g/10.13​48/01​4466607x241540
Glanz, K., & Bishop, D. B. (2010). The role of behavioral science
theory in development and implementation of public health interventions. Annual Review of Public Health, 31, 399–418. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​
o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​6​/​a​n​n​u​r​e​v​.​p​u​b​l​h​e​a​l​t​h​.​0​1​2​8​0​9​.​1​0​3​6​0​4​​​​​​​
Godin, G., Sheeran, P., Conner, M., Belanger-Gravel, A., Gallani, B.
J., & Nolin, B. (2010). Social structure, social cognition, and
physical activity: A test of four models. British Journal of Health
Psychology, 15(1), 79–95. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​3​4​8​/​1​3​5​9​1​0​7​0​9​x​4​
2​9​9​0​1​​​​​​​
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The implicit

13

54
association test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74(6), 1464–1480. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37//0​022-3514.74.6.1464
Hagger, M. S. (2016). Non-conscious processes and dual-process
theories in health psychology. Health Psychology Review, 10(4),
375–380. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2016.1244647
Hagger, M. S. (2018). Personality and the theory of planned behavior:
A meta-analysis. Retrieved November 29, 2018, from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​o​s​f​
.​i​o​/​k​p​j​q​w​​​​​​​
Hagger, M. S. (2019). The reasoned action approach and the theories
of reasoned action and planned behavior. In D. S. Dunn (Ed.),
Oxford bibliographies in psychology. Oxford University Press.
https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​93/OB​O/9780199828340-0240
Hagger, M. S. (2025). Psychological determinants of health behavior.
Annual Review of Psychology, 76. 21.21–21.30
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2020). Changing behavior using integrated theories. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton,
N. Hankonen & T. Lintunen (Eds.), The handbook of behavior
change (pp. 208–224). Cambridge University Press. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​7​/​9​7​8​1​1​0​8​6​7​7​3​1​8​.​0​1​5​​​​​​​
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2021a). General causality orientations
in self-determination theory: Meta-analysis and test of a process
model. European Journal of Personality, 35(5), 710–735. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​
d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​7​7​/​0​8​9​0​2​0​7​0​2​0​9​6​2​3​3​0​​​​​​​
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2021b). Effects of socio-structural
variables in the theory of planned behavior: A mediation model
in multiple samples and behaviors. Psychology & Health, 36(3),
307–333. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/08​870446.2020.1784420
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2024a). Longitudinal tests of the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. European Review of
Social Psychology, 35(1), 198–254. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​0​4​6​
3​2​8​3​.​2​0​2​3​.​2​2​2​5​8​9​7​​​​​​​
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2024b). Testing theory predictions and
intervention mechanisms of action in sport and exercise psychology using meta-analysis. Sport Exercise and Performance Psychology. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/sp​y0000352
Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2024c). Trait self-control as a determinant of health behavior: Recent advances on mechanisms and
future directions for research. Current Opinion in Psychology, 60,
101887. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​16/j.​copsyc.2024.101887
Hagger, M. S., Chatzisarantis, N. L. D., & Biddle, S. J. H. (2002).
A meta-analytic review of the theories of reasoned action and
planned behavior in physical activity: Predictive validity and the
contribution of additional variables. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 24(1), 3–32. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​23/js​ep.24.1.3
Hagger, M. S., Hankonen, N., Kangro, E. M., Lintunen, T., Pagaduan,
J., Polet, J., Ries, F., & Hamilton, K. (2019). Trait self-control,
social cognition constructs, and intentions: Correlational evidence for mediation and moderation effects in diverse health
behaviors. Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 11(3),
407–437. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​11/ap​hw.12153
Hagger, M. S., Cameron, L. D., Hamilton, K., Hankonen, N., & Lintunen, T. (2020a). Changing behavior: A theory- and evidencebased approach. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton,
N. Hankonen, & T. Lintunen (Eds.), The handbook of behavior
change (pp. 1–14). Cambridge University Press. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​1​7​/​9​7​8​1​1​0​8​6​7​7​3​1​8​0​.​0​0​1​​​​​​​
Hagger, M. S., Moyers, S., McAnally, K., & McKinley, L. E. (2020b).
Known knowns and known unknowns on behavior change interventions and mechanisms of action. Health Psychology Review,
14(1), 199–212. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2020.1719184
Hagger, M. S., Cheung, M. W. L., Ajzen, I., & Hamilton, K. (2022).
Perceived behavioral control moderating effects in the theory of
planned behavior: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology, 41(2),
155–167. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0001153
Hagger, M. S., Hamilton, K., Phipps, D. J., Protogerou, C., Zhang, C.
Q., Girelli, L., Mallia, L., & Lucidi, F. (2023). Effects of habit

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56
and intention on behavior: Meta-analysis and test of key moderators. Motivation Science, 9(2), 73–94. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​m​
o​t​0​0​0​0​2​9​4​​​​​​​
Hamilton, K., van Dongen, A., & Hagger, M. S. (2020). An extended
theory of planned behavior for parent-for-child health behaviors:
A meta-analysis. Health Psychology, 39(10), 863–878. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​
i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​h​e​a​0​0​0​0​9​4​0​​​​​​​
Hennessy, E. A., Johnson, B. T., Acabchuk, R. L., McCloskey, K., &
Stewart-James, J. (2020). Self-regulation mechanisms in health
behaviour change: A systematic meta-review of meta-analyses,
2006–2017. Health Psychology Review, 14(1), 6–42. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​7​4​3​7​1​9​9​.​2​0​1​9​.​1​6​7​9​6​5​4​​​​​​​
Hennessy, E. A., Acabchuk, R. L., Arnold, P. A., Dunn, A. G., Foo, Y.
Z., Johnson, B. T., Geange, S. R., Haddaway, N. R., Nakagawa,
S., Mapanga, W., Mengersen, K., Page, M. J., Sánchez-Tójar, A.,
Welch, V., & McGuinness, L. A. (2022). Ensuring prevention science research is synthesis-ready for immediate and lasting scientific impact. Prevention Science, 23(5), 809–820. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​1​2​1​-​0​2​1​-​0​1​2​7​9​-​8​​​​​​​
Howell, J. L., Ratliff, K. A., & Shepperd, J. A. (2016). Automatic
attitudes and health information avoidance. Health Psychology,
35(8), 816–823. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0000330
Jak, S., & Cheung, M. W. L. (2020). Meta-analytic structural equation
modeling with moderating effects on SEM parameters. Psychological Methods, 24(4), 430–455. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​m​e​t​0​0​
0​0​2​4​5​​​​​​​
Jak, S., & Cheung, W. L., M (2024). A cautionary note on using univariate methods for meta-analytic structural equation modeling.
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science,
7(4), 1–24. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​77/25​152459241274249
Johnston, M., Carey, R. N., Bohlen, C., Johnston, L. E., Rothman,
D. W., de Bruin, A. J., Kelly, M., Groarke, M. P., H., & Michie,
S. (2021). Development of an online tool for linking behavior
change techniques and mechanisms of action based on triangulation of findings from literature synthesis and expert consensus.
Translational Behavioral Medicine, 11(5), 1049–1065. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​
i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​3​/​t​b​m​/​i​b​a​a​0​5​0​​​​​​​
Kaushal, N., Rhodes, R. E., Spence, J. C., & Meldrum, J. T. (2017).
Increasing physical activity through principles of habit formation
in new gym members: A randomized controlled trial. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 51(4), 578–586. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​
2​1​6​0​-​0​1​7​-​9​8​8​1​-​5​​​​​​​
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G. J. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S.,
Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernández, M. E., Markham, C., & Bartholomew,
L. K. (2016). A taxonomy of behavior change methods: An intervention mapping approach. Health Psychology Review, 10(3),
297–312. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2015.1077155
Lindgren, K. P., Neighbors, C., Teachman, B. A., Gasser, M. L., Kaysen, D., Norris, J., & Wiers, R. W. (2015). Habit doesn’t make
the predictions stronger: Implicit alcohol associations and habitualness predict drinking uniquely. Addictive Behaviors, 45, 139–
145. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​16/j.​addbeh.2015.01.003
Liska, A. E. (1984). A critical examination of the causal structure of
the Fishbein/Ajzen attitude-behavior model. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 47(1), 61–74. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.23​07/30​33889
Liu, Y., Croft, J. B., Wheaton, A. G., Kanny, D., Cunningham, T. J., Lu,
H., Onufrak, S., Malarcher, A. M., Greenlund, K. J., & Giles, W.
H. (2016). Clustering of five health-related behaviors for chronic
disease prevention among adults, United States, 2013. Preventing Chronic Disease, 13, 160054. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​8​8​8​/​p​c​d​1​3​
.​1​6​0​0​5​4​​​​​​​
Marques, M., Wright, A., Corker, E., Johnston, M., West, R., Hastings,
J., Zhang, L., & Michie, S. (2023). The behaviour change technique ontology: Transforming the behaviour change technique
taxonomy v1. Wellcome Open Research, 8, 308. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​2​6​8​8​/​w​e​l​l​c​o​m​e​o​p​e​n​r​e​s​.​1​9​3​6​3​.​2​​​​​​​

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56
McAnally, K., & Hagger, M. S. (2023). Health literacy, social cognition constructs, and health behaviors and outcomes: A metaanalysis. Health Psychology, 42(4), 213–234. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​3​7​/​h​e​a​0​0​0​1​2​6​6​​​​​​​
McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M. T., Taylor, N., & Lawton, R. J. (2011).
Prospective prediction of health-related behaviors with the theory
of planned behavior: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review,
5(2), 97–144. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2010.521684
Michie, S., & West, R. (2013). Behaviour change theory and evidence:
A presentation to government. Health Psychology Review, 7(1),
1–22. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/17​437199.2011.649445
Michie, S., Carey, R. N., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., de Bruin, M.,
Kelly, M. P., & Connell, L. E. (2018). From theory-inspired to
theory-based interventions: A protocol for developing and testing
a methodology for linking behaviour change techniques to theoretical mechanisms of action. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
52(6), 501–512. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​07/s1​2160-016-9816-6
Norman, P., Cameron, D., Epton, T., Webb, T. L., Harris, P. R., Millings, A., & Sheeran, P. (2018). A randomized controlled trial
of a brief online intervention to reduce alcohol consumption in
new university students: Combining self-affirmation, theory of
planned behaviour messages, and implementation intentions.
British Journal of Health Psychology, 23(1), 108–127. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​
o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​b​j​h​p​.​1​2​2​7​7​​​​​​​
Oldenburg, B., Absetz, P., & Chan, C. K. Y. (2010). Behavioral interventions for prevention and management of chronic disease. In A.
Steptoe (Ed.), Handbook of behavioral medicine: Methods and
applications (pp. 969–988). Springer New York. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​0​-​3​8​7​-​0​9​4​8​8​-​5​_​6​2​​​​​​​
Orbell, S., & Verplanken, B. (2010). The automatic component of habit
in health behavior: Habit as cue-contingent automaticity. Health
Psychology, 29(4), 374–383. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/a0​019596
Orbell, S., Szczepura, A., Weller, D., Gumber, A., & Hagger, M. S.
(2017). South Asian ethnicity, socio-economic status and psychological mediators of faecal occult blood colorectal screening
participation: A prospective test of a process model. Health Psychology, 36(12), 1161–1172. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0000525
Orth, U., Clark, D. A., Donnellan, M. B., & Robins, R. W. (2021).
Testing prospective effects in longitudinal research: Comparing
seven competing cross-lagged models. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 120(4), 1013–1034. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​3​7​/​p​s​p​p​0​0​0​0​3​5​8​​​​​​​
Phipps, D. J., Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2020). Predicting limiting ‘free sugar’ consumption using an integrated model of health
behavior. Appetite, 150, 104668. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​p​p​e​t​.​
2​0​2​0​.​1​0​4​6​6​8​​​​​​​
Phipps, D. J., Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2024). Relative effects
of implicit and explicit attitudes on behavior: Meta-analysis and
test of key moderators. Retrieved April 17, 2024, from ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​o​
s​​f​.​i​​o​/​n​​d​8​2​​b​/​?​v​​i​e​​w​_​o​n​l​y​=​1​0​b​2​9​6​4​e​a​c​7​c​4​f​2​e​9​1​4​2​b​b​0​8​5​2​d​3​9​4​4​1​​​​​​​
Prati, G., Mazzoni, D., & Zani, B. (2014). Perceived behavioural control, subjective norms, attitudes and intention to use condom: A
longitudinal cross-lagged design. Psychology & Health, 29(10),
1119–1136. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​80/08​870446.2014.913043
Prestwich, A., Webb, T. L., & Conner, M. (2015). Using theory to
develop and test interventions to promote changes in health behaviour: Evidence, issues, and recommendations. Current Opinion in
Psychology, 5, 1–5. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​16/j.​copsyc.2015.02.011
Primoceri, P., Hagger, M. S., & Ullrich, J. (2018). Trait self-control
and social cognitive predictors of health behavior: A meta-analysis. Retrieved May 30, 2018, from ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​w​w​​w​.​c​​r​d​.​​y​o​r​​k​.​a​c​​.​u​​k​/​p​r​
o​s​p​e​r​o​/​d​i​s​p​l​a​y​_​r​e​c​o​r​d​.​p​h​p​?​I​D​=​C​R​D​4​2​0​1​8​0​9​5​9​6​4​​​​​​​
Rebar, A. L., Dimmock, J. A., Jackson, B., Rhodes, R. E., Kates, A.,
Starling, J., & Vandelanotte, C. (2016). A systematic review of the
effects of non-conscious regulatory processes in physical activity.

55
Health Psychology Review, 10(4), 395–407. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
8​0​/​1​7​4​3​7​1​9​9​.​2​0​1​6​.​1​1​8​3​5​0​5​​​​​​​
Reinecke, J., Schmidt, P., & Ajzen, I. (1996). Application of the theory
of planned behavior to adolescents’ condom use: A panel study.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 26(9), 749–772. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​
i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​5​5​9​-​1​8​1​6​.​1​9​9​6​.​t​b​0​1​1​2​8​.​x​​​​​​​
Rhodes, R. E., & Courneya, K. S. (2003). Relationships between personality, an extended theory of planned behaviour model and
exercise behaviour. British Journal of Health Psychology, 8(1),
19–36. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.13​48/13​5910703762879183
Rhodes, R. E., Boudreau, F., Josefsson, W., K., & Ivarsson, A. (2021).
Mediators of physical activity behavior change interventions
among adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health
Psychology Review, 15(2), 272–286. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​7​4​
3​7​1​9​9​.​2​0​1​9​.​1​7​0​6​6​1​4​​​​​​​
Rich, A., Brandes, K., Mullan, B. A., & Hagger, M. S. (2015). Theory
of planned behavior and adherence in chronic illness: A metaanalysis. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 38(4), 673–688. https:/​
/doi.or​g/10.10​07/s1​0865-015-9644-3
Roberts, B. W., Luo, J., Briley, D. A., Chow, P. I., Su, R., & Hill, P. L.
(2017). A systematic review of personality trait change through
intervention. Psychological Bulletin, 143(2), 117–141. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​
.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​b​u​l​0​0​0​0​0​8​8​​​​​​​
Rohrer, J. M. (2024). Causal inference for psychologists who think that
causal inference is not for them. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 18(3), e12948. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​11/sp​c3.12948
Rooke, S. E., Hine, D. W., & Thorsteinsson, E. B. (2008). Implicit
cognition and substance use: A meta-analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 33(10), 1314–1328. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​d​d​b​e​h​.​2​0​0​8​.​
0​6​.​0​0​9​​​​​​​
Schifter, D. E., & Ajzen, I. (1985). Intention, perceived control, and
weight loss: An application of the theory of planned behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49(3), 843–851.
https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/00​22-3514.49.3.843
Schüz, B. (2017). Socio-economic status and theories of health behaviour: Time to upgrade a control variable. British Journal of Health
Psychology, 22(1), 1–7. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​11/bj​hp.12205
Sheeran, P., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2013). Nonconscious
processes and health. Health Psychology, 32(5), 460–473. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​
/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​a​0​0​2​9​2​0​3​​​​​​​
Sheeran, P., Bosch, J. A., Crombez, G., Hall, P. A., Harris, J. L., Papies,
E. K., & Wiers, R. W. (2016a). Implicit processes in health psychology: Diversity and promise. Health Psychology, 35(8), 761–
766. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0000409
Sheeran, P., Maki, A., Montanaro, E., Avishai-Yitshak, A., Bryan, A.,
Klein, W. M. P., Miles, E., & Rothman, A. J. (2016b). The impact
of changing attitudes, norms, and self-efficacy on health-related
intentions and behavior: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology,
35(11), 1178–1188. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​37/he​a0000387
Sheeran, P., Klein, W. M. P., & Rothman, A. J. (2017). Health behavior
change: Moving from observation to intervention. Annual Review
of Psychology, 68(1), 573–600. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​6​/​a​n​n​u​r​e​v​-​
p​s​y​c​h​-​0​1​0​4​1​6​-​0​4​4​0​0​7​​​​​​​
Sheeran, P., Wright, C. E., Avishai, A., Villegas, M. E., Lindemans, J.
W., Klein, W. M. P., Rothman, A. J., Miles, E., & Ntoumanis, N.
(2020). Self-determination theory interventions for health behavior change: Meta-analysis and meta-analytic structural equation
modeling of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 88(8), 726–737. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​
7​/​c​c​p​0​0​0​0​5​0​1​​​​​​​
Sheeran, P., Wright, C. E., Avishai, A., Villegas, M. E., Rothman, A. J.,
& Klein, W. M. P. (2021). Does increasing autonomous motivation or perceived competence lead to health behavior change? A
meta-analysis. Health Psychology, 40(10), 706–716. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​h​e​a​0​0​0​1​1​1​1​​​​​​​

13

56
Simpson-Rojas, D., & Hagger, M. S. (2021). Physical activity and the
theory of planned behavior: A revised meta-analysis. Retrieved
July 2, 2021, from ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​w​w​​w​.​c​​r​d​.​​y​o​r​​k​.​a​c​​.​u​​k​/​p​r​o​s​p​e​r​o​/​d​i​s​p​l​a​y​_​
r​e​c​o​r​d​.​p​h​p​?​R​e​c​o​r​d​I​D​=​2​5​8​5​0​3​​​​​​​
Sniehotta, F. F. (2009). An experimental test of the theory of Planned
Behavior. Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 1(2),
257–270. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​11/j.​1758-0854.2009.01013.x
Steinmetz, H., Knappstein, M., Ajzen, I., Schmidt, P., & Kabst, R.
(2016). How effective are behavior change interventions based
on the theory of Planned Behavior? A three-level meta-analysis.
Zeitschrift Fur Psychologie-Journal of Psychology, 224(3), 216–
233. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.10​27/21​51-2604/a000255
Verplanken, B., & Orbell, S. (2003). Reflections on past behavior: A
self-report index of habit strength. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 33(6), 1313–1330. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​5​5​9​-​1​8​1​6​.​
2​0​0​3​.​t​b​0​1​9​5​1​.​x​​​​​​​
Verplanken, B., Aarts, H., van Knippenberg, A., & van Knippenberg,
C. (1994). Attitude versus general habit: Antecedents of travel

13

Journal of Behavioral Medicine (2025) 48:43–56
model choice. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24(4), 285–
300. https:/​/doi.or​g/10.11​11/j.​1559-1816.1994.tb00583.x
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 132(2), 249–268. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​
/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​0​0​3​3​-​2​9​0​9​.​1​3​2​.​2​.​2​4​9​​​​​​​
Wicker, A. W. (1969). Attitudes versus actions: The relationship of
verbal and overt behavioral responses to attitude objects. Journal
of Social Issues, 25(4), 41–78. ​h​t​t​​p​s​:​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​5​4​0​-​4​5​6​
0​.​1​9​6​9​.​t​b​0​0​6​1​9​.​x​​​​​​​
Wood, W., Quinn, J. M., & Kashy, D. A. (2002). Habits in everyday
life: Thought, emotion, and action. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83(6), 1281–1297. ​h​t​t​​​​p​​s​:​​/​​/​d​​o​i​​​.​o​​r​​​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​0​
0​2​2​-​3​5​1​4​.​8​3​.​6​.​1​2​8​1​​​​​​​
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

