This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Tanouri, Afshin, Mulcahy, Rory, & Russell-Bennett, Rebekah
(2019)
Transformative gamification services for social behavior brand equity: a
hierarchical model.
Journal of Service Theory and Practice, 29(2), pp. 122-141.
This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/134196/

© Consult author(s) regarding copyright matters
This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the document is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au

Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Submitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appearance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JSTP-06-2018-0140

Transformative gamification services for social behavior brand equity: A hierarchical
model
Purpose: The first aim of this study was to test a hierarchical model with interrelationships
between social support, value, and brand equity to examine the effect of a transformative
gamification service on users’ well-being behaviors. The second aim of the study was to
demonstrate the usefulness of brand equity to measure social behavior brands encouraged via
transformative gamification services.
Design/Methodology/Approach: Data were collected (N=351) via users of a transformative
gamification service delivered via mobile in Iran. Structural equation modeling was used to
test the model.
Findings: The results revealed the hierarchical model had a superior fit to the data than rival
models measuring constructs at lower orders. The results also reveal value mediates the
relationship between social support and brand equity for a social behavior.
Originality and Value: This is the first study to hierarchically test a model for
transformative gamification services. Furthermore, it begins to shed light on the antecedents
of value created within transformative gamification services, which to date has not been
thoroughly explored. Finally, the study demonstrates brand equity is applicable beyond
commercial campaigns and services and can be used to measure social (well-being)
behaviors.
Keywords Brand equity, Gamification, Social behavior, Transformative services
Article Classification Research paper

1

1. Introduction
Health and well-being are central to the global economy and significant steps are being made
by service scholars and practitioners to improve individuals’ quality of life (Sweeney et al.,
2015). This focus has led to the growing area of transformative services – services which
assist uplifting the well-being of customers (Anderson et al., 2013). However, significant
health issues remain worldwide, such as obesity resulting from overconsumption of food and
beverage products (Seiders and Petty, 2004). The World Health Organization (WHO) reports
that obesity has nearly doubled since 1975, with 1.9 billion adults being overweight and 650
million being classified as obese (WHO, 2017). This is concerning, because obesity is noted
as leading to other health complications, such as diabetes, psychosocial problems,
osteoarthritis, and cancer (Reilly and Kelly, 2011). Service scholars and service practitioners
therefore still have an important role to play in delivering these services and understanding
how they can address such health issues.
Traditionally, health and well-being customers are required to be physically present to
receive services which improve their well-being (e.g. visiting a dietitian or doctor); however,
in recent years, mobile technology has been increasingly used to deliver such transformative
services (Schuster et al., 2013, 2015). In addition to the growing prevalence of transformative
services being delivered by technology, new approaches to how these experiences are
delivered are emerging. One such approach is gamification – the use of game design elements
which enable greater value-creation for service users (Huotari and Hamari, 2017). Service
practitioners and researchers have realized a great opportunity exists in using “gameful”
thinking for service provision, with the mobile gaming industry growing at 19% per year to a
total of US$46.1 billion in 2017 (McDonald, 2017). Further, transformative services and
gamification sit at the nexus of two prevalent areas of service research: improving health and
well-being through the delivery of services (Ostrom et al., 2015), and the use of gamification
2

to encourage real-world behavior (Johnson et al., 2016). Thus, it is timely to understand how
gamification and transformative services can be used in tandem to improve customer wellbeing behaviors.
Transformative services are known to create an array of support resources
(Rosenbaum and Massiah, 2007; Van Dolen and Weinberg, 2017) and value (Blocker and
Barrios, 2015; Van Oerle et al., 2016). However, little service literature exists to explain how
support resources and value are created via gamified mobile applications or apps (hereafter
referred to as “transformative gamification services”). This is despite the existence of such
practices in the marketplace. For example, FitBit+ provides support via encouraging
statements, “Almost there! Get 1,487 steps more to hit your daily goal”, and provides value to
users via the tracking of physical activity and weight loss. Therefore, whilst it could be
presumed support created by transformative gamified apps creates value, there is limited
empirical evidence validating such an assumption. Furthermore, given the large array of
different social support dimensions and value dimensions proposed in the service literature, it
becomes hard to holistically understand their collective importance. Research suggests
hierarchical modeling can be one useful approach to gain a greater holistic understanding of
technological experiences (Atker et al., 2011; Piyathasan et al., 2015; Wetzels et al., 2009).
Thus, the first aim of this research is to empirically investigate the relationship between
social support and value hierarchically in transformative gamification services.
Transformative gamification services can be unique in that they often encourage a
social brand; that is, a behavior variant with attributes that bear similarities to that of a
commercial brand. The notion of a social brand being a behavior is relatively new to the
literature (Mulcahy et al., 2015; Naidoo and Abratt, 2018), with the predominant alternative
approach being social brands represented by campaigns or services (Evans et al., 2002
Gordon et al., 2016). This new and under-researched perspective of a social brand suggests
3

that behaviors can act and be measured as brand variants. For example, Mulcahy and
colleagues’ (2015) study suggests there are three variants of alcohol drinking behavior:
absent drinking, moderate drinking, and binge drinking. Their study validates the
performance of social behaviors being measured via brand equity. However, this is the only
study to the authors’ knowledge that validates and quantifies social behavior brands.
Therefore, there is a need to confirm if indeed behaviors can function as a social brand.
Further, what also requires examination is how social support and value created by gamified
transformative services support a social behavior brand, and whether these effects are direct
(i.e. social support to social brand equity) or mediated (i.e. social support to social brand
equity via value). Thus, the second aim of this research is to investigate the effect of social
support on social brand equity, and whether this effect is direct or mediated by value.
One context in which these aims can be examined is that of a transformative
gamification service encouraging healthy beverage consumption outside of a western culture,
such as by Middle Eastern consumers. This is an important area to research transformative
gamification services, as research points out that many gamification studies are situated
within a western context and focused on behaviors such as alcohol consumption (Dietrich et
al., 2018) or exercise (Johnson et al., 2016). Further, industry reports show that the
consumption of beverages that can be perceived as “unhealthy,” such as soft drinks, has
increased from 33.8 million liters in 2012 to 38.7 million in 2017 (Statista, 2018a). Therefore,
it is important to clarify the generalizability of the positive impact of transformative
gamification services in encouraging behaviors, such as healthy beverage consumption,
beyond market segments situated in developed, western market economies.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First, related literature is
reviewed in the areas of gamification services, social support, value, and brand equity. This is
followed by a presentation of the conceptual model and hypothesized relationships. The
4

method of the study is then outlined and the results presented. A discussion of the results and
their theoretical and practical implications is then provided. The paper concludes by outlining
directions for future research. Overall, this paper contributes new knowledge by testing a
hierarchical model with mediating effects, which takes into consideration social support,
value, and social brand equity in a new well-being behavior and market segment setting. This
newly proposed theoretical model and empirical findings further the agenda of gamification
delivered via mobile platforms (Hofacker et al., 2016), and the service research priorities of
Ostrom and colleagues (2015).
2. Literature review
2.1 Transformative gamification services
There is growing interest in the application of gamification in the services field. Research
suggests gamification can create enjoyable and useful experiences (Koivisto and Hamari,
2014), which can lead to improved engagement (Harwood and Garry, 2015). In the literature,
there appears to be two streams of research in services relating to gamification. The first
stream focuses on gamification for commercial benefit; that is, examining how gamification
can increase consumers’ usage of products and services which are commercially orientated,
such as e-banking services (Rodrigues et al., 2016) or online shopping (Poncin, et al., 2017).
The second stream focuses on gamification for uplifting and maintaining change in
consumers’ performances of health and well-being behaviors (Hammedi et al., 2017; Johnson
et al., 2016), which can be labelled “transformative gamification” (Mulcahy et al., 2018).
Most research in transformative gamification has focused upon health and well-being
behaviors, such as exercise (Hamari and Kovisito, 2015), smoking (Mulcahy et al., 2018),
and energy consumption (Johnson et al., 2017). Furthermore, most studies are situated within
developed economies and consumers from western markets such as the United States and

5

Australia. The current research, however, focuses on a less-researched behavior in
transformative gamification services – healthy beverage consumption – with consumers from
an emerging non-western economy, namely Iran. Taking such a perspective and approach is
important to extending the knowledge base of transformative gamification services and its
generalizable effectiveness across different contexts. The next section reviews the literature
on social support to begin setting the conceptual foundations of the study’s model.
2.2 Social support
In the literature, social support has been shown to be beneficial for assisting consumers to
maintain or improve their well-being (Coulson, 2005; Rosenbaum and Massiah, 2007). This
includes delivering social support through technological channels, such as online social
support groups (Coulson, 2005; Parkinson et al., 2017). Whilst not thoroughly researched,
transformative gamification services can offer social support by providing guidance and
encouragement to users. When conceptualizing social support there appears to be agreement
that the construct should be measured as a multi-dimensional construct to allow richer insight
into the construct’s characteristics (Osman et al., 2014; Yao et al., 2015). Further, most
studies appear to leverage the conceptualization of Cutrona and Russell (1990), who propose
five dimensions: emotional, informational, esteem, network, and tangible assistance.
However, despite agreement in the literature that social support is multi-dimensional and that
many studies leverage the work of Cutrona and Russell (1990), the number and
characteristics of social support differ considerably in different studies (see Table 1). For
example, Rosenbaum and Massiah (2007) examine emotional and instrumental
(informational) support, whereas Parkinson and colleagues (2017) measure all five
dimensions of social support: emotional, informational, esteem, network, and tangible
assistance. The variance in the number of social support dimensions examined across this
study is to be expected, as it is dependent on the behavior, service user, and service under
6

investigation. Therefore, for the purposes of this research, social support is conceptualized as
a two-dimensional hierarchical construct represented by emotional and informational support.
These two dimensions were chosen as they represent the social support given by the
transformative gamified service in addition to them being the most consistently measured
dimensions in social support studies (see Table 1).

<Insert Table 1 about here>

2.3 Value creation
The creation of value is central to services, and particularly those that are transformative
(Zainuddin et al., 2016) or gamification-focused (Hamari and Kovisito, 2015; Leclercq et al.,
2017). In the literature, multiple multi-dimensional frameworks have been used to examine
value created by technological products and services. Of these, three appear to be
predominately used to guide studies of value: consumption-values theory (Sheth et al., 1991),
hedonic and utilitarian value (Babin et al., 1994), and Holbrook’s (1994) typology. Of these
three, Babin and colleagues’ (1994) and Holbrook’s (1994) typology appear to be best suited
to understanding game experiences and gamification. For example, Hamari and Koivisto
(2015) conceptualize hedonic benefits to be represented by two single-factor dimensions –
playfulness and enjoyment – and utilitarian benefits to be represented by usefulness and ease
of use, whereas Okazaki (2008) leverages Holbrook’s (1994) typology operationalized by
Mathwick and colleagues (2001) to measure the value of mobile game experiences.
Research also suggests multiple frameworks of value can be used together to
hierarchically measure and subsequently gain a deeper understanding of the concept’s
structure and how it collectively contributes to service users’ experience (Wetzels et al.,
2009). Wetzels and colleagues’ (2009) study, for example, demonstrates that value can be

7

measured hierarchically and this can contribute to understanding users’ loyalty. They argue
that measuring value hierarchically can be advantageous as it allows for examining the
richness of the construct, its level of factors, and its overall assessment of impact on desired
outcomes. They also demonstrate that hierarchically measuring value can enable multiple
frameworks – such as Babin and colleagues’ (1994) hedonic and utilitarian value, and
Holbrook’s (1994) typology – to be represented within a singular model. They use
Holbrook’s dimensions to measure experiential value and hierarchically model them
according to Babin and colleagues’ hedonic and utilitarian value dimensions. Research
outside of value also demonstrates similar advantages for hierarchically modeling similar
constructs, such as service quality in technological settings (Blut, 2016; Fassnacht and Koese,
2006; Piyathasanan et al., 2015). However, research which goes beyond the single-order
measurement of value and uses hierarchical modeling within transformative services and
gamification is limited. This research takes a similar approach to Wetzels and colleagues
(2009) by using Holbrook’s (1994) typology to measure value, and Babin and colleagues’
(1994) framework to hierarchically map their characteristics. Undertaking such an approach
is important, as users are likely to evaluate certain dimensions of value created by a
transformative gamified service, but also assess the cumulative value created by these
dimensions. It is therefore proposed that hierarchical modelling can achieve these two
purposes.

2.4 Brand equity and social brands
Brands can represent products, services, people, places, and ideas (Keller, 1998). Recently,
branding has been extended to apply to social behaviors (e.g. drinking in moderation)
(Mulcahy et al., 2015). Keller (1998) points out that branding behaviors can be feasible and
that actual behaviors need to be branded. In the literature, the predominate approach to
8

branding a social behavior relates to a supportive campaign or product/service (see Table 2).
For example, the campaign ‘TruthSM’ is a brand which represents quitting smoking (Evans et
al., 2002), whereas services such as ‘Breastscreening Queensland’ studied by Gordon and
colleagues (2016) can represent a brand for services which assist well-being through cancer
screening. However, more recently a new and less examined approach has been proposed to
measure social brands. Mulcahy and colleagues (2015) propose that branding frameworks,
such as brand equity, can be applied to a social behavior without the co-branding of a
campaign or supporting product or service. This bears similarities to other scholarly thoughts
outside of branding, such as ‘value-in-behavior’ proposed by Gordon and colleagues (2018),
which demonstrates that well-being behaviors themselves (without a product of service) can
create value for consumers. Mulcahy and colleagues (2015) point out that there can be
variants in the behaviors consumers can perform in a “behavior category”, which bear
similarities to that of commercial product brands. For example, in their study they suggest
that, like the commercial product of beer which can have brands with varying attributes (e.g.
Heineken, Corona, and Peroni), so too can drinking behaviors (excessive drinking, moderate
drinking, and abstinence drinking). They further demonstrate that the social brand of
moderate drinking has similar brand equity dimension structures to that of commercial
products. However, whilst Mulcahy and colleagues (2015) have successfully applied brand
equity to social brands in alcohol consumption behavior and Australian adolescents, there is
still a need to replicate and extend these findings to different social behaviors and market
segments. It is important to extend the external validity (generalizability) of their findings and
ensure they are applicable to different behavior contexts, such as healthy beverage
consumption and Irian consumers (Kerr et al., 2016). This study therefore examines the
existence and structure of brand equity, specifically the dimensions of brand awareness,
brand image, perceived quality, and brand loyalty, and how they contribute to the overall

9

brand equity (as a second higher-order factor, consistent with Blahut et al., 2004) of a social
behavior brand, and how this can be encouraged by the social support and value delivered via
transformative gamification services.

<Insert Table 2 about here>

3. Conceptual model and hypotheses development
The literature review established the conceptual basis of the study and highlighted gaps in the
literature. Based upon the gaps in the literature, this research presents a conceptual model
(Figure 1) which hierarchically measures the constructs of social support, value, and brand
equity. Furthermore, the model suggests there is a mediated relationship between social
support and brand equity via value. Justification for the proposed model and its relationships
are discussed below.
Based on prior research, it is hypothesized that social support created by
transformative gamified services will create value for users. This follows the work of Loane
and colleagues’ (2015) netnographic study findings, which suggests that the social support
generated from online health communities can create value for members. Similarly, Van
Oerle and colleagues (2016) found online health communities that provide support and
information to members can create affective (hedonic) and cognitive (utilitarian) value.
Establishing the relationship between social support and value is important, as while prior
studies have hinted at the link between these two constructs this has been mainly qualitative.
Therefore, while there are suggestions that social support and value are linked, research is
required to confirm these findings. Thus, based upon the evidence of prior studies, the
following relationship is suggested for testing:
10

Hypothesis 1: Social support has a direct and positive association with value.
A review of the literature suggests alternative approaches regarding the
interrelationships between social support, value, and brand equity. Rosenbaum and Massiah’s
(2007) study demonstrates that social support can have a direct effect on loyalty, a
component of brand equity, whereas He and Li’s (2010) study of high-tech services brand
equity can be mediated by value. Research also suggests that aspects of brand equity can be
antecedents rather than outcomes of customer value (Brodie et al., 2009). As this study
theorizes the impact of social support on creating value and support on social brand equity, it
is appropriate and expected that social supports’ impact will be mediated by value, and
consequently have an indirect effect on brand equity. Thus, the following is proposed for
testing:
Hypothesis 2: Social support has a significant indirect effect on brand equity via value.
Hypothesis 3: Value has a direct and positive association with brand equity.

<Insert Figure 1 about here>

4. Method
4.1 Study Setting
This study was conducted in Iran, a developing country in the Middle East with a population
of over 80 million (Statista, 2018b). Conducting the study in Iran provided an interesting
market segment to examine in relation to their technology adoption and usage, as well as
excessive consumption of alcohol. First, in relation to the adoption of technology, industry
11

reports show that Iranian mobile users have reached 53 in 2018, an increase from 47 million
in 2017 (Jafari, 2018). Thus, an opportunity exists for global and domestic technological
service providers in Iran and the findings of this study besides its theoretical insights is how
gamified technological services can be designed and marketed for this rapidly expanding
market.
For the desired health and well-being behavior, reduced alcohol consumption, Iran
also provides an interesting study setting. Despite alcohol being illegal in Iran, many
alcoholic beverages are smuggled and distributed via the black-market or is illegally
homemade (Lankarani and Afshari, 2014). Further, the social stigmatism and legal
restrictions on alcohol consumption in Iran prevents consumers from admitting habits and
problematic behaviours, which makes it difficult for hospital and medical services to identify
and assist these consumers (Alavi, et al. 2016). Therefore, whilst excessive alcohol
consumption is acknowledged as a health issue for Iran, its scale is somewhat difficult to
determine and so too is the forecasting and planning of the delivery of services to overcome
this issue. Transformative gamification services delivered via apps is one potential novel way
to evade such difficulties and circumstances, as the use of mobile technology to gain access
to health and medical services is known to provide greater anonymity and increase
consumers’ confidence in accessing potentially vital services in comparison to those which
are face-to-face (Schuster, et al., 2013).

4.2 Data Collection and Sample
A survey was chosen as the data collection instrument for the study. Participants were
recruited via social media posts, social media sites, and flyers with a download link to a
purpose-built gamification app for the study (details regarding the app will be outlined
shortly). Participants were incentivized to partake in the study with the chance to go into a
12

prize draw of a one-in-five chance to win a gold coin worth US$100. Once participants had
installed the app they were directed to a registry page with questions relating to their height,
weight, age, and current habits regarding beverage consumption. This demographic
information was important not only for the study, but it enabled the gamification app to tailor
its information to the user. Participants were directed to use the gamified app for a period of 2
weeks, after which time they were invited to fill out a questionnaire with items relating to
social support, value, and brand equity. The final sample consisted of 351 respondents. The
sample profiles are shown in Table 3. The sample shows a good variability across gender and
a good variation across those in normal weight (45.86%) and overweight or obese categories
(50.99%) according to their self-reported body mass index (BMI), calculated using height and
weight. The sample shows a slight tendency for respondents to be aged 20–35, which is to be
expected as this group is known to adopt technology faster and perceive more value in the
services it provides (Kumar and Lim, 2008).

<Insert Table 3 about here>

4.1 The gamified app
The participants used a gamified app which was developed by the lead author (see Figure 2).
Gamification was incorporated into the app through game design elements, such as characters,
competition, leaderboards, and points, all of which have been identified as key to services being
“gamified” (Hamari et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2016). The gamified app also included five
mini-games. Users were rewarded points within the gamified app for performing desired
behaviors in the real world (e.g. drinking a healthy beverage). This therefore facilitated the use
of game design elements for purposes beyond entertainment and outside of the gaming system,
13

which is reflective of conceptualizations of gamification (Deterding et al., 2011). The gamified
app also provided messages of encouragement and informative facts regarding the beverages
being consumed by users and the impact they had (positive or negative) on their health,
reflecting emotional and informational support.

<Insert Figure 2 about here>

4.2 Instrument development
All measurements were based upon scales from previous studies. Items for emotional support
were drawn from Uchida and colleagues (2008). Informational support consisted of items
drawn from Oh and Lee (2012). Items for value were drawn from Mathwick and colleagues
(2001), whereas brand equity items were drawn from Boo and colleagues (2009). All items
were measured with 5-point Likert items. To ensure no biases resulted from the use of 5-point
Likert scales, common method bias testing was conducted. A Harman’s one-factor test and
common latent factor test were carried out, as suggested by Podsakoff and colleagues (2003).
The results revealed that common method bias did not contaminate the study’s results.

5. Results
5.1 Instrument validation
Prior to testing the research hypotheses, the constructs were assessed for convergent and
discriminant validity via confirmatory factor analysis. For the hierarchical analysis, social
support and brand equity were measured as second-order hierarchical constructs, whereas
14

value was measured as a third-order hierarchical construct, which is consistent with prior
studies (Wetzels et al., 2009). Following the procedures suggested by Bagozzi and Yi (1988)
and Fornell and Larker (1981), convergent validity was assessed via the t-values associated
with the parameter estimates. Table 4 shows that the loadings of the items were positively
and statistically significant for all constructs examined in the study. The reliability of the
items was also confirmed, with the composite reliability index being higher than the
recommended threshold of .60 (Fornell and Larker, 1981).
The constructs’ hierarchical structures were also assessed. The two dimensions of
support, emotional support (.833), and informational support (.945), loaded with significant tvalues onto the hierarchical factor of social support, validating it as a second-order construct.
Next, the hierarchical structure of value was assessed. Service excellence (.979) and
Customer Return on Investment (CROI) (.974) had high factor loadings and significant tvalues with the second-order construct of utilitarian value, confirming it as a second-order
construct. Aesthetics (.860) and playfulness (.934) met factor-loading thresholds and had
significant t-values, validating hedonic value as a second-order construct. Utilitarian value
(.996) and hedonic value (.966) had high factor loadings and significant t-values, validating
value as a third-order construct. Finally, brand equity’s hierarchical structure was assessed,
with brand awareness (.962), brand image (.989), perceived quality (.957), and brand loyalty
(.990) having high factor loadings and significant t-values, confirming it as a second-order
hierarchical construct. Discriminant validity was also established with AVE scores being
above their related shared variances with constructs (see Table 5). After establishing the
hierarchical structure of the constructs, the measurement model was assessed with the results
(CMIN/DF=1.39 CFI=.97, TLI=.97, RMSEA=.03) suggesting the model had an acceptable
fit to the data. The CMIN/DF ratio was smaller than the recommended 3 by Fornell and
Larker (1981), indicating a good model fit.
15

<Insert Tables 4 and 5 about here>

5.2 Testing of hypotheses
To test the hypothesized relationships structural equation modelling in AMOS24.0 was
performed. The structural model had a good fit to the data (CMIN/DF=1.39, CFI=.97,
TLI=.97, RMSEA=.03) and the hypotheses testing results are detailed in Table 6 and Figure
3. Testing revealed social support had a positive association with value (β=.38, p<.000), as
hypothesized in H1. This indicates social support creates a valuable transformative
gamification service experience for users. H2 predicted social support would have a
significant indirect effect on brand equity via value. The results revealed the direct effect of
social support on brand equity was non-significant (β=-.03, ns), whereas results revealed (as
predicted in H2) that social support had a significant indirect effect on brand equity via the
mediator of value (β=.34, p<.000). The results also revealed value had a strong significant
and direct positive association with brand equity (β=.94, p<.000), supporting H3. This
suggests value created via transformative gamification services positively builds brand equity
relating to the social behavior being encouraged. The model also produced a high R² of .87
for brand equity, suggesting the model was a good predictor.

<Insert Table 6 and Figure 3 about here>

5.3 Post-hoc analyses and rival models

16

This study took the a priori belief that hierarchically modeling the relationships between
social support, value, and brand equity would be superior to lower-order modeling. It is also
agreed in the literature that researchers should compare the fit of rival (competing) models
(Iacobucci, 2010). Accordingly, alternative lower-order models were tested to indeed confirm
that hierarchically modeling the constructs of support, value, and brand equity is better served
to the purpose of understanding transformative gamification services and future research.
The first rival model tested examined all constructs as single-order factors, with relationships
between the constructs following that of the proposed model, whereas the second model
tested support as a single-order construct, value as a second-order construct, with playfulness
and aesthetics representing hedonic value, CROI and service excellence representing
utilitarian value, and brand equity measured via single-order factors. The resulting test
statistics for the first rival model (CMIN/DF=14.07, CFI=.92, TLI=.75, RMSEA=0.194) and
second rival model (CMIN/DF=2.45, CFI=.91, TLI=.90, RMSEA 0.06) were either not
acceptable based upon recommended fit indices for structural equation modeling or inferior
to the originally proposed and tested model (see Table 7). Thus, it is suggested that the data
indicate the originally proposed and tested model is superior and more appropriate for
theoretically and empirically understanding transformative gamification services.
<Insert Table 7 about here>

6. Discussion
This research investigates the influence of social support on value and social brand equity in
a transformative gamification setting through the empirical testing of a hierarchical model.
The hierarchical model was shown to outperform rival models measuring constructs at a

17

lower order, and the effect of social support being fully mediated by value. These findings
provide important theoretical and managerial contributions which will now be discussed.
6.1 Theoretical implications
This newly proposed theoretical model and empirical findings further the agenda of
gamification delivered via mobile platforms (Hofacker et al., 2016), and the service research
priorities of Ostrom and colleagues (2015). Collectively, the results also both support and
build on extant literature to provide new insight into the emerging area of transformative
gamification in three ways.
6.1.1 Hierarchical Modelling for Gamification Service Research
The first theoretical contribution of this study relates to its hierarchical modelling
approach. The results of this research indicate that the conceptual model fits well to the data
and outperforms other competing models measured at lower orders. To the authors’
knowledge, this study is one of the first to theoretically propose and empirically demonstrate
a hierarchical model for transformative gamification. Previous modeling of gamification,
including those of a transformative and commercial focus, have predominately modelled
constructs such as value as single-order constructs (Koivisto and Hamari, 2014; Hamari and
Kovisito, 2015). This research demonstrates an alternative theoretical view of
conceptualizing and empirically testing related constructs in gamification hierarchically to
provide a more holistic perspective of users’ experiences (Piyathasanan et al., 2015, Wetzels
et al., 2009). Consistent with the emerging evidence in digital technologies and experiences,
the findings of this study suggest value has a hierarchical structure in a transformative
gamification setting (Wetzels et al., 2009; Mencarelli and Lombart, 2017). Furthermore, our
study extends this perspective by confirming that social support and brand equity can also

18

have hierarchical structures, which to date has not been thoroughly explored or validated in
the literature.
Taking a hierarchical approach to modelling consumers experiences with
transformative gamification is conceptually interesting and valuable for a number of reasons.
First, it represents a step toward better understanding the associations between various subdimensions (for example the interrelationships and structure of value) (Faasnacht & Koese,
2006). Second, the findings of this study suggest hierarchical construct models provide utility
to gamification and service scholars in that it allows for greater theoretical parsimony and a
reduction in model complexity (i.e. the number of hypothesized relationships tested)
(Wetzels, Odekerken-Schröder, Van Oppen, 2009). This is important for service researchers
examining gamification in particular as many of the constructs and frameworks are multidimensional and often have a considerable amount of relationships between single order
factor constructs. As a result, exciting opportunities exist for service and gamification
scholars to test prior (and future) studies frameworks which theorize single order factors are
related but yet to be empirically supported from a hierarchical modelling approach.
Furthermore, this offers service and gamification some flexibility in their theorization and
analysis by allowing diagnostic examinations of the effect of single order factors but also the
cumulative effect of concepts.
6.1.2 Social Support, Value and Social Brand Equity Interrelationships
The second contribution of this study relates to a greater understanding of the
interrelationships between social support, value and social brand equity. In this study, the
findings show value plays a mediating role between social support and social behavior brand
equity. Prior research has suggested that social support (Parkinson et al., 2017; Rosenbaum
and Massiah, 2007) and value (Hamari and Kovisito, 2015; Zainuddin et al., 2013) can

19

influence well-being outcomes. Yet, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, this study is one
of the first to show the strong positive influence social support has on creating value in
transformative gamification. Consistent with prior research, this study found that value plays
a mediating role (e.g. He and Li, 2010), and that social support has a non-significant direct
effect on brand equity, but a significant indirect effect via value. This has potentially
important implications beyond transformative gamification, as social support and value are
two central concepts in the broader transformative service research agenda (Anderson et al.,
2013). In addition, the gamification literature has established that value can influence desired
outcomes (e.g. Hamari and Kovisito, 2015), but the antecedents which influence the creation
of value have not yet been thoroughly researched. This research therefore sheds light on
social support as one form of antecedent that can result in value creation in transformative
gamification services.
6.1.3 Behaviors as Social Brands
The third contribution of this study relates to measuring brands in transformative
service and social marketing settings. Theorists in social marketing have posited that
behaviors function as products and brands (Gordon, 2012). Yet, there is limited empirical
evidence that supports this view, with most studies examining branding of services and
campaigns which encourage a desired behavior (Evans et al., 2002; Asbury et al., 2008;
Gordon et al., 2016; Evans et al., 2016). Findings from this research provide important
empirical evidence that social behaviors can indeed be viewed as products measured via
brands. In doing so, it theoretically extends the generalizability of prior studies – those prior
studies which have thus far only provided preliminary evidence (Mulcahy et al., 2015;
Naidoo and Abratt, 2018). Therefore, this research strengthens the theoretical perspective that
there are two approaches to branding for social behaviors: branding of the service or
campaign, and branding of the social behavior.
20

6.2 Practical implications
There are several important practical implications derived from this study. At a higher level,
the results of this study add to the evidence-base of transformative gamification assisting the
well-being of consumers. As well-being and healthcare services are often funded publicly via
government bodies or non-government organizations (NGOs), the results of this study
provide further compelling evidence to governments, NGOs, and other well-being service
providers to support the funding and creation of transformative gamification apps that target
health and well-being behaviors. This could also be important for countries where the
discussion of particular well-being behaviors with health professionals is a taboo topic or
illegal such as the consumption of alcohol in countries such as Iran. The findings of this study
therefore suggest that transformative gamification is one alternative that provides a
potentially more anonymous approach for consumers to seek health and well-being services.
Our findings also reveal the importance of designing social support mechanisms to
create valuable transformative gamification service experiences. Thus, transformative
gamification designers should pay special attention to incorporating elements which provide
social support to users. Specifically, from our conceptualization of social support, emotional
support and informational support are encouraged to be especially designed within
gamification transformative services. Emotional support should focus on boosting users’ selfesteem and ego. For example, apps in the current marketplace such as 7 Cups: Anxiety &
Stress Chat1 provides users with anonymous emotional support and counseling from trained
professionals. Practitioners should consider ways in which design features such as chatrooms
or communities incorporated into transformative gamification services to foster the seeking

1

https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/7-cups-anxiety-stress-chat/id921814681?mt=8

21

and provision of (anonymous) emotional support. For informational support, the findings
suggest that design features such as push notifications or tracking features can designed
within transformative gamified apps to create value for users. Practitioners could therefore
undertake similar design approaches to apps such as Strava2, which allows users to track their
running or riding and analyse their performance overtime.
The model and findings from this study also demonstrate service and gamification
practitioners are able to measure social support, value and social brand equity at multiple
levels. Just as the hierarchical model approach provides flexibility for scholars, this approach
also provides practitioners the ability to evaluate these constructs at a primary dimensional
level (single order factor) or cumulative level (higher order). Practitioners can therefore make
informed strategic decisions when evaluating and assessing gamification services based upon
their evaluation aims as well as their information and reporting requirements (Dagger, et al.
2007). Finally, our findings show transformative service practitioners can measure well-being
behaviors using branding models and frameworks such as brand equity (Mulcahy et al.,
2015). Practitioners could thus pay attention to the variation of the behavior they are
encouraging customers to perform and pinpoint the defining characteristics or value
propositions the behavior has in comparison to other competing behavior brands. Further, this
demonstrates a new perspective and method by which transformative service practitioners
can measure well-being. It is suggested that practitioners measure social brand equity for both
their targeted well-being behavior and other competing behaviors to diagnostically evaluate
the performance of their services and campaigns in encouraging well-being behavior.
6.3 Limitations and further research directions

2

https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/strava-running-and-cycling-gps/id426826309?mt=8

22

Some limitations of this research will now be acknowledged. This study utilized a crosssectional design of consumers’ experiences after using a transformative gamification service
for a period of two weeks. It would be interesting for future research to track consumers’
experiences with transformative gamification services over time and identify how value and
brand equity in a social behavior evolve (or diminish). A worthy direction for future research
would be to consider other aspects aside from social support which assist in creating valuable
transformative gamification service experiences. This could include the influence of game
design elements, such as points, challenges, and characters, on the creation and experience of
value. Caution should be taken when attempting to draw generalizability from the study’s
findings to other market settings and behaviors. Whilst this study examined transformative
gamification services in a market segment (Iran) and behavior not thoroughly researched,
future research may benefit from examining cross-cultural differences or variances which
may occur based upon different behaviors being encouraged. Future studies could also seek
to investigate whether the findings of the current study are consistent in other developing
markets beyond Iran such as countries in the Middle East (e.g. Saudi Arabia and Qatar) and
Latina America (for example Chile and Argentina). Another interesting avenue for future
research would to be examine factors which moderate (e.g. strengthen or weaken) the
relationships examined within this study. For example, whether consumers previous
experience or familiarity with technology (in the case of this research apps or smartphones)
or duration of use based upon data analytics changes the nature of the relationships between
social support, value and social brand equity. Finally, whilst outside the scope of this study,
including some emerging concepts in transformative services and gamification could provide
greater insight. For example, consumer engagement is emerging as an important concept for
understanding value co-creation, gamification and services (Harwood and Garry, 2015;

23

Hollebeek and Andreaseen, 2018), and its incorporation in future studies could provide an
interesting extension on the current study.

References
Akter, S., D'Ambra, J. and Ray, P. (2011), “Trustworthiness in mHealth information services:
an assessment of a hierarchical model with mediating and moderating effects using
partial least squares (PLS)”, Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, Vol. 62 No. 1, pp. 100-116.
Alavi, S. S., Mehrdad, R., & Makarem, J. (2016). “Prevalence of substance abuse/alcohol
consumption and their predictors among patients admitted in operating rooms of a
General Educational Hospital, Tehran, Iran”. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical
Research and Health Care, Vol. 8, pp.63-71
Anderson, L., Ostrom, A. L., Corus, C., Fisk, R. P., Gallan, A. S., Giraldo, M. ... and
Shirahada, K. (2013), “Transformative service research: an agenda for the
future”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 66 No. 8, pp. 1203-1210.
Asbury, L. D., Wong, F. L., Price, S. M., and Nolin, M. J. (2008), “The verb™
campaign”, American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 34 No. 6, pp. S183-S187
Babin, B. J., Darden, W. R., and Griffin, M. (1994), “Work and/or fun: measuring hedonic
and utilitarian shopping value”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 20 No. 4, pp. 644656.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). “On the evaluation of structural equation models”. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 16 No.1, pp.74-94.

24

Blahut, S. A., Evans, W. D., Price, S. and Ulasevich, A. (2004), “A confirmatory test of a
higher order factor structure: brand equity and the TruthSM campaign”, Social
Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 3-15.
Blocker, C. P. and Barrios, A. (2015), “The transformative value of a service
experience”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 265-283.
Blut, M. (2016), “E-service quality: development of a hierarchical model”, Journal of
Retailing, Vol. 92 No. 4, pp. 500-517.
Boo, S., Busser, J., & Baloglu, S. (2009). “A model of customer-based brand equity and its
application to multiple destinations”. Tourism Management, Vol. 30 No.2, pp. 219231.Brodie et al. (2009)
Brodie, R. J., Whittome, J. R., & Brush, G. J. (2009). “Investigating the service brand: A
customer value perspective”. Journal of Business Research, Vol. 62 No.3, pp.345-355.
Coulson, N. S. (2005). “Receiving social support online: an analysis of a computer-mediated
support group for individuals living with irritable bowel syndrome”. CyberPsychology
& Behavior, Vol. 8 No.6, pp. 580-584.
Coulson, N. S., & Knibb, R. C. (2007). “Coping with food allergy: exploring the role of the
online support group”. CyberPsychology & Behavior, Vol. 10 No.1, pp. 145-148.
Cutrona, C. E., & Russell, D. W. (1990). “Type of social support and specific stress: Toward
a theory of optimal matching”. In B. R. Sarason, I. G. Sarason, & G. R. Pierce
(Eds.), Wiley series on personality processes. Social support: An interactional view(pp.
319-366). Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Deterding, S., Dixon, D., Khaled, R., & Nacke, L. (2011, September). “From game design
elements to gamefulness: defining gamification”. In Proceedings of the 15th
international academic MindTrek conference: Envisioning future media
environments (pp. 9-15). ACM.

25

Dietrich, T., Mulcahy, R., & Knox, K. (2018). “Gaming attribute preferences in social
marketing programmes: Meaning matters more than rewards”. Journal of Social
Marketing (in press)
Evans, W. D., Rath, J., Pitzer, L., Hair, E. C., Snider, J., Cantrell, J., and Vallone, D. (2016),
“Design and feasibility testing of the truth FinishIt tobacco countermarketing brand
equity scale”, Journal of Health Communication, Vol. 21 No. 7, pp. 800-808.
Evans, W. D., Renaud, J., Blitstein, J., Hersey, J., Ray, S., Schieber, B., & Willett, J. (2007).
“Prevention effects of an anti-tobacco brand on adolescent smoking initiation”. Social
Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 13 No.2, 2-20.
Evans, W. D., Wasserman, J., Bertolotti, E. and Martino, S. (2002), “Branding behavior: the
strategy behind the truthSM campaign”, Social Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp.
17-29.
Fassnacht, M. and Koese, I. (2006), “Quality of electronic services: conceptualizing and
testing a hierarchical model’, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 19-37.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). “Evaluating structural equation models with
unobservable variables and measurement error”. Journal of Marketing Research, Vol.
18 No.1, pp. 39-50.
Gordon, R. (2012), “Re-thinking and re-tooling the social marketing mix”, Australasian
Marketing Journal (AMJ), Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 122-126.
Gordon, R., Zainuddin, N., & Magee, C. (2016). “Unlocking the potential of branding in
social marketing services: utilising brand personality and brand personality appeal”.
Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 30 No.1, pp. 48-62.
Hamari, J. and Koivisto, J. (2015), “Why do people use gamification services?”,
International Journal of Information Management, Vol. 35 No. 4, pp. 419-431.

26

Hamari, J., Koivisto, J. and Sarsa, H. (2014, January), “Does gamification work? – a
literature review of empirical studies on gamification”, in System Sciences (HICSS),
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference (pp. 3025-3034). IEEE.
Hammedi, W., Leclercq, T., and Van Riel A, C. R. (2017), “The use of gamification
mechanics to increase employee and user engagement in participative healthcare
services: A study of two cases”. Journal of Service Management, Vol. 28, pp. 640-661.
Harwood, T. and Garry, T. (2015), “An investigation into gamification as a customer
engagement experience environment”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 29 No. 6/7,
pp. 533-546.
He, H. and Li, Y. (2010), “Key service drivers for high-tech service brand equity: the
mediating role of overall service quality and perceived value”, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 27 No. 1-2, pp. 77-99.
Hofacker, C. F., De Ruyter, K., Lurie, N. H., Manchanda, P., and Donaldson, J. (2016),
“Gamification and mobile marketing effectiveness”, Journal of Interactive
Marketing, Vol. 34, pp. 25-36.
Holbrook, M. B. (1994), “The nature of customer value: an axiology of services in the
consumption experience”, Service Quality: New Directions in Theory and
Practice, Vol. 21, pp. 21-71.
Hollebeek, L. D. and Andreassen, T. W. (2018), “The SD logic-informed ‘hamburger’ model
of service innovation and its implications for engagement and value”, Journal of
Services Marketing, Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 1-7.
Huotari, K. and Hamari, J. (2017), “A definition for gamification: anchoring gamification in
the service marketing literature”, Electronic Markets, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 21-31.
Iacobucci, D. (2010), “Structural equations modeling: fit indices, sample size, and advanced
topics”, Journal of Consumer Psychology, Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 90-98.
27

Jafari, H. (2018). “53 Million Mobile Internet Users in Iran Until March 2018”. Retrieved
from: http://techrasa.com/2018/05/29/53-million-mobile-internet-users-in-iran-march2018/
Johnson, D., Horton, E., Mulcahy, R., & Foth, M. (2017). “Gamification and serious games
within the domain of domestic energy consumption: A systematic review”. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol. 73, pp. 249-264.
Johnson, D., Deterding, S., Kuhn, K. A., Staneva, A., Stoyanov, S. and Hides, L. (2016),
“Gamification for health and wellbeing: A systematic review of the literature”, Internet
Interventions, Vol. 6, pp. 89-106.
Keller, K. L. (1998). “Branding perspectives on social marketing”. ACR North American
Advances.
Kerr, G., Schultz, D. E. and Lings, I. (2016), “‘Someone should do something’: replication
and an agenda for collective action”, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 4-12.
Koivisto, J. and Hamari, J. (2014), “Demographic differences in perceived benefits from
gamification”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 35, pp. 179-188.
Kumar, A. and Lim, H. (2008), “Age differences in mobile service perceptions: comparison
of Generation Y and baby boomers”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 22 No. 7, pp.
568-577.
Lankarani, K. B., & Afshari, R. (2014). “Alcohol consumption in Iran”. The Lancet, Vol.
384, pp. 1927-1928.
Lee, J. K., and Hecht, M. L. (2011), “Examining the protective effects of brand equity in the
keepin'it REAL substance use prevention curriculum”, Health Communication, Vol. 26
No. 7, pp. 605-614.

28

Leclercq, T., Poncin I., and Hammedi, W. (2017), “The Engagement Process During Value
Co-Creation: Gamification in New Product-Development Platforms”. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce, Vol. 21, pp. 454-488
Lin, T.C., Hsu, J.S.C., Cheng, H.L. and Chiu, C.M., (2015). “Exploring the relationship
between receiving and offering online social support: a dual social support
model”, Information and Management, Vol. 52 No.3, pp.371-383.
Loane, S.S., Webster, C. M. and D’Alessandro, S. (2015), “Identifying consumer value cocreated through social support within online health communities”, Journal of
Macromarketing, Vol. 35 No. 3, pp. 353-367.
Mathwick, C., Malhotra, N., & Rigdon, E. (2001). Experiential value: conceptualization,
measurement and application in the catalog and Internet shopping environment.
Journal of Retailing, Vol. 77 No.1, pp.39-56.
McDonald, E. (2017). The Global Games Market Will Reach $108.9 Billion in 2017 with
Mobile Taking 42%. Retrieved from: https://newzoo.com/insights/articles/the-globalgames-market-will-reach-108-9-billion-in-2017-with-mobile-taking-42/ Last accessed
06.22.2018
Mencarelli, R. and Lombart, C. (2017), “Influences of the perceived value on actual
repurchasing behavior: empirical exploration in a retailing context”, Journal of
Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 38, pp. 12-21.
Mo, P.K. and Coulson, N.S. (2008), “Exploring the communication of social support within
virtual communities: a content analysis of messages posted to an online HIV/AIDS
support group”, Cyberpsychology & Behavior, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 371-374.

29

Mulcahy, R., Russell-Bennett, R., & Rundle-Thiele, S. (2015). “Electronic games: can they
create value for the moderate drinking brand?”. Journal of Social Marketing, Vol. 5 No.
3, pp.258-278.
Mulcahy, R. F., Russell-Bennett, R., Zainuddin, N., & Kuhn, K. A. (2018). “Designing
gamified transformative and social marketing services: An investigation of serious mgames”. Journal of Service Theory and Practice. Vol. 28 No.1, pp.26-51
Nadioo, C. and Abratt, R. (2018), “Brands that do good: insight into social brand equity”,
Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 25, pp. 3-13.
Oh, H. J., & Lee, B. (2012). “The effect of computer-mediated social support in online
communities on patient empowerment and doctor–patient communication”. Health
Communication, Vol. 27 No.1, pp. 30-41.
Oh, H.J., Lauckner, C., Boehmer, J., Fewins-Bliss, R. and Li, K. (2013), “Facebooking for
health: an examination into the solicitation and effects of health-related social support
on social networking sites”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 20722080.
Okazaki, S. (2008), “Exploring experiential value in online mobile gaming adoption”,
Cyberpsychology & Behavior, Vol. 11 No. 5, pp. 619-622.
Osman, A., Lamis, D. A., Freedenthal, S., Gutierrez, P. M. and McNaughton-Cassill, M.
(2014), “The multidimensional scale of perceived social support: analyses of internal
reliability, measurement invariance, and correlates across gender”, Journal of
Personality Assessment, Vol. 96 No. 1, pp. 103-112.
Ostrom, A. L., Parasuraman, A., Bowen, D. E., Patricio, L., and Voss, C. A. (2015), “Service
research priorities in a rapidly changing context”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 18
No. 2, pp. 127-159.

30

Parkinson, J., Schuster, L., Mulcahy, R. and Taiminen, H. M. (2017), “Online support for
vulnerable consumers: a safe place?”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 31 No. 4/5,
pp. 412-422.
Piyathasanan, B., Mathies, C., Wetzels, M., Patterson, P. G. and de Ruyter, K. (2015), “A
hierarchical model of virtual experience and its influences on the perceived value and
loyalty of customers”, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, Vol. 19 No. 2,
126-158.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y. and Podsakoff, N. P. (2003), “Common
method biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and
recommended remedies”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 88 No. 5, p. 879.
Poncin, I., Garnier, M., Mimoun, M. S. B., & Leclercq, T. (2017). “Smart technologies and
shopping experience: Are gamification interfaces effective? The case of the
Smartstore”. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol.124, pp. 320-331.
Price, S. M., Potter, L. D., Das, B., Wang, Y. C. L. and Huhman, M. (2009), “Exploring the
influence of the VERB™ brand using a brand equity framework”, Social Marketing
Quarterly, Vol. 15 No. 4, pp. 66-82.
Reilly, J. J. and Kelly, J. (2011), “Long-term impact of overweight and obesity in childhood
and adolescence on morbidity and premature mortality in adulthood: systematic
review”, International Journal of Obesity, Vol. 35 No. 7, p. 891.
Rodrigues, L. F., Oliveira, A. and Costa, C. J. (2016), “Does ease-of-use contributes to the
perception of enjoyment? A case of gamification in e-banking”, Computers in Human
Behavior, Vol. 61, pp. 114-126.
Rosenbaum, M. S. and Massiah, C. A. (2007), “When customers receive support from other
customers: exploring the influence of inter customer social support on customer
voluntary performance”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 9 No. 3, pp. 257-270.

31

Schuster, L., Drennan, J. and Lings, I. (2015), “Understanding consumers’ decisions to adopt
technology-enabled transformative services”, The Service Industries Journal, Vol. 35
No. 15-16, pp. 846-864.
Schuster, L., Drennan, J. and N. Lings, I. (2013), “Consumer acceptance of m-wellbeing
services: a social marketing perspective”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 47 No.
9, pp. 1439-1457.
Seiders, K. and Petty, R. D. (2004), “Obesity and the role of food marketing: a policy
analysis of issues and remedies”, Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, Vol. 23 No.
2, pp. 153-169.
Sheth, J. N., Newman, B. I. and Gross, B. L. (1991), “Why we buy what we buy: a theory of
consumption values”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 159-170.
Statista. (2018a), “Soft drink sales worldwide in 2012 and 2017, by region (in million liters)”,
available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/232794/global-soft-drink-sales-byregion/ (accessed 9 February 2018)
Statista (2018b). “Iran: Total population from 2012 to 2022 (in million inhabitants)”.
Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/294102/total-population-of-iran/
Sweeney, J. C., Danaher, T. S. and McColl-Kennedy, J. R. (2015), “Customer effort in value
cocreation activities: improving quality of life and behavioral intentions of health care
customers”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 318-335.
Tong, S.T., Heinemann-LaFave, D., Jeon, J., Kolodziej-Smith, R. and Warshay, N. (2013).
“The use of pro-ana blogs for online social support”, Eating Disorders, Vol. 21 No. 5,
pp. 408-422.
Uchida, Y., Kitayama, S., Mesquita, B., Reyes, J. A. S., & Morling, B. (2008). Is perceived
emotional support beneficial? Well-being and health in independent and interdependent
cultures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, Vol 34 No.6, pp.741-754.

32

Van Dolen, W. and Weinberg, C. B. (2017), “Child helplines: how social support and
controllability influence service quality and well-being”, Journal of Services
Marketing, Vol. 31 No. 4/5, pp. 385-396.
Van Oerle, S., Mahr, D., and Lievens, A. (2016), “Coordinating online health communities
for cognitive and affective value creation”, Journal of Service Management, Vol. 27
No. 4, pp. 481-506.
Wang, Y.C., Kraut, R.E. and Levine, J.M. (2015), “Eliciting and receiving online support:
using computer-aided content analysis to examine the dynamics of online social
support”, Journal of Medical Internet Research, Vol 17 No. 4, p. e99.
Wetzels, M., Odekerken-Schröder, G. and Van Oppen, C. (2009), “Using PLS path modeling
for assessing hierarchical construct models: guidelines and empirical illustration”, MIS
Quarterly, pp. 177-195.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2017), “Obesity and overweight”, Fact Sheet, available
at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/
Yao, T., Zheng, Q. and Fan, X. (2015), “The impact of online social support on patients’
quality of life and the moderating role of social exclusion”, Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 369-383.
Zainuddin, N., Russell-Bennett, R., & Previte, J. (2013). The value of health and wellbeing:
an empirical model of value creation in social marketing. European Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 47 No.9, pp.1504-1524.
Zainuddin, N., Tam, L., & McCosker, A. (2016). Serving yourself: value self-creation in
health care service. Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 30 No.6, pp.586-600.

33

Table 1.
Chronological overview of social support studies using Cutrona and Russell’s (1990) typology
Author(s)/Year
Coulson (2005)
Rosenbaum and Massiah (2007)
Coulson and Knibb (2007)
Lin et al. (2015)
Loane et al. (2014)
Mo and Coulson (2008)
Oh et al. (2013)
Tong et al. (2013)
Yao et al. (2015)
Wang et al. (2015)
Totals

Information
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Tangible Assistance
Y

Esteem
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

6

7

Y
Y
Y
9

34

Emotional
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
10

Network
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

7

Table 2.
Chronological overview of branding studies in social marketing
Author/s (Year)

Target Behavior

Evans et al. (2002)
Evans, et al. (2007)
Asbury et al. (2008)
Price et al. (2009)
Lee and Hecht (2011)
Mulcahy et al. (2015)
Gordon et al. (2016)
Evans et al. (2016)
This Research

Smoking
Smoking
Physical Activity
Physical Activity
Substance Use
Alcohol Consumption
Cancer Screening
Smoking
Beverage consumption

Branding of
Behavior

Brand for Service/Campaign Assisting
Behavior
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

35

Table 3.
Respondents characteristics (%)
Demographic Variable
Gender
Male
Female
Age
<20
20–35
36–50
>50
BMI
<18.5 (Underweight)
18.5–24.9 (Normal weight)
25–29.9 (Overweight)
>30 (Obese)

%
49
51
13.68
50.72
34.47
1.13
3.13
45.86
38.74
12.25

36

Table 4.
Construct reliability and validity
Construct
Emotional Support
The app cheers you up when you are depressed.
The app cares about your health and shape, when you enter your weight and health status in the app.
When something good happens to your health and weight the app praises you and it seems to be happy.
If you fall into a health situation that you cannot do anything about, the app sees to it that something is done.
If the app finds out that you have failed to reach your health and weight target, it tries to console you.
If you are feeling down about your health and weight, the app cares for you right away.
If you make a mistake, the app picks up the slack for you.
If you accomplish something, the app congratulates you with sincerity.
If you are busy and you cannot finish your health and weight target, it helps you out.
The app recognizes your ability and it expects you to do the best of your abilities on a daily basis.
If the app finds out that you are having a hard time with your health and weight problems, it gives you advice on how to solve the
problem.
The app accepts you for who you are, regardless of your health and weight problems.
Informational Support
The app offers you necessary information when you face weight-related problems.
The app gives you additional information about weight-related symptoms and treatments that you are not familiar with.
The app gives you advice so that you understand the reality of and adapt yourself to a healthy plan.
The app will show you how to cope with a difﬁcult weight-related situation that you have faced.
Playfulness
Using X gets me away from it all.
Using X makes me feel like I am in another world.
Service Excellence
When I think of X I think of excellence.
I think of X as an expert in the content it offers.
CROI
Using X is an efficient way to use my leisure time.

37

Loading (t-stat)

AVE
0.58

CR
0.94

0.60

0.85

0.60

0.74

0.65

0.79

0.71

0.83

0.78 (15.22***)
0.78 (15.31***)
0.75 (14.52***)
0.74 (14.31***)
0.75 (14.52***)
0.73 (14.17***)
0.77 (15.02***)
0.77 (14.97***)
0.77 (15.12***)
0.75 (14.63***)
0.76 (14.72***)
0.74 (14.97***)
0.77 (14.43***)
0.76 (14.22***)
0.75 (14.10***)
0.77 (14.22***)
0.88 (13.26***)
0.65 (13.26***)
0.73 (16.43***)
0.87 (16.43***)
0.86 (19.23***)

Construct
Using X fits in with my schedule.
Aesthetics
I like the way X looks.
X is visually appealing.
The way X displays content is attractive.
I think X is very entertaining.
Brand Awareness
[Behavior] is well known.
[Behavior] has a good name and reputation.
Brand Image
The image of [behavior] is consistent with my image of myself.
[Behavior] reflects who I am.
My friends would think highly of me if [I performed behavior].
[Behavior] reflects my personality.
Perceived quality
[Behavior] provides quality experiences.
[Behavior] provides experiences of consistent quality.
Brand Loyalty
I would advise my friends [to perform behavior].
[Behavior] would be my preferred choice of behavior.
Overall, I am committed to [behavior].

Loading (t-stat)
0.81 (19.23***)

AVE

CR

0.59

0.85

0.71

0.82

0.69

0.90

0.77

0.87

0.73

0.88

0.68 (14.06***)
0.76 (16.43***)
0.75 (16.04***)
0.85 (16.04***)
0.83 (19.42***)
0.84 (19.42***)
0.84 (21.73***)
0.87 (21.73***)
0.76 (17.38***)
0.84 (20.32***)
0.87 (23.13***)
0.88 (23.13***)
0.83 (21.01***)
0.87 (21.02***)
0.84 (20.13***)

Note: Items in the table are translated into English. Items used in the study were in Persian, one of the main languages spoken in Iran where participants were
drawn from. X=indicates placing for transformative gamification service name.

38

Table 5.
Mean, standard deviation (SD) and correlations of constructs (higher order)
Construct
Mean
SD
1
2
3
1. Support
3.49
0.67
(.82)
.09
.08
2. Value
3.72
0.84
0.31**
(.96)
.67
3. Brand Equity
3.76
0.99
0.29**
0.82**
(.94)
AVE scores in brackets. **p<.01, shared variances shown in top half of matrix

39

Table 6.
Structural model results
Paths
Direct effects
SupportValue
β=0.38***
SupportBrand Equity
β=-0.03ns
ValueBrand Equity
β=0.94***
R²
Value
0.14
Brand Equity
0.87
*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.000 ns non-significant

40

Indirect effects (mediated)
Same as direct
β=0.36***
Same as direct

Table 7.
Comparison of fit indices for rival models and tested model
Fit Indices Recommended Thresholds Rival Model 1 Rival Model 2 Tested Model
CMIN/DF
<3.00
14.07
2.45
1.39
CFI
>.95
0.92
0.90
0.97
TLI
>.95
0.75
0.90
0.97
RMSEA
<.06
0.19
0.06
0.03
Note: Thresholds based upon Fornell and Larker (1981) and Iacobucci (2010).

41

Figure 1.
Conceptual model
Service
Excellence

CROI

Playfulness

Aesthetics

Hedonic

Utilitarian

Brand
Awareness
Value
H1

H3

Social Support

Brand Equity
H2

Informational
Support

Brand Image

Emotional
Support

Perceived
Quality

Brand Loyalty

Notes: The hierarchical model for support, value, and brand equity is of the reflective–reflective type, which is suggested as superior to
formative approaches (see Iacobucci, 2010).

42

Figure 2.
Screenshots of the gamified app used in the study

43

Figure 3.
Relationship testing results
Service
Excellence

CROI

Playfulness

Aesthetics

0.97***

0.97***

Hedonic

Utilitarian

Brand
Awareness

0.38***

Value

0.94***

Brand Image

-.03ns
Social Support

Brand Equity

0.94***

0.83***

Informational
Support

Emotional
Support

0.95***

Perceived
Quality

0.36***
Brand Loyalty

Note: Dashed line indicates indirect effect, ***p<.000, ns=non-significant

44

45

