Building Theories from Case Study Research
Author(s): Kathleen M. Eisenhardt
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Oct., 1989, Vol. 14, No. 4 (Oct., 1989), pp.
532-550
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/258557
REFERENCES
:Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article
https://www.jstor.org/stable/258557?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Accessibility support:
If you experience accessibility issues with this file, report them here

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
.facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

JSTOR is working to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy of Management Review

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

C Academy of Management Review, 1989, Vol. 14, No. 4, 532-550

Building Theories from Case
Study Research
KATHLEEN M. EISENHARDT

Stanford University
This paper describes the process of inducting theory using case studies-from specifying the research questions to reaching closure.
Some features of the process, such as problem definition and construct validation, are similar to hypothesis-testing research. Others,
such as within-case analysis and replication logic, are unique to the
inductive, case-oriented process. Overall, the process described here
is highly iterative and tightly linked to data. This research approach is
especially appropriate in new topic areas. The resultant theory is
often novel, testable, and empirically valid. Finally, framebreaking
insights, the tests of good theory (e.g., parsimony, logical coherence),

and convincing grounding in the evidence are the key criteria for

evaluating this type of research.
Development of theory is a central activity in

lack of clarity about the process of actually
building theory from cases, especially regarding the central inductive process and the role of
literature. Glaser and Strauss (1967) and more
recently Strauss (1987) have outlined pieces of
the process, but theirs is a prescribed formula,
and new ideas have emerged from methodologists (e.g., Yin, 1984; Miles & Huberman, 1984)
and researchers conducting this type of research (e.g., Gersick, 1988; Harris & Sutton,
1986; Eisenhardt & Bourgeois, 1988). Also, it appears that no one has explicitly examined when
this theory-building approach is likely to be
fruitful and what its strengths and weaknesses

organizational research. Traditionally, authors
have developed theory by combining observations from previous literature, common sense,
and experience. However, the tie to actual data

has often been tenuous (Perrow, 1986; Pfeffer,

1982). Yet, as Glaser and Strauss (1967) argue, it
is the intimate connection with empirical reality
that permits the development of a testable, relevant, and valid theory.
This paper describes building theories from

case studies. Several aspects of this process are

discussed in the literature. For example, Glaser

and Strauss (1967) detailed a comparative
method for developing grounded theory, Yin

may be.

(1981, 1984) described the design of case study

This paper attempts to make two contributions
to the literature. The first is a roadmap for building theories from case study research. This
roadmap synthesizes previous work on qualitative methods (e.g., Miles & Huberman, 1984), the
design of case study research (e.g., Yin, 1981,

research, and Miles and Huberman (1984) codified a series of procedures for analyzing qualitative data. However, confusion surrounds the

distinctions among qualitative data, inductive
logic, and case study research. Also, there is a

532

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1984), and grounded theory building (e.g., Gla-

search than has existed in the past. This frame-

ser & Strauss, 1967) and extends that work in

work is summarized in Table 1.

areas such as a priori specification of constructs,

The second contribution is positioning theory

triangulation of multiple investigators, within-

building from case studies into the larger context

case and cross-case analyses, and the role of

of social science research. For example, the pa-

existing literature. The result is a more nearly

per explores strengths and weaknesses of theory

complete roadmap for executing this type of re-

building from case studies, situations in which it

Table 1

Process of Building Theory from Case Study Research

Step

Activity

Reason

Getting Started Definition of research question Focuses efforts
Possibly a priori constructs Provides better grounding of construct
measures

Neither theory nor hypotheses Retains theoretical flexibility

Selecting Cases Specified population Constrains extraneous variation and
sharpens external validity

Theoretical, not random, sampling Focuses efforts on theoretically useful
cases-i.e., those that replicate or extend
theory by filling conceptual categories

Crafting Instruments Multiple data collection methods Strengthens grounding of theory by
and

Protocols triangulation of evidence
Qualitative and quantitative data combined Synergistic view of evidence
Multiple investigators Fosters divergent perspectives and
strengthens grounding

Entering the Field Overlap data collection and analysis, Speeds analyses and reveals helpful
including field notes adjustments to data collection
Flexible and opportunistic data collection Allows investigators to take advantage of
methods emergent themes and unique case
features

Analyzing Data Within-case analysis Gains familiarity with data and preliminary
theory generation

Cross-case pattern search using divergent Forces investigators to look beyond initial
techniques impressions and see evidence thru
multiple lenses

Shaping Hypotheses Iterative tabulation of evidence for each Sharpens construct definition, validity, and
construct

measurability

Replication, not sampling, logic across Confirms, extends, and sharpens theory
cases

Search evidence for "why" behind Builds internal validity
relationships

Enfolding Literature Comparison with conflicting literature Builds internal validity, raises theoretical
level, and sharpens construct definitions

Comparison with similar literature Sharpens generalizability, improves
construct definition, and raises theoretical
level

Reaching Closure Theoretical saturation when possible Ends process when marginal improvement
becomes small

533

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

is an attractive research approach, and some

Eisenhardt, 1988) developed cross-case analysis

guidelines for evaluating this type of research.

techniques.

Finally, the work of others such as Van Maanen (1988) on ethnography, Jick (1979) on triangulation of data types, and Mintzberg (1979) on
direct research has provided additional pieces
for a framework of building theory from case

Background
Several pieces of the process of building the-

ory from case study research have appeared in

the literature. One is the work on grounded theory building by Glaser and Strauss (1967) and,
more recently, Strauss (1987). These authors

study research.

have detailed their comparative method for de-

Nevertheless, at the same time, there is substantial confusion about how to combine them,

As a result, many pieces of the theorybuilding process are evident in the literature.

veloping grounded theory. The method relies on

continuous comparison of data and theory be-

when to conduct this type of study, and how to

ginning with data collection. It emphasizes both

evaluate it.

the emergence of theoretical categories solely
from evidence and an incremental approach to

The Case Study Approach

case selection and data gathering.
More recently, Yin (1981, 1984) has described

The case study is a research strategy which

the design of case study research. He has de-

focuses on understanding the dynamics present
within single settings. Examples of case study
research include Selznick's (1949) description of
TVA, Allison's (1971) study of the Cuban missile

fined the case study as a research strategy, developed a typology of case study designs, and
described the replication logic which is essential
to multiple case analysis. His approach also

crisis, and Pettigrew's (1973) research on decision making at a British retailer. Case studies
can involve either single or multiple cases, and
numerous levels of analysis (Yin, 1984). For ex-

stresses bringing the concerns of validity and
reliability in experimental research design to the
design of case study research.

Miles and Huberman (1984) have outlined

ample, Harris and Sutton (1986) studied 8 dying
organizations, Bettenhausen and Murnighan
(1986) focused on the emergence of norms in 19
laboratory groups, and Leonard-Barton (1988)
tracked the progress of 10 innovation projects.
Moreover, case studies can employ an embedded design, that is, multiple levels of analysis
within a single study (Yin, 1984). For example,
the Warwick study of competitiveness and strategic change within major U.K. corporations is
conducted at two levels of analysis: industry and
firm (Pettigrew, 1988), and the Mintzberg and
Waters (1982) study of Steinberg's grocery empire examines multiple strategic changes within

specific techniques for analyzing qualitative

data. Their ideas include a variety of devices
such as tabular displays and graphs to manage
and present qualitative data, without destroying
the meaning of the data through intensive coding.

A number of active researchers also have undertaken their own variations and additions to
the earlier methodological work (e.g., Gersick,
1988; Leonard-Barton, 1988; Harris & Sutton,
1986). Many of these authors acknowledge a
debt to previous work, but they have also developed their own "homegrown" techniques for
building theory from cases. For example, Sutton
and Callahan (1987) pioneered a clever use of a
resident devil's advocate, the Warwick group
(Pettigrew, 1988) added triangulation of investigators, and my colleague and I (Bourgeois &

a single firm.

Case studies typically combine data collection
methods such as archives, interviews, questionnaires, and observations. The evidence may be
qualitative (e.g., words), quantitative (e.g.,

534

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

numbers), or both. For example, Sutton and

qualitative evidence from interviews and obser-

Callahan (1987) rely exclusively on qualitative

vations.

data in their study of bankruptcy in Silicon Val-

Finally, case studies can be used to accom-

ley, Mintzberg and McHugh (1985) use qualita-

plish various aims: to provide description (Kid-

tive data supplemented by frequency counts in

der, 1982), test theory (Pinfield, 1986; Anderson,
1983), or generate theory (e.g., Gersick, 1988;

their work on the National Film Board of Canada, and Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) com-

Harris & Sutton, 1986). The interest here is in this
last aim, theory generation from case study ev-

bine quantitative data from questionnaires with
Table 2

Recent Examples of Inductive Case Study Research*

Description Research Data

Study of Cases Problem Sources Investigators Output
Burgelman (1983) 6 internal cor- Management of Archives Single investigator Process model
porate ventures new ventures Interviews linking multiple
in 1 major Some observation organizational
corporation

levels

Mintzberg & 1 National Film Formulation of Archives Research team Strategy-making
McHugh (1985) Board of Can- strategy in an Some interviews themes, "grass
ada, 1939-1975, adhocracy roots" model of
with 6 periods strategy formation

Harris & Sutton 8 diverse organi- Parting cere- Interviews Research team Conceptual
(1986) zations monies during Archives framework
organizational about the
death
functions
of
parting ceremonies for

displaced
members

Eisenhardt & 8 microcomputer Strategic decision Interviews Research team Mid-range theory
Bourgeois (1988) firms making in high Questionnaires Tandem inter- linking power,
velocity environ- Archives views politics, and
ments Some observation firm performance

Gersick (1988) 8 project groups Group develop- Observation Single investigator Punctuated
with deadlines ment in project- Some interviews equilibrium
teams

model

of

group
development

Leonard-Barton 10 technical inno- Internal technol- Interviews Single investigator Process model
(1988) vations ogy transfer Experiment

Observation

Pettigrew (1988) 1 high performing Strategic change Interviews Research teams In progress
& 1 low per- & competi- Archives
forming firm in tiveness Some observation
each of 4
industries

* Examples were chosen from recent organizational writing to provide illustrations of the possible range of theory building

from case studies.

535

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

to the decision process, there were strong, trian-

idence. Table 2 summarizes some recent re-

gulated measures on which to ground the emer-

search using theory building from case studies.

gent theory.
Although early identification of the research

Building Theory from Case

question and possible constructs is helpful, it is
equally important to recognize that both are tentative in this type of research. No construct is

Study Research
Getting Started

guaranteed a place in the resultant theory, no
matter how well it is measured. Also, the re-

An initial definition of the research question,

search question may shift during the research.
At the extreme, some researchers (e.g., Gersick,
1988; Bettenhausen & Murnighan, 1986) have
converted theory-testing research into theorybuilding research by taking advantage of seren-

in at least broad terms, is important in building

theory from case studies. Mintzberg (1979, p.
585) noted: "No matter how small our sample or
what our interest, we have always tried to go
into organizations with a well-defined focus-to

dipitous findings. In these studies, the research

collect specific kinds of data systematically." The
rationale for defining the research question is
the same as it is in hypothesis-testing research.

focus emerged after the data collection had be-

Without a research focus, it is easy to become

gun. As Bettenhausen and Murnighan (1986, p.
352) wrote: ". . . we observed the outcomes of an

overwhelmed by the volume of data. For exam-

experiment on group decision making and co-

ple, Pettigrew and colleagues (1988) defined

alition formation. Our observations of the

their research question in terms of strategic

groups indicated that the unique character of

change and competitiveness within large British

each of the groups seemed to overwhelm our

corporations, and Leonard-Barton (1988) focused on technical innovation of feasible tech-

other manipulations." These authors proceeded

nologies. Such definition of a research question

building study of group norms.

to switch their research focus to a theory-

within a broad topic permitted these investiga-

Finally and most importantly, theory-building

tors to specify the kind of organization to be ap-

research is begun as close as possible to the

proached, and, once there, the kind of data to be
gathered.

ideal of no theory under consideration and no
hypotheses to test. Admittedly, it is impossible to

A priori specification of constructs can also

cision making in top management teams, Bour-

achieve this ideal of a clean theoretical slate.
Nonetheless, attempting to approach this ideal
is important because preordained theoretical
perspectives or propositions may bias and limit
the findings. Thus, investigators should formulate a research problem and possibly specify
some potentially important variables, with some
reference to extant literature. However, they
should avoid thinking about specific relationships between variables and theories as much
as possible, especially at the outset of the pro-

geois and Eisenhardt (1988) identified several

cess.

help to shape the initial design of theorybuilding research. Although this type of specification is not common in theory-building studies

to date, it is valuable because it permits re-

searchers to measure constructs more accurately. If these constructs prove important as the
study progresses, then researchers have a
firmer empirical grounding for the emergent

theory. For example, in a study of strategic de-

potentially important constructs (e.g., conflict,

power) from the literature on decision making.
These constructs were explicitly measured in the
interview protocol and questionnaires. When

Selecting Cases

Selection of cases is an important aspect of
building theory from case studies. As in hypoth-

several of these constructs did emerge as related

536

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Several studies illustrate theoretical sampling. Harris and Sutton (1986), for example,
were interested in the parting ceremonies of
dying organizations. In order to build a model
applicable across organization types, these researchers purposefully selected diverse organizations from a population of dying organizations. They chose eight organizations, filling
each of four categories: private, dependent; private, independent; public, dependent; and public, independent. The sample was not random,
but reflected the selection of specific cases to extend the theory to a broad range of organizations. Multiple cases within each category allowed findings to be replicated within categories. Gersick (1988) followed a similar strategy of
diverse sampling in order to enhance the generalizability of her model of group development. In the Warwick study (Pettigrew, 1988),
the investigators also followed a deliberate,
theoretical sampling plan. Within each of four
markets, they chose polar types: one case of
clearly successful firm performance and one unsuccessful case. This sampling plan was designed to build theories of success and failure.
Finally, the Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988)
study of the politics of strategic decision making
illustrates theoretical sampling during the
course of research. A theory linking the centralization of power to the use of politics in top management teams was built and then extended to
consider the effects of changing team composition by adding two cases, in which the executive
teams changed, to the first six, in which there
was no change. This tactic allowed the initial
framework to be extended to include dynamic
effects of changing team composition.

esis-testing research, the concept of a population is crucial, because the population defines

the set of entities from which the research sample is to be drawn. Also, selection of an appropriate population controls extraneous variation

and helps to define the limits for generalizing the
findings.
The Warwick study of strategic change and
competitiveness illustrates these ideas (Pettigrew, 1988). In this study, the researchers se-

lected cases from a population of large British
corporations in four market sectors. The selection of four specific markets allowed the researchers to control environmental variation,

while the focus on large corporations constrained variation due to size differences among
the firms. Thus, specification of this population
reduced extraneous variation and clarified the
domain of the findings as large corporations operating in specific types of environments.

However, the sampling of cases from the chosen population is unusual when building theory
from case studies. Such research relies on theoretical sampling (i.e., cases are chosen for theoretical, not statistical, reasons, Glaser & Strauss,
1967). The cases may be chosen to replicate previous cases or extend emergent theory, or they
may be chosen to fill theoretical categories and

provide examples of polar types. While the
cases may be chosen randomly, random selection is neither necessary, nor even preferable.

As Pettigrew (1988) noted, given the limited
number of cases which can usually be studied,
it makes sense to choose cases such as extreme
situations and polar types in which the process
of interest is "transparently observable." Thus,
the goal of theoretical sampling is to choose
cases which are likely to replicate or extend the

Crafting Instruments and Protocols

emergent theory. In contrast, traditional, withinexperiment hypothesis-testing studies rely on

Theory-building researchers typically combine multiple data collection methods. While interviews, observations, and archival sources
are particularly common, inductive researchers
are not confined to these choices. Some investigators employ only some of these data collection
methods (e.g., Gersick, 1988, used only obser-

statistical sampling, in which researchers randomly select the sample from the population. In
this type of study, the goal of the sampling process is to obtain accurate statistical evidence on

the distributions of variables within the population.

537

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

vations for the first half of her study), or they may
add others (e.g., Bettenhausen & Murnighan,
1986, used quantitative laboratory data). The rationale is the same as in hypothesis-testing research. That is, the triangulation made possible
by multiple data collection methods provides
stronger substantiation of constructs and hy-

the findings. Convergent perceptions add to the
empirical grounding of the hypotheses, while
conflicting perceptions keep the group from premature closure. Thus, the use of more investigators builds confidence in the findings and increases the likelihood of surprising findings.

potheses.

gators is to make the visits to case study sites in
teams (e.g., Pettigrew, 1988). This allows the

One strategy for employing multiple investi-

Of special note is the combining of qualitative
with quantitative evidence. Although the terms
qualitative and case study are often used interchangeably (e.g., Yin, 1981), case study research can involve qualitative data only, quantitative only, or both (Yin, 1984). Moreover, the
combination of data types can be highly synergistic. Quantitative evidence can indicate relationships which may not be salient to the researcher. It also can keep researchers from
being carried away by vivid, but false, impressions in qualitative data, and it can bolster findings when it corroborates those findings from
qualitative evidence. The qualitative data are
useful for understanding the rationale or theory
underlying relationships revealed in the quantitative data or may suggest directly theory
which can then be strengthened by quantitative
support (Jick, 1979). Mintzberg (1979) described
this synergy as follows:

case to be viewed from the different perspectives
of multiple observers. A variation on this tactic is
to give individuals on the team unique roles,
which increases the chances that investigators
will view case evidence in divergent ways. For
example, interviews can be conducted by two
person teams, with one researcher handling the
interview questions, while the other records
notes and observations (e.g., Eisenhardt & Bourgeois, 1988). The interviewer has the perspective
of personal interaction with the informant, while
the notetaker retains a different, more distant
view. Another tactic is to create multiple research teams, with teams being assigned to
cover some case sites, but not others (e.g., Pettigrew, 1988). The rationale behind this tactic is
that investigators who have not met the informants and have not become immersed in case

details may bring a very different and possibly
more objective eye to the evidence. An extreme
form of this tactic is to keep some member or
members of the research team out of the field
altogether by exclusively assigning to them the
role of resident devil's advocate (e.g., Sutton &
Callahan, 1987).

For while systematic data create the foundation
for our theories, it is the anecdotal data that enable us to do the building. Theory building
seems to require rich description, the richness
that comes from anecdote. We uncover all kinds
of relationships in our hard data, but it is only
through the use of this soft data that we are able

Entering the Field

to explain them. (p. 587)

Also, of special note is the use of multiple investigators. Multiple investigators have two key
advantages. First, they enhance the creative
potential of the study. Team members often
have complementary insights which add to the
richness of the data, and their different perspectives increase the likelihood of capitalizing on
any novel insights which may be in the data.

A striking feature of research to build theory
from case studies is the frequent overlap of data
analysis with data collection. For example, Gla-

ser and Strauss (1967) argue for joint collection,
coding, and analysis of data. While many researchers do not achieve this degree of overlap,
most maintain some overlap.

Field notes, a running commentary to oneself
and/or research team, are an important means
of accomplishing this overlap. As described by

Second, the convergence of observations from
multiple investigators enhances confidence in
538

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Van Maanen (1988), field notes are an ongoing

given situation. In other situations adjustments

stream-of-consciousness commentary about

can include the addition of data sources in se-

what is happening in the research, involving

lected cases. For example, Sutton and Callahan

both observation and analysis-preferably sep-

(1987) added observational evidence for one

arated from one another.

case when the opportunity to attend creditors'

One key to useful field notes is to write down

meetings arose, and Burgelman (1983) added

whatever impressions occur, that is, to react

interviews with individuals whose importance

rather than to sift out what may seem important,

became clear during data collection. Leonard-

because it is often difficult to know what will and

Barton (1988) went even further by adding sev-

will not be useful in the future. A second key to

eral experiments to probe her emergent theory

successful field notes is to push thinking in these

in a study of the implementation of technical in-

notes by asking questions such as "What am I
learning?" and "How does this case differ from
the last?" For example, Burgelman (1983) kept

novations.

extensive idea booklets to record his ongoing

collection methods during a study? For theory-

These alterations create an important ques-

tion: Is it legitimate to alter and even add data

thoughts in a study of internal corporate ventur-

building research, the answer is "yes," because

ing. These ideas can be cross-case compari-

investigators are trying to understand each case

sons, hunches about relationships, anecdotes,

individually and in as much depth as is feasible.

and informal observations. Team meetings, in

The goal is not to produce summary statistics

which investigators share their thoughts and

about a set of observations. Thus, if a new data

emergent ideas, are also useful devices for over-

collection opportunity arises or if a new line of

lapping data collection and analysis.

thinking emerges during the research, it makes

Overlapping data analysis with data collection not only gives the researcher a head start in

sense to take advantage by altering data collec-

analysis but, more importantly, allows re-

ground the theory or to provide new theoretical

searchers to take advantage of flexible data col-

insight. This flexibility is not a license to be un-

lection. Indeed, a key feature of theory-building

systematic. Rather, this flexibility is controlled

tion, if such an alteration is likely to better

case research is the freedom to make adjust-

opportunism in which researchers take advan-

ments during the data collection process. These

tage of the uniqueness of a specific case and the

adjustments can be the addition of cases to

emergence of new themes to improve resultant

probe particular themes which emerge. Gersick

theory.

(1988), for example, added several cases to her
Analyzing Within-Case Data

original set of student teams in order to more
closely observe transition point behaviors
among project teams. These transition point be-

Analyzing data is the heart of building theory

haviors had unexpectedly proved interesting,

from case studies, but it is both the most difficult

and Gersick added cases in order to focus more

and the least codified part of the process. Since
published studies generally describe research

closely on the transition period.

sites and data collection methods, but give little

Additional adjustments can be made to data
collection instruments, such as the addition of

space to discussion of analysis, a huge chasm

questions to an interview protocol or questions to

often separates data from conclusions. As Miles

a questionnaire (e.g., Harris & Sutton, 1986).

and Huberman (1984, p. 16) wrote: "One cannot

These adjustments allow the researcher to

ordinarily follow how a researcher got from 3600

probe emergent themes or to take advantage of

pages of field notes to the final conclusions,
sprinkled wth vivid quotes though they may be."

special opportunities which may be present in a

539

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

However, several key features of analysis can

familiarity with each case which, in turn, accel-

be identified.

erates cross-case comparison.

One key step is within-case analysis. The im-

Searching for Cross-Case Patterns

portance of within-case analysis is driven by

one of the realities of case study research: a

Coupled with within-case analysis is cross-

staggering volume of data. As Pettigrew (1988)

case search for patterns. The tactics here are

described, there is an ever-present danger of

driven by the reality that people are notoriously

"death by data asphyxiation." For example,

poor processors of information. They leap to con-

Mintzberg and McHugh (1985) examined over

clusions based on limited data (Kahneman &

2500 movies in their study of strategy making at

Tversky, 1973), they are overly influenced by the

the National Film Board of Canada-and that

vividness (Nisbett & Ross, 1980) or by more elite

was only part of their evidence. The volume of

respondents (Miles & Huberman, 1984), they ig-

data is all the more daunting because the re-

nore basic statistical properties (Kahneman &

search problem is often open-ended. Within-

Tversky, 1973), or they sometimes inadvertently

case analysis can help investigators cope with

drop disconfirming evidence (Nisbett & Ross,

1980). The danger is that investigators reach

this deluge of data.

premature and even false conclusions as a re-

Within-case analysis typically involves detailed case study write-ups for each site. These

sult of these information-processing biases.

write-ups are often simply pure descriptions, but

Thus, the key to good cross-case comparison is

they are central to the generation of insight (Ger-

counteracting these tendencies by looking at the

sick, 1988; Pettigrew, 1988) because they help

data in many divergent ways.

researchers to cope early in the analysis process

One tactic is to select categories or dimen-

with the often enormous volume of data. How-

sions, and then to look for within-group similar-

ever, there is no standard format for such anal-

ities coupled with intergroup differences. Di-

ysis. Quinn (1980) developed teaching cases for

mensions can be suggested by the research

each of the firms in his study of strategic decision

problem or by existing literature, or the re-

making in six major corporations as a prelude to

searcher can simply choose some dimensions.

his theoretical work. Mintzberg and McHugh

For example, in a study of strategic decision

(1985) compiled a 383-page case history of the

making, Bourgeois and Eisenhardt (1988) sifted

National Film Board of Canada. These authors

cases into various categories including founder-

coupled narrative description with extensive use

run vs. professional management, high vs. low

of longitudinal graphs tracking revenue, film

performance, first vs. second generation prod-

sponsorship, staffing, film subjects, and so on.

uct, and large vs. small size. Some categories

Gersick (1988) prepared transcripts of team
meetings. Leonard-Barton (1988) used tabular
displays and graphs of information about each
case. Abbott (1988) suggested using sequence
analysis to organize longitudinal data. In fact,
there are probably as many approaches as re-

such as size and product generation revealed
no clear patterns, but others such as perfor-

mance led to important patterns of within-group
similarity and across-group differences. An extension of this tactic is to use a 2 x 2 or other cell

design to compare several categories at once, or
to move to a continuous measurement scale
which permits graphing.
A second tactic is to select pairs of cases and
then to list the similarities and differences between each pair. This tactic forces researchers
to look for the subtle similarities and differences

searchers. However, the overall idea is to become intimately familiar with each case as a
stand-alone entity. This process allows the
unique patterns of each case to emerge before
investigators push to generalize patterns across

cases. In addition, it gives investigators a rich

540

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

between cases. The juxtaposition of seemingly

a close fit with the data. Also, cross-case search-

similar cases by a researcher looking for differ-

ing tactics enhance the probability that the investigators will capture the novel findings which
may exist in the data.

ences can break simplistic frames. In the same

way, the search for similarity in a seemingly different pair also can lead to more sophisticated
understanding. The result of these forced com-

Shaping Hypotheses

parisons can be new categories and concepts

From the within-site analysis plus various

which the investigators did not anticipate. For

cross-site tactics and overall impressions, tentative themes, concepts, and possibly even rela-

example, Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) found
that CEO power differences dominated initial

tionships between variables begin to emerge.

impressions across firms. However, this paired

The next step of this highly iterative process is to

comparison process led the researchers to see

compare systematically the emergent frame

that the speed of the decision process was

with the evidence from each case in order to

equally important (Eisenhardt, in press). Fi-

assess how well or poorly it fits with case data.

nally, an extension of this tactic is to group cases

The central idea is that researchers constantly
compare theory and data-iterating toward a
theory which closely fits the data. A close fit is

into threes or fours for comparison.
A third strategy is to divide the data by data

views, and still another works with question-

important to building good theory because it
takes advantage of the new insights possible
from the data and yields an empirically valid

naire evidence. This tactic was used in the sep-

theory.

aration of the analyses of qualitative and

One step in shaping hypotheses is the sharpening of constructs. This is a two-part process
involving (1) refining the definition of the con-

source. For example, one researcher combs observational data, while another reviews inter-

quantitative data in a study of strategic decision

making (Bourgeois & Eisenhardt, 1988; Eisenhardt & Bourgeois, 1988). This tactic exploits the

struct and (2) building evidence which measures
the construct in each case. This occurs through
constant comparison between data and constructs so that accumulating evidence from diverse sources converges on a single, well-

unique insights possible from different types of
data collection. When a pattern from one data
source is corroborated by the evidence from an-

other, the finding is stronger and better
grounded. When evidence conflicts, the re-

defined construct. For example, in their study of
stigma management in bankruptcy, Sutton and
Callahan (1987) developed constructs which described the reaction of customers and other parties to the declaration of bankruptcy by the focal
firms. The iterative process involved data from
multiple sources: initial semi-structured telephone conversations; interviews with key informants including the firm's president, other
executives, a major creditor, and a lawyer; U. S.
Bankruptcy Court records; observation of a
creditors' meeting; and secondary source material including newspaper and magazine articles
and firm correspondence. The authors iterated
between constructs and these data. They eventually developed definitions and measures for
several constructs: disengagement, bargaining

searcher can sometimes reconcile the evidence
through deeper probing of the meaning of the

differences. At other times, this conflict exposes
a spurious or random pattern, or biased thinking in the analysis. A variation of this tactic is to
split the data into groups of cases, focusing on
one group of cases initially, while later focusing

on the remaining cases. Gersick (1988) used this
tactic in separating the analyses of the student
group cases from her other cases.

Overall, the idea behind these cross-case
searching tactics is to force investigators to go
beyond initial impressions, especially through
the use of structured and diverse lenses on the
data. These tactics improve the likelihood of accurate and reliable theory, that is, a theory with
541

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

ined for each case, not for the aggregate cases.
Thus, the underlying logic is replication, that is,
the logic of treating a series of cases as a series
of experiments with each case serving to confirm or disconfirm the hypotheses (Yin, 1984).
Each case is analogous to an experiment, and
multiple cases are analogous to multiple experiments. This contrasts with the sampling logic of
traditional, within-experiment, hypothesistesting research in which the aggregate relationships across the data points are tested using
summary statistics such as F values (Yin, 1984).
In replication logic, cases which confirm
emergent relationships enhance confidence in
the validity of the relationships. Cases which

for a more favorable exchange relationship,
denigration via rumor, and reduction in the
quality of participation.

This process is similar to developing a single
construct measure from multiple indicators in
hypothesis-testing research. That is, researchers
use multiple sources of evidence to build construct measures, which define the construct and

distinguish it from other constructs. In effect, the
researcher is attempting to establish construct
validity. The difference is that the construct, its
definition, and measurement often emerge from
the analysis process itself, rather than being
specified a priori. A second difference is that no
technique like factor analysis is available to collapse multiple indicators into a single construct

disconfirm the relationships often can provide
an opportunity to refine and extend the theory.
For example, in the study of the politics of strategic decision making, Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) found a case which did not fit with
the proposition that political coalitions have stable memberships. Further examination of this
disconfirming case indicated that the executive
team in this case had been newly formed at the
time of the study. This observation plus replication in another case led to a refinement in the
emergent theory to indicate that increasing stabilization of coalitions occurs over time.
At this point, the qualitative data are particularly useful for understanding why or why not
emergent relationships hold. When a relationship is supported, the qualitative data often provide a good understanding of the dynamics underlying the relationship, that is, the "why" of
what is happening. This is crucial to the establishment of internal validity. Just as in hypothesis-testing research an apparent relationship
may simply be a spurious correlation or may
reflect the impact of some third variable on each
of the other two. Therefore, it is important to discover the underlying theoretical reasons for why
the relationship exists. This helps to establish the
internal validity of the findings. For example, in
her study of project groups, Gersick (1988) identified a midpoint transition in the lives of most
project groups. She then used extensive quali-

measure. The reasons are that the indicators

may vary across cases (i.e., not all cases may
have all measures), and qualitative evidence

(which is common in theory-building research)
is difficult to collapse. Thus, many researchers
rely on tables which summarize and tabulate
the evidence underlying the construct (Miles &
Huberman, 1984; Sutton & Callahan, 1987). For
example, Table 3 is a tabular display of the evidence grounding the CEO power construct
used by Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988), which
included qualitative personality descriptions,

quantitative scores from questionnaires, and
quotation examples. The reasons for defining
and building evidence for a construct apply in
theory-building research just as they do in tra-

ditional, hypothesis-testing work. That is, careful construction of construct definitions and evidence produces the sharply defined, measurable constructs which are necessary for strong
theory.

A second step in shaping hypotheses is verifying that the emergent relationships between
constructs fit with the evidence in each case.
Sometimes a relationship is confirmed by the
case evidence, while other times it is revised,
disconfirmed, or thrown out for insufficient evidence. This verification process is similar to that
in traditional hypothesis testing research. The
key difference is that each hypothesis is exam542

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Table 3

Example of Tabulated Evidence for a Power Centralization Construct*

CEO

CEO

CEO

CEO

Story

Decision Power Power Dominated Decision

Firm Description Score Distance' Functions Styleb Examplesc
First Strong 9.6 3.5 Mkt, R&D, Ops, Authoritarian Geoff (Chairman) is THE
Volatile Fin decision maker. He runs the
Dogmatic whole show. (VP, Marketing)
Alpha Impatient 9.6 3.8 Mkt, R&D, Ops, Authoritarian Thou shalt not hire w/o
Parental Fin Presidential approval. Thou
Tunes You Out shalt not promote w/o
Presidential approval. Thou
shalt not explore new

markets w/o Presidential

approval. (VP, Operations)

Cowboy Strong 9.1 3.1 Mkt, R&D, Fin Authoritarian The tone of meetings would
Power Boss Consensus change depending upon
Master

whether

Strategist

If

he

he'd

was

in

leave

the

the

room.

room,

discussion would spread out,

go off the wall. It got back
on focus when he came

back. (Director of Marketing)

Neutron Organized 9.1 2.3 Mkt, Ops, Fin Authoritarian If there is a decision to make, I
Analytic will make it. (President)
Omicron Easy Going 8.4 1.2 Fin Consensus Bill (prior CEO) was a
Easy to Work suppressor of ideas. Jim is
With
more
open.
(VP,
Mfg.)
Promise People- 8.9 1.3 Ops, Fin Consensus (My philosophy is) to make
Oriented quick decisions involving as
Pragmatic many people as possible.
(President)

Forefront Aggressive 8.3 1.2 None Consensus Art depends on picking good
Team people and letting them
Player
operate.
(VP,
Sales)
Zap Consensus- 7.5 0.3 Fin Consultative It's very open. We're successful
Style most of the time in building
People- consensus. (VP, Engineering)
Oriented

Difference between CEO power score and score of next most powerful executive.

b Authoritarian-Decisions made either by CEO alone or in consultation with only one person.
Consultative-Decisions made by CEO in consultation with either most of or all of the team.
Consensus-Decisions made by entire team in a group format.
c Individual in parentheses is the source of the quotation.
* Taken from Eisenhardt & Bourgeois, 1988.

tative data to understand the cognitive and motivational reasons why such abrupt and precisely timed transitions occur.

building research involves measuring constructs and verifying relationships. These processes are similar to traditional hypothesistesting research. However, these processes are

Overall, shaping hypotheses in theory543

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

other conflicts allowed these researchers to establish the unique features of strategy making in
an "adhocracy" in relief against "machine
bureaucracies" and "entrepreneurial firms."

more judgmental in theory-building research
because researchers cannot apply statistical
tests such as an F statistic. The research team
must judge the strength and consistency of rela-

The result was a sharper theory of strategy formation in all three types of organizations.
Similarly, in a study of politics, Eisenhardt
and Bourgeois (1988) contrasted the finding that
centralized power leads to politics with the previous finding that decentralized power creates
politics. These conflicting findings forced the
probing of both the evidence and conflicting research to discover the underlying reasons for
the conflict. An underlying similarity in the apparently dissimilar situations was found. That is,
both power extremes create a climate of frustration, which leads to an emphasis on self-interest
and ultimately politics. In these extreme situations, the "structure of the game" becomes an
interpersonal competition among the executives. In contrast, the research showed that an
intermediate power distribution fosters a sense
of personal efficacy among executives and ultimately collaboration, not politics, for the good of
the entire group. This reconciliation integrated
the conflicting findings into a single theoretical
perspective, and raised the theoretical level and

tionships within and across cases and also fully
display the evidence and procedures when the
findings are published, so that readers may apply their own standards.
Enfolding Literature

An essential feature of theory building is com-

parison of the emergent concepts, theory, or hypotheses with the extant literature. This involves

asking what is this similar to, what does it contradict, and why. A key to this process is to consider a broad range of literature.
Examining literature which conflicts with the
emergent theory is important for two reasons.

First, if researchers ignore conflicting findings,
then confidence in the findings is reduced. For
example, readers may assume that the results

are incorrect (a challenge to internal validity), or
if correct, are idiosyncratic to the specific cases
of the study (a challenge to generalizability).
Second and perhaps more importantly, conflicting literature represents an opportunity. The
juxtaposition of conflicting results forces re-

searchers into a more creative, framebreaking
mode of thinking than they might otherwise be

generalizability of the results.

Literature discussing similar findings is important as well because it ties together underlying

able to achieve. The result can be deeper insight
into both the emergent theory and the conflicting literature, as well as sharpening of the limits

similarities in phenomena normally not associated with each other. The result is often a theory
with stronger internal validity, wider generalizability, and higher conceptual level. For example, in her study of technological innovation in a
major computer corporation, Leonard-Barton
(1988) related her findings on the mutual adaptation of technology and the host organization to
similar findings in the education literature. In so
doing, Leonard-Barton strengthened the confidence that her findings were valid and generalizable because others had similar findings in a
very different context. Also, the tie to mutual adaptation processes in the education setting
sharpened and enriched the conceptual level of
the study.

to generalizability of the focal research. For example, in their study of strategy making at the

National Film Board of Canada, Mintzberg and
McHugh (1985) noted conflicts between their
findings for this highly creative organization
and prior results at Volkswagenwerk and other
sites. In the earlier studies, they observed differences in the patterns of strategic change
whereby periods of convergence were long and
periods of divergence were short and very
abrupt. In contrast, the National Film Board exhibited a pattern of regular cycles of convergence and divergence, coupled with a longterm trend toward greater diversity. This and
544

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Similarly, Gersick (1988) linked the sharp mid-

such as time and money to dictate when case

point transition in project group development to

collection ends. In fact, it is not uncommon for

the more general punctuated equilibrium phe-

researchers to plan the number of cases in ad-

nomenon, to the literature on the adult midlife

vance. For example, the Warwick group

transition, and to strategic transitions within or-

planned their study of strategic change and

ganizations. This linkage with a variety of liter-

competitiveness in British firms to include eight

ature in other contexts raises the readers' confi-

firms (Pettigrew, 1988). This kind of planning

dence that Gersick had observed a valid phe-

may be necessary because of the availability of

nomenon within her small number of project

resources and because time constraints force re-

teams. It also allowed her to elevate the concep-

searchers to develop cases in parallel. Finally,

tual level of her findings to the more fundamen-

while there is no ideal number of cases, a num-

tal level of punctuated equilibrium, and strength-

ber between 4 and 10 cases usually works well.

en their likely generalizability to other project

With fewer than 4 cases, it is often difficult to

teams. Finally, Burgelman (1983) strengthened

generate theory with much complexity, and its

the theoretical scope and validity of his work by

empirical grounding is likely to be unconvinc-

tying his results on the process of new venture

ing, unless the case has several mini-cases

development in a large corporation to the selec-

within it, as did the Mintzberg and McHugh

tion arguments of population ecology. The result

study of the National Film Board of Canada.

again was a higher conceptual level for his find-

With more than 10 cases, it quickly becomes difficult to cope with the complexity and volume of

ings and enhanced confidence in their validity.

the data.

Overall, tying the emergent theory to existing
literature enhances the internal validity, gener-

In the second closure issue, when to stop iter-

alizability, and theoretical level of theory building from case study research. While linking results to the literature is important in most re-

ating between theory and data, again, saturation is the key idea. That is, the iteration process

search, it is particularly crucial in theory-

ory is minimal. The final product of building the-

building research because the findings often

ory from case studies may be concepts (e.g., the

stops when the incremental improvement to the-

rest on a very limited number of cases. In this

Mintzberg and Waters, 1982, deliberate and

situation, any further corroboration of internal

emergent strategies), a conceptual framework

validity or generalizability is an important im-

(e.g., Harris & Sutton's, 1986, framework of

provement.

bankruptcy), or propositions or possibly midrange theory (e.g., Eisenhardt and Bourgeois's,

Reaching Closure

1988, midrange theory of politics in high velocity

Two issues are important in reaching closure:

environments). On the downside, the final prod-

when to stop adding cases, and when to stop

uct may be disappointing. The research may

iterating between theory and data. In the first,

simply replicate prior theory, or there may be no

ideally, researchers should stop adding cases

clear patterns within the data. The steps for

when theoretical saturation is reached. (Theo-

building theory from case studies are summa-

retical saturation is simply the point at which

rized in Table 1.

incremental learning is minimal because the researchers are observing phenomena seen be-

Comparison with Other Literature

fore, Glaser and Strauss, 1967.) This idea is quite
similar to ending the revision of a manuscript

The process described here has similarities

when the incremental improvement in its qual-

with the work of others. For example, I have

ity is minimal. In practice, theoretical saturation

drawn upon the ideas of theoretical sampling,

often combines with pragmatic considerations

theoretical saturation, and overlapped coding,

545

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

data collection, and analysis from Glaser and

Discussion

Strauss (1967). Also, the notions of case study
design, replication logic, and concern for internal validity have been incorporated from Yin

The process of building theory from case study
research is a strikingly iterative one. While an
investigator may focus on one part of the process
at a time, the process itself involves constant it-

(1984). The tools of tabular display of evidence
from Miles and Huberman (1984) were particularly helpful in the discussion of building evi-

eration backward and forward beween steps.
For example, an investigator may move from
cross-case comparison, back to redefinition of
the research question, and out to the field to
gather evidence on an additional case. Also,
the process is alive with tension between diver-

dence for constructs.

However, the process described here has im-

portant differences from previous work. First, it
is focused on theory building from cases. In contrast, with the exception of Glaser and Strauss

gence into new ways of understanding the data
and convergence onto a single theoretical
framework. For example, the process involves
the use of multiple investigators and multiple

(1967), previous work was centered on other topics such as qualitative data analysis (e.g., Miles,
1979; Miles & Huberman, 1984; Kirk & Miller,
1986), case study design (Yin, 1981, 1984; Mc-

data collection methods as well as a variety of

Clintock et al., 1979), and ethnography (Van
Maanen, 1988). To a large extent, Glaser and
Strauss (1967) focused on defending building
theory from cases, rather than on how actually
to do it. Thus, while these previous writings provide pieces of the process, they do not provide
(nor do they intend to provide) a framework for
theory building from cases as developed here.
Second, the process described here contributes new ideas. For example, the process includes a priori specification of constructs, population specification, flexible instrumentation,
multiple investigators, cross-case analysis tactics, and several uses of literature. Their inclusion plus their illustration using examples from
research studies and comparison with traditional, hypothesis-testing research synthesizes,
extends, and adds depth to existing views of the-

cross-case searching tactics. Each of these tac-

tics involves viewing evidence from diverse perspectives. However, the process also involves
converging on construct definitions, measures,
and a framework for structuring the findings. Finally, the process described here is intimately
tied with empirical evidence.

Strengths of Theory Building from Cases
One strength of theory building from cases is
its likelihood of generating novel theory. Creative insight often arises from the juxtaposition of

contradictory or paradoxical evidence (Cameron & Quinn, 1988). As Bartunek (1988) argued,
the process of reconciling these contradictions

forces individuals to reframe perceptions into a
new gestalt. Building theory from case studies

ory-building research.

centers directly on this kind of juxtaposition. That

Third, particularly in comparison with Strauss

is, attempts to reconcile evidence across cases,
types of data, and different investigators, and

(1987) and Van Maanen (1988), the process described here adopts a positivist view of research.
That is, the process is directed toward the development of testable hypotheses and theory which
are generalizable across settings. In contrast,
authors like Strauss and Van Maanen are more
concerned that a rich, complex description of
the specific cases under study evolve and they
appear less concerned with development of
generalizable theory.

between cases and literature increase the likelihood of creative reframing into a new theoretical vision. Although a myth surrounding theory

building from case studies is that the process is
limited by investigators' preconceptions, in fact,
just the opposite is true. This constant juxtaposition of conflicting realities tends to "unfreeze"

thinking, and so the process has the potential to
generate theory with less researcher bias than
546

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

theory built from incremental studies or arm-

staggering volume of rich data, there is a temp-

chair, axiomatic deduction.

tation to build theory which tries to capture everything. The result can be theory which is very

A second strength is that the emergent theory
is likely to be testable with constructs that can be

rich in detail, but lacks the simplicity of overall

readily measured and hypotheses that can be

perspective. Theorists working from case data

proven false. Measurable constructs are likely

can lose their sense of proportion as they con-

because they have already been measured dur-

front vivid, voluminous data. Since they lack

ing the theory-building process. The resulting

quantitative gauges such as regression results

hypotheses are likely to be verifiable for the

or observations across multiple studies, they

same reason. That is, they have already under-

may be unable to assess which are the most

gone repeated verification during the theory-

important relationships and which are simply

building process. In contrast, theory which is

idiosyncratic to a particular case.

generated apart from direct evidence may have

Another weakness is that building theory from

testability problems. For example, population

cases may result in narrow and idiosyncratic

ecology researchers borrowed the niche con-

theory. Case study theory building is a bottom

cept from biology. This construct has proven dif-

up approach such that the specifics of data pro-

ficult to operationalize for many organizational

duce the generalizations of theory. The risks are

researchers, other than its originators. One rea-

that the theory describes a very idiosyncratic

son may be its obscure definition, which ham-

phenomenon or that the theorist is unable to

pers measurability: ". . . that area in constraint

raise the level of generality of the theory. In-

space (the space whose dimensions are levels of

deed, many of the grounded case studies men-

resources, etc.) in which the population outcom-

tioned earlier resulted in modest theories. For

petes all other local populations" (Hannan &

example, Gersick (1988) developed a model of

Freeman, 1977, p. 947). One might ask: How do

group development for teams with project deadlines, Eisenhardt and Bourgeois (1988) devel-

you measure an area in constraint space?
A third strength is that the resultant theory is

oped a mid-range theory of politics in high ve-

likely to be empirically valid. The likelihood of

locity environments, and Burgelman (1983) pro-

valid theory is high because the theory-building

posed a model of new product ventures in large

process is so intimately tied with evidence that it

corporations. Such theories are likely to be test-

is very likely that the resultant theory will be

able, novel, and empirically valid, but they do
lack the sweep of theories like resource depen-

consistent with empirical observation. In well-

dence, population ecology, and transaction cost.
They are essentially theories about specific phe-

executed theory-building research, investiga-

tors answer to the data from the beginning of the
research. This closeness can lead to an intimate

nomena. To their credit, many of these theorists

sense of things-"how they feel, smell, seem"

tie into broader theoretical issues such as adap-

(Mintzberg, 1979). This intimate interaction with
actual evidence often produces theory which

rationality, but ultimately they are not theories

tation, punctuated equilibrium, and bounded

closely mirrors reality.

about organization in any grand sense. Perhaps
"grand" theory requires multiple studies-an

Weaknesses of Theory Building from Cases

accumulation of both theory-building and the-

However, some characteristics that lead to

ory-testing empirical studies.

strengths in theory building from case studies

Applicability

also lead to weaknesses. For example, the in-

tensive use of empirical evidence can yield the-

When is it appropriate to conduct theorybuilding case study research? In normal science, theory is developed through incremental

ory which is overly complex. A hallmark of good
theory is parsimony, but given the typically

547

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Second, the assessment of theory-building research also depends upon empirical issues:

empirical testing and extension (Kuhn, 1970).
Thus, the theory-building process relies on past

strength of method and the evidence grounding
the theory. Have the investigators followed a
careful analytical procedure? Does the evidence
support the theory? Have the investigators ruled
out rival explanations? Just as in other empirical
research, investigators should provide information on the sample, data collection procedures,
and analysis. Also, they should display enough

literature and empirical observation or experience as well as on the insight of the theorist to
build incrementally more powerful theories.

However, there are times when little is known
about a phenomenon, current perspectives

seem inadequate because they have little empirical substantiation, or they conflict with each
other or common sense. Or, sometimes, serendipitous findings in a theory-testing study sug-

evidence for each construct to allow readers to

gest the need for a new perspective. In these

make their own assessment of the fit with theory.
While there are no concise measures such as

situations, theory building from case study re-

correlation coefficients or F values, nonetheless
thorough reporting of information should give

search is particularly appropriate because theory building from case studies does not rely on

confidence that the theory is valid. Overall, as in
hypothesis testing, a strong theory-building
study has a good, although not necessarily perfect, fit with the data.

previous literature or prior empirical evidence.
Also, the conflict inherent in the process is likely
to generate the kind of novel theory which is
desirable when extant theory seems inade-

quate. For example, Van de Ven and Poole (in

Finally, strong theory-building research should

press) have argued that such an approach is

result in new insights. Theory building which

especially useful for studying the new area of

simply replicates past theory is, at best, a mod-

longitudinal change processes. In sum, building

est contribution. Replication is appropriate in
theory-testing research, but in theory-building
research, the goal is new theory. Thus, a strong
theory-building study presents new, perhaps
framebreaking, insights.

theory from case study research is most appropriate in the early stages of research on a topic
or to provide freshness in perspective to an already researched topic.

Evaluation

Conclusions

How should theory-building research using

case studies be evaluated? To begin, there is no
generally accepted set of guidelines for the as-

The purpose of this article is to describe the

sessment of this type of research. However, sev-

process of theory building from case studies.

eral criteria seem appropriate. Assessment

The process, outlined in Table 1, has features
which range from selection of the research
question to issues in reaching closure. Several
conclusions emerge.

turns on whether the concepts, framework, or
propositions that emerge from the process are

"good theory." After all, the point of the process
is to develop or at least begin to develop theory.

Theory developed from case study research is
likely to have important strengths like novelty,
testability, and empirical validity, which arise
from the intimate linkage with empirical evidence. Second, given the strengths of this theory-building approach and its independence
from prior literature or past empirical observation, it is particularly well-suited to new research

Pfeffer (1982) suggested that good theory is parsimonious, testable, and logically coherent, and
these criteria seem appropriate here. Thus, a
strong theory-building study yields good theory
(that is, parsimonious, testable, and logically co-

herent theory) which emerges at the end, not
beginning, of the study.

548

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

concept development (e.g., parsimony, testabil-

areas or research areas for which existing the-

ory seems inadequate. This type of work is

ity, logical coherence) and are grounded in con-

highly complementary to incremental theory

vincing evidence.

building from normal science research. The

Most empirical studies lead from theory to

former is useful in early stages of research on a

data. Yet, the accumulation of knowledge in-

topic or when a fresh perspective is needed,

volves a continual cycling between theory and

while the latter is useful in later stages of knowl-

data. Perhaps this article will stimulate some re-

edge. Finally, several guidelines for assessing

searchers to complete the cycle by conducting

the quality of theory building from case studies

research that goes in the less common direction

have been suggested. Strong studies are those

from data to theory, and equally important, per-

which present interesting or framebreaking

haps it will help others become informed con-

theories which meet the tests of good theory or

sumers of the results.

References
Gersick, C. (1988) Time and transition in work teams: Toward

Abbott, A. (1988, September) Workshop on sequence methods. National Science Foundation Conference on Longi-

a new model of group development. Academy of Man-

tudinal Research Methods in Organizations, Austin.

agement Journal, 31, 9-41.

Allison, G. (1971) Essence of decision. Boston: Little, Brown.

Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967) The discovery of grounded
theory: Strategies of qualitative research. London:

Anderson, P. (1983) Decision making by objection and the

Wiedenfeld and Nicholson.

Cuban missile crisis. Administrative Science Quarterly,
28, 201-222.

Hannan, M., & Freeman, J. (1977) The population ecology of
organizations. American Journal of Sociology, 82, 929-

Bartunek, J. (1988) The dynamics of personal and organizational reframing. In R. Quinn & K. Cameron (Eds.), Para-

964.

dox and transformation: Towards a theory of change in

Harris, S., & Sutton, R. (1986) Functions of parting ceremonies in dying organizations. Academy of Management

organization and management (pp. 137-162). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

Journal, 29, 5-30.

Bettenhausen, K., & Murnighan, J. K. (1986) The emergence

Jick, T. (1979) Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods:

of norms in competitive decision-making groups. Admin-

Triangulation in action. Administrative Science Quarterly,

istrative Science Quarterly, 30, 350-372.

24, 602-611.

Bourgeois, L., & Eisenhardt, K. (1988) Strategic decision pro-

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973) On the psychology of

cesses in high velocity environments: Four cases in the

prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.

microcomputer industry. Management Science, 34, 816835.

Kidder, T. (1982) Soul of a new machine. New York: Avon.

Burgelman, R. (1983) A process model of internal corporate

Kimberly, J. (1988) A review of Walter R. Nord and Sharon
Tucker: Implementing routine and radical innovations.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 33, 314-316.

venturing in a major diversified firm. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, 223-244.

Cameron, K., & Quinn, R. (1988) Organizational paradox

Kirk, J., & Miller, M. (1986) Reliability and validity in quali-

and transformation. In R. Quinn & K. Cameron (Eds.),

tative research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Paradox and transformation (pp. 1- 18). Cambridge, MA:

Kuhn, T. (1970) The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd
ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ballinger.

Eisenhardt, K. (in press) Making fast strategic decisions in

Leonard-Barton, D. (1988) Synergistic design for case studies: Longitudinal single-site and replicated multiple-site.
Paper presented at the National Science Foundation Conference on Longitudinal Research Methods in Organiza-

high velocity environments. Academy of Management
Journal.

Eisenhardt, K., & Bourgeois, L. J. (1988) Politics of strategic
decision making in high velocity environments: Toward a
mid-range theory. Academy of Management Journal, 31,

tions, Austin.

737-770.

McClintock, C., Brannon, D., & Maynard-Moody, S. (1979)

549

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Pfeffer, J. (1982) Organizations and organization theory.

Applying the logic of sample surveys to qualitative case

Marshfield, MA: Pitman.

studies: The case cluster method. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 612-629.

Pinfield, L. (1986) A field evaluation of perspectives on orga-

Miles, M. (1979) Qualitative data as an attractive nuisance:

nizational decision making. Administrative Science Quar-

The problem of analysis. Administrative Science Quar-

terly, 31, 365-388.

terly, 24, 590-601.

Quinn, J. B. (1980) Strategies for change. Homewood, IL:

Miles, M., & Huberman, A. M. (1984) Qualitative data anal-

Dow-Jones Irwin.

ysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

Selznick, P. (1949) TVA and the grass roots. Berkeley, CA:

Mintzberg, H. (1979) An emerging strategy of "direct" re-

University of California Press.

search. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 580-589.
Mintzberg, H., & McHugh, A. (1985) Strategy formation in an

Strauss, A. (1987) Qualitative analysis for social scientists.

adhocracy. Administrative Science Quarterly, 30, 160-

Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

197.

Sutton, R., & Callahan, A. (1987) The stigma of bankruptcy:

Mintzberg, H., & Waters, J. (1982) Tracking strategy in an
entrepreneurial firm. Academy of Management Journal,

Spoiled organizational image and its management. Academy of Management Journal, 30, 405-436.

25, 465-499.

Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980) Human inference: Strategies

Van de Ven, A., & Poole, M. S. (in press) Methods to develop

and shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood Cliffs,

a grounded theory of innovation processes in the Minnesota Innovation Research Program. Organization Sci-

NJ: Prentice-Hall.

ence, 1.

Perrow, C. (1986) Complex organizations (3rd ed.). New
York: Random House.

Van Maanen, J. (1988) Tales of the field: On writing ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Pettigrew, A. (1973) The politics of organizational decision
making. London: Tavistock.

Yin, R. (1981) The case study crisis: Some answers. Admin-

Pettigrew, A. (1988) Longitudinal field research on change:

istrative Science Quarterly, 26, 58-65.

Theory and practice. Paper presented at the National Sci-

Yin, R. (1984) Case study research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage

ence Foundation Conference on Longitudinal Research

Publications.

Methods in Organizations, Austin.

Kathleen M. Eisenhardt (Ph.D., Stanford University) is
Assistant Professor at Stanford University. Correspondence can be sent to her at the Department of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, 346

Terman Building, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 94305.

I appreciate the helpful comments of Paul Adler, Ken-

nith Bettenhausen, Constance Gersick, James Frederickson, James Jucker, Deborah Myerson, Dorothy Leonard-Barton, Robert Sutton, and the participants in
the Stanford NIMH Colloquium. I also benefitted from
informal conversations with many participants at the
National Science Foundation Conference on Longitu-

dinal Research Methods in Organizations, Austin,
1988.

550

This content downloaded from
137.208.133.186 on Thu, 23 Jul 2026 09:18:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

