Working for “Warm Glow”: On the Benefits and Limits
of Prosocial Incentives
Alex Imas∗
UC San Diego

October 21, 2013

Abstract
We study whether using prosocial incentives, where e↵ort is tied directly to charitable contributions, may lead to better performance than standard incentive schemes.
In a real-e↵ort task, individuals indeed work harder for charity than for themselves,
but only when incentive stakes are low. When stakes are raised, e↵ort increases when
individuals work for themselves but not when they work for others and, as a result, the
di↵erence in provided e↵ort disappears. Individuals correctly anticipate these e↵ects,
choosing to work for charity at low incentives and for themselves at high incentives.
The results are consistent with warm glow giving and have implications for optimal
incentive design.

JEL classification: D02, D03
Keywords: Prosocial behavior, warm glow, incentives, motivation

∗

Dept. of Economics, University of California, San Diego; aimas@ucsd.edu

1

1

Introduction

Designing incentive schemes to best motivate e↵ort is an important design question for
firms, governments and other organizations. Neoclassical economic theory predicts that
individuals should excerpt more e↵ort when compensation for performance is paid directly
to them rather than to a charity. Money is a good and e↵ort is costly; therefore, indirect
compensation through charitable donations or gifts should be a less e↵ective incentive than
an equivalent direct monetary payment.
However, evidence from psychology (Deci, 1971) and behavioral economics (Gneezy,
Meier and Rey-Biel, 2011) suggests that direct monetary incentives may not always be optimal in motivating performance, especially when the incentive levels are low. Suppose a
company wants to motivate its employees to lose weight and can pay at most $5 per pound
lost. Losing a pound is difficult and the extra $5 in purchasing power may not be motivation
enough for individuals to lose the weight.
Alternatively, suppose that the company o↵ered to donate $5 to a local charity for every
pound lost. The pleasure derived from doing good for others every time the treadmill is used
or unhealthy food is avoided may be greater than from equivalent direct compensation. In
turn, these prosocial incentives could provide sufficient motivation for individuals to take the
necessary steps towards weight loss. However, although prosocial incentives may be more
e↵ective when the amounts involved are small, would they still work harder for charity when
the stakes increase—would people work harder for a $100 or $1000 donation rather than
receiving the money directly?
This paper studies whether and when prosocial incentives—where charitable contributions are directly tied to e↵ort levels—lead to better performance and greater e↵ort provision
than standard, self-benefiting incentives. We find that individuals indeed provide greater effort under prosocial incentives than under standard, self-benefiting ones when the incentive
stakes are low. However, this di↵erence disappears or reverses when the stakes are high.
In addition, individuals seem to anticipate these e↵ects and prefer to work for prosocial
incentives when the stakes are low and self-benefiting ones when stakes are raised.

2

In a recent paper, Dunn, Aknin and Norton (2008) demonstrate that individuals report greater happiness when spending money on others than when spending on themselves.
Bonuses in the form of charitable contributions were shown to increase employee happiness relative to paying the employee directly (Norton, Anik, Aknin, Dunn and Quoidbach,
2012). These findings suggest that, at least over some incentive levels, tying individuals’
e↵ort directly to charitable contributions may be a more e↵ective motivator than standard
incentives. While numerous lines of research have argued that individuals derive pleasure
directly from prosocial behavior (Charness and Rabin, 2002; Loewenstein, Thompson and
Bazerman, 1989), the theory of “warm glow” giving o↵ers the most parsimonious framework
for testing this intuition (Andreoni, 1988, 1989, 1990). According to the theory, individuals
derive private value from the the altruistic act apart from the overall outcome provided for
others.
In addition, studies have shown that introducing direct monetary incentives may not
necessarily increase an individual’s motivation to exert e↵ort in a particular task. In some
cases, introducing low self-benefiting incentives actually decreases performance relative to
providing no incentives at all. Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) showed that, relative to no
compensation, students scored worse on an IQ test when they were paid a small amount
directly for their performance; Heyman and Ariely (2004) found a similar result in the case of
neutral computer task. Drawing on these findings, we posit our first hypothesis (Hypothesis
1): a prosocial incentive scheme may both be preferred and result in better performance
than a self-benefiting incentive scheme when the incentive stakes are low.
However, there is reason to suspect that the benefit individuals derive from charitable
acts may be to some extent independent of the benefit for the recipients of the acts. In other
words, people derive warm glow from giving, valuing the e↵ort exerted for others rather than
the benefit others receive from that e↵ort. Andreoni (1993) o↵ered support for this notion
through an experimental test of the crowding-out hypothesis, which predicts that government
contributions to a privately provided public good (e.g., a charity) should completely crowd
out private contributions. The neutrality result presumes that purely altruistic individuals
do not place a private value on the act of giving: if the government uses a dollar in taxes
3

for contributions to a charity, then the individual will reduce her voluntary contribution
by a dollar while keeping the charity’s revenue constant. The theory of warm glow giving
makes an alternate prediction—that crowding out will be incomplete since individuals derive
a private benefit from the act of personally giving. Andreoni used a modified public goods
game to show that indeed crowding out was incomplete: when participants were taxed and
taxes were contributed to the public good, they did not reduce voluntary contributions by
the size of the tax. Total contributions were significantly larger when participants were taxed
than when they were not, suggesting that individuals valued the act of giving apart from
the overall impact of contributions.
Hsee and Rottenstreich (2004) provide further evidence of individuals’ insensitivity to
the benefits of the donation for others, showing that individuals are willing to donate the
same amount for the rescue of one animal as for the rescue of four animals. This type of
scope insensitivity is also shown by Small, Loewenstein and Slovic (2007), who demonstrate
that individuals donate the same amount for one person as for 10 people (also see Linardi
and McConnell (2011) for additional evidence of scope insensitivity in the social domain). In
light of these studies, our second hypothesis (Hypothesis 2) predicts that e↵ort under prosocial incentive schemes should display scope insensitivity—namely, e↵ort provided should be
independent of incentive stakes.
Self-benefiting incentives, on the other hand, may not exhibit the same scope insensitivity. As demonstrated by Gneezy et al. (2011), individuals under self-benefiting incentive
schemes do respond positively to increases in incentive size once these incentives are already
in place. Particularly, individuals already being compensated personally for their work will
work harder when the payment stakes increase. The positive relationship between incentive size and e↵ort under self-benefiting incentive schemes, in conjunction with the scope
insensitivity under prosocial incentives, leads to our third hypothesis (Hypothesis 3): as the
incentive size increases, individuals should both prefer and exert more or equal e↵ort under self-benefiting rather than prosocial incentive schemes (provided the substitution e↵ect
exceeds the income e↵ect).
We provide empirical support for these hypotheses using a novel experimental paradigm
4

where real, costly e↵ort is tied directly to either self-benefiting or prosocial incentives. We
first look at whether individuals exert more e↵ort under a prosocial incentive scheme than
under a self-benefiting one when incentive stakes are low, and study whether this di↵erence
disappears or reverses when stakes are higher. We then examine if individuals anticipate
these e↵ects: whether they choose to work for charity more often than for themselves when
incentives are low, and if this choice reverses when stakes are raised.
Our findings are consistent with our hypotheses: individuals work harder for charity
than for themselves under low incentives or when no explicit incentives are provided. E↵ort
provided under prosocial incentives, however, is no longer greater than under self-benefiting
incentives when the stakes increase. This is primarily driven by the fact that individuals
work significantly harder when the amount they are paid is greater, as economic reasoning
would suggest, but are generally insensitive to the scope of the prosocial incentive. This
insensitivity to scope is consistent with pure warm glow giving. Particularly, the e↵ort they
exert for charity does not change as the payment stakes increase. In addition, individuals’
choice of incentive scheme is consistent with their choice of e↵ort provision: they choose
to work for charity when stakes are low and for themselves when the stakes increase. This
contrasts with the inconsistency between choice and reported well-being found in previous
work (Dunn et al., 2008).

2

E↵ort Experiment

We recruited 187 students from a university wide subject pool to participate in a 30 minute
study. Participants were given a $5 show up fee and could earn more depending on the
condition and e↵ort exerted.
Each session had between 6 to 8 participants who were randomly assigned to isolated
computer terminals. There was at least one empty computer terminal between each participant to ensure privacy. A computer program randomized conditions within each session,
and all instructions were displayed on each participant’s individual computer screen.1 Par1

The experiment was programmed using the Qualtrics Research Suite.

5

ticipants were asked to read the instructions to themselves and notify the experimenter if
they had any questions. All questions were answered in private.
To measure e↵ort, we asked subjects to squeeze a hand dynamometer that recorded force
output in Newtons, twice. All participants were first asked to squeeze the device for 60
seconds to obtain a baseline measurement. The total force exerted was reported to the
participants and acted as the baseline measure. Participants were then randomly assigned
to one of five conditions in a 2 (For Self vs. For Others Incentives) ⇥ 2 (Low vs. High
Incentives) between-subjects design, with an additional no incentive control condition.
After squeezing the hand dynamometer for 60 seconds to obtain a baseline measurement,
participants were exposed to our manipulation. Participants were told that under the For
Self incentive scheme (self-benefiting) they would receive the amount earned at the end of
the experiment; the amount earned under the For Others incentive scheme (prosocial) would
be donated to the Make-A-Wish Foundation (incentives are shown in Table 1). Each was
then asked to squeeze the device again for 60 seconds after being matched into one of the
5 treatments: For Others and For Self incentive schemes were crossed with two incentive
levels, Low and High. In the control condition, we simply asked participants to squeeze the
device again for 60 seconds without giving them any explicit incentive to do so.
In the four incentive treatments, the amount earned by the participants or the charity was
directly tied to e↵ort. For example, participants in the For Self treatment under High incentives earned $2.00 cents for every 25k Newtons of force exerted during the treatment stage.
They were not directly compensated for e↵ort during the baseline stage. Earnings based on
e↵ort in the two incentive levels ranged between $0.02 and $0.35 in the Low treatments and
$2.73 and $12.34 in the High incentive treatments.
As our dependent measure of e↵ort, we used the ratio R of total force exerted during the
treatment stage to that exerted in the baseline stage, which provides a normalized measure of
e↵ort that aims to control for individual characteristics such as gender and physical fitness.

6

Table 1.
Treatment Summary
Incentive

Gender

Initial

Treatment

(per 25k Newtons)

N

(% Male)

(Newtons)

R

For Others Low

$0.05

38

39%

65,620

1.51

For Others High

$2.00

40

55%

57,991

1.48

For Self Low

$0.05

36

44%

68,450

1.14

For Self High

$2.00

36

53%

59,598

1.74

Control

-

37

51%

64,836

1.07

Results
Table 1 lists averages of initial exerted e↵ort for each of the 5 treatments. A preliminary
test on initial e↵ort revealed no between-group di↵erences in baseline force exerted, F (4,
182)=1.01, ns. Similarly, pairwise comparisons show no significant di↵erences in initial
e↵ort (p > .1 for all comparisons), suggesting that e↵ort at the baseline stage did not di↵er
by treatment.
Table 1 also lists the gender composition in each treatment; pairwise comparisons reveal
no significant di↵erences in compositions (p > .2 for all comparisons). In addition, there was
no significant di↵erence in the gender composition between the two High treatments and the
two Low treatments plus Control (t(185)=1.20, p = .23). Running an OLS regression of the
e↵ort ratio R on a gender dummy (Male = 1; Female = 0) revealed no significant relationship
between gender and our main dependent measure of e↵ort ( = .09, p =.497). There were
also no gender di↵erences in the e↵ort ratio R within any of the treatments (p > .3 for all
comparisons).
We first examined the e↵ect of the 4 incentive treatments (For Self vs. For Others
Incentives) ⇥ (Low vs. High Incentives) on e↵ort. We predicted that at Low incentive
levels participants would exert more e↵ort For Others than For Self (Hypothesis 1), with this
di↵erence disappearing or reversing as the incentive size increased (Hypothesis 3). Consistent

7

Figure 1. E↵ort Ratio R by Treatment
2.2

2

Effort Ratio R

1.8

For Others

1.6

For Self
1.4

1.2

1
Low Incentive

High Incentive

with the first hypothesis, individuals indeed worked harder For Others (M =1.51, SD=.87)
than For Self (M =1.14, SD=.34), t(72)=2.37, p =.020, when incentives were Low. However,
in line with Hypothesis 3, the di↵erence between incentive schemes disappeared when the
incentive size was High, t(74)=.96, p =.338. Indeed, a joint hypothesis test revealed that
e↵ort For Self under Low incentives was significantly lower than in the other three conditions,
F (3, 182)=2.86, p=.038 (see Figure 1).
We further predicted that participants’ e↵ort would respond positively to increases in incentive size under the For Self incentive scheme, but be insensitive to the scope of incentives
when working For Others (Hypothesis 2). In line with our second hypothesis and traditional
economic reasoning, participants exerted significantly more e↵ort under the For Self incentive scheme when incentives increased from Low to High (M =1.14, SD=.34 vs. M =1.74,
SD=1.36), t(70)=2.58, p =.012. However, the increase in incentives did not change the
level of e↵ort exerted under the prosocial incentive scheme (M =1.51, SD=.87 vs. M =1.48,
SD=1.03), t(76) = -.13, p =.896.
To see whether the di↵erence in di↵erence between incentive schemes was significant as
the size of incentives went up, we ran an OLS regression of the dependent variable R on the
8

interaction between incentive scheme and incentive size. Our binary independent variables
were the incentive scheme (For Others = 0; For Self = 1), incentive size (Low = 0; High
= 1), and the interaction of the two. Neither incentive scheme (

= -.37, p =.107) nor

incentive size ( = -.03, p =.898) had a significant influence on exerted e↵ort. Importantly,
however, we observed a significant interaction ( = .63, p =.049), suggesting that the relative
e↵ectiveness of prosocial incentive schemes is e↵ected by the stakes involved.
Our control condition provided insight into the e↵ectiveness of the incentive schemes
relative to when no explicit incentives were provided. When no incentives were provided,
individuals exerted less e↵ort than under both prosocial incentive schemes, as well as under
the self-benefiting incentive scheme when stakes were high (all ps < .02). However, when
incentive levels were low in the self-benefiting incentive scheme, participants worked about
as hard as when no incentives were provided (M =1.14, SD=.34 vs. M =1.07, SD=.29),
t(71)=.90, p =.369. This o↵ers further support for the notion that when incentives are
low, prosocial incentive schemes may be superior to standard ones in motivating e↵ort and
performance.
To ensure that our results are robust to outliers, we conducted non-parametric permutation tests on the distributions of e↵ort under the 4 incentive schemes. Using permutation
methods, we constructed test statistics based on Schmid and Trede (1996) and conducted
one-sided tests for stochastic dominance and separatedness of the distributions (see also Anderson, DiTraglia and Gerlach, 2011; Ditraglia, 2006). The test statistics identify the degree
to which one distribution lies to the right of the other, taking into account both the consistency of di↵erences between distributions (i.e. how often they crossed) and the magnitudes
of the di↵erences.2
The results of non-parametric distributional tests, p-values computed by Monte-Carlo
methods with 10,000 repetitions, were consistent with the parametric tests above. We found
a significant di↵erence between the distributions of e↵ort For Others and e↵ort For Self
under Low incentives (p =.027), as well as between the distribution of e↵ort For Others and
the control condition (p =.002). At High incentives, however, the distributions of e↵ort For
2

For the data and a full description of how these tests were constructed, see Online Appendix
(https://sites.google.com/site/alexoimas/prosocialincentives).

9

Others and For Self did not di↵er (p =.279), and both were significantly di↵erent than the
distribution of e↵ort in the control condition (both ps < .01).
To further rule out that our results were driven by outliers, we re-ran the analyses while
winsorizing R at the upper bounds of the 95% confidence intervals of the treatments, which
were 1.79, 1.80, 1.25 and 2.21 under the For Others (Low, High) and For Self (Low, High)
incentive schemes, respectively.3 The results were robust to winsorizing the data: individuals
worked harder for charity than themselves at low incentive levels (t(72)=3.24, p =.001), and
this di↵erence disappeared when incentives were raised (t(74)=1.32, p =.19). Winsorizing R
at a constant value (e.g., 3) did not change the results.4

3

Choice Experiment

We recruited 57 students from a university wide subject pool to participate in this study.
Subjects were given a $5 show up fee and could earn more depending on the condition and
e↵ort exerted.
E↵ort was measured similarly to Study 1. All participants squeezed the hand dynamometer for 60 seconds to obtain a baseline measurement and were informed of their initial force
output. At the outset of the study, each participant was randomly assigned into one of two
conditions: Low Incentives or High Incentives. They were then asked to choose one of two
payment schemes, For Self (self-benefiting) or For Others (prosocial), prior to squeezing the
device again for 60 seconds.
As in Study 1, e↵ort exerted For Others benefited the Make-A-Wish Foundation and
e↵ort For Self was tied to payment received at the end of the experiment. Incentive under
each condition are shown in Table 2.

3

The maximum Rs under the For Others (Low, High) and For Self (Low, High) incentive schemes were
4.55, 6.49, 1.90 and 5.88, respectively.
4
See Online Appendix for further robustness checks

10

Table 2.
Treatment Summary
Incentive

Gender

Initial

Treatment

(per 25k Newtons)

N

(% Male)

(Newtons)

R

Low Incentives

$0.05

30

37%

56,621

1.41

High Incentives

$2.00

27

52%

64,387

1.37

Results
Averages of initial exerted e↵ort for both treatments are listed in Table 2. A pairwise comparison revealed no significant di↵erence in initial e↵ort, t(55)=-1.00, ns. Gender composition
did not di↵er by treatment, t(55)=-1.15, ns.
Our results suggest that individuals did indeed anticipate the benefits of prosocial vs.
self-benefiting incentives as implied by Study 1 (see Figure 2). At Low incentive levels, 77%
(23) of participants chose to work For Others, compared to 23% (7) who chose to work For
Self. In contrast, at High incentive levels 15% (4) chose to work For Others, compared to 85%
(23) who chose to work For Self. This di↵erence was significant ( 2 (1) = 21.81; p <.001).
Given the issues of selection in both incentive treatments, we cannot meaningfully compare the e↵ort exerted by individuals under the two incentive schemes. Moreover, the resulting imbalance in cell sizes left these types of analyses severely underpowered. Nonetheless,
results do appear to fit the general pattern outlined by our hypotheses, with the average R
equaling 1.47 in the For Others condition versus 1.21 in the For Self when incentives were
Low, and the same corresponding averages equaling 1.07 and 1.43 when incentives were High.

4

Discussion

Taking measured e↵ort as a proxy for utility derived from the respective incentives, our
findings suggest that individuals derive greater utility from prosocial spending than selfbenefiting compensation, but only when the stakes are low. In addition, the utility derived

11

Figure 2. Percentage of Participants Choosing Incentive Scheme
100%
85%

90%
80%

77%

70%
60%
For Others
50%

For Self

40%
30%

23%
15%

20%
10%
0%
Low Incentive

High Incentive

is anticipated ex-ante: individuals choose to work for charity rather than themselves at low
incentives, but prefer the opposite when stakes are raised.
Our results are consistent with a model of pure warm glow giving and help inform the
literature on optimal incentive design. Traditional economic reasoning suggests that direct
monetary payment will provide the strongest incentives. However, these self-benefiting monetary incentives have been shown to backfire, particularly when the payment stakes are low
(Deci, 1971; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000): monetary incentives may decrease prosocial behavior (Ariely, Bracha and Meier, 2009), reduce socially efficient contributions to a public
good (Fuster and Meier, 2009), and result in lower e↵ort provision than could be achieved
with no payment scheme at all (Gneezy et al., 2011; Heyman and Ariely, 2004). These findings suggest that there may be situations where direct monetary compensation is not the
optimal incentive scheme to motivate individuals to exert e↵ort.
Suppose that a company o↵ers incentives to its employees to lose weight. Providing low
direct compensation, e.g. $5 per pound lost, may not be enough to motivate individuals
to adopt a healthier routine, and may in fact crowd out positive steps they were already
taking. Indeed, recent evidence on the e↵ectiveness of paying people directly for weight loss
12

has been mixed at best (Kullgren, Troxel, Loewenstein, Asch, Norton, Wesby, Tao, Zhu and
Volpp, 2013). Our results suggest that prosocial incentives may provide stronger motivation
for individuals to lose weight than “standard,” self-benefiting incentives. Particularly, if the
budget for a certain task or project is small, organizations should take advantage of the scope
insensitivity of prosocial incentives by tying small charitable contributions to performance
rather than compensating individuals directly.
Future research should explore whether making the contributions under a prosocial incentive scheme public or private has an e↵ect on e↵ort provision. Given the social signaling
value of prosocial behavior, a prosocial incentive scheme may be even more e↵ective in motivating individuals when e↵ort-contingent contributions are public. In addition, since many
employment contexts carry the expectation of direct compensation, it would be useful to compare the performance of individuals under a prosocial incentive scheme to when prosocial
and self-benefiting incentives are mixed (Bracha and Brown, 2009; Tonin and Vlassopoulos,
2010, 2012).

13

References
Anderson, L. R., DiTraglia, F. J. and Gerlach, J. R. (2011). Measuring altruism
in a public goods experiment: acomparison of U.S. and Czech subjects. Experimental
Economics, 14 (3), 426–437.
Andreoni, J. (1988). Privately Provided Public Goods In A Large Economy - The Limits
Of Altruism. Journal of Public Economics, 35, 57–73.
— (1989). Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to charity and ricardian equivalence.
The Journal of Political Economy, 97 (6), 1447–1458.
— (1990). Impure altruism and donations to public goods: a theory of warm-glow giving.
The Economic Journal, 100, 464–477.
— (1993). An experimental test of the public-goods crowding-out hypothesis. American
Economic Review, 83 (5), 1317–1327.
Ariely, D., Bracha, A. and Meier, S. (2009). Doing Good or Doing Well? Image
Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially. American Economic Review,
99 (1), 544–555.
Bracha, A. and Brown, D. J. (2009). A↵ective Decision Making: A Behavioral Theory
of Choice. mimeo.
Charness, G. and Rabin, M. (2002). Understanding social preferences with simple tests.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (3), 817–869.
Deci, E. L. (1971). E↵ects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 18 (1), 105–115.
Ditraglia, F. J. (2006). Experimental Public Goods in Prague and Williamsburg: An
International Comparison. mimeo, College of William and Mary.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B. and Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others
promotes happiness. Science (New York, N.Y.), 319 (5870), 1687–8.
14

Fuster, A. and Meier, S. (2009). Another Hidden Cost of Incentives: The Detrimental
E↵ect on Norm Enforcement. Management Science, 56 (1), 57–70.
Gneezy, U., Meier, S. and Rey-Biel, P. (2011). When and Why Incentives (Don’t)
Work to Modify Behavior. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (4), 191–210.
— and Rustichini, A. (2000). Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115 (3), 791–810.
Heyman, J. and Ariely, D. (2004). E↵ort for payment. A tale of two markets. Psychological science, 15 (11), 787–93.
Hsee, C. K. and Rottenstreich, Y. (2004). Music, pandas, and muggers: on the a↵ective
psychology of value. Journal of experimental psychology. General, 133 (1), 23–30.
Kullgren, J. T., Troxel, A. B., Loewenstein, G., Asch, D. A., Norton, L. A.,
Wesby, L., Tao, Y., Zhu, J. and Volpp, K. G. (2013). Individual- versus group-based
financial incentives for weight loss: a randomized, controlled trial. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 158 (7), 505–14.
Linardi, S. and McConnell, M. A. (2011). No excuses for good behavior: Volunteering
and the social environment. Journal of Public Economics, 95 (5-6), 445–454.
Loewenstein, G. F., Thompson, L. and Bazerman, M. H. (1989). Social utility and
decision making in interpersonal contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
57 (3), 426–441.
Norton, M. I., Anik, L., Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W. and Quoidbach, J. (2012).
Prosocial Incentives Increase Employee Satisfaction and Team Performance. mimeo, pp.
1–18.
Schmid, F. and Trede, M. (1996). Testing for first-order stochastic dominance : a new
distribution-free test. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series D (The Statistician),
45 (3), 371–380.
15

Small, D. a., Loewenstein, G. and Slovic, P. (2007). Sympathy and callousness:
The impact of deliberative thought on donations to identifiable and statistical victims.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102 (2), 143–153.
Tonin, M. and Vlassopoulos, M. (2010). Disentangling the sources of pro-socially motivated e↵ort: A field experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 94 (11-12), 1086–1092.
— and — (2012). Social incentives matter: Evidence from an online real e↵ort experiment.
IZA Discussion Paper No. 6716.

16

