JENNIFER L. AAKER*
Although a considerable amount of research in personality psychology
has been done to conceptualize human personality, identify the "Big Five"
dimensions, and explore the meaning of each dimension, no parallel
research has been conducted in consumer behavior on brand personality. Consequently, an understanding of the symbolic use of brands has
been limited in the consumer behavior literature. In this research, the
author develops a theoretical framework of the brand personality construct by determining the number and nature of dimensions of brand personality (Sincerity, Excitement, Competence, Sophistication, and
Ruggedness). To measure the five brand personality dimensions, a reliable, valid, and generalizable measurement scale is created. Finally, theoretical and practical implications regarding the symbolic use of brands
are discussed.

Dimensions of Brand Personality
In consumer behavior research, a considerable amount of
attention has been given to the construct brand personality,
which refers to the set of human characteristics associated
with a brand. Researchers have focused on how the personality of a brand enables a consumer to express his or her own
self (Belk 1988), an ideal self (Malhotra 1988), or specific
dimensions of the self (Kleine, Kleine, and Kernan 1993)
through the use of a brand. Practitioners view it as a key way
to differentiate a brand in a product category (Halliday
1996), as a central driver of consumer preference and usage
(BielI993), and as a common denominator that can be used
to market a brand across cultures (Plummer 1985).
However, despite this interest, research on brand personality and the symbolic use of brands more generally has remained limited due in part to the lack of consensus regarding what brand personality really is. How is it defined and
thereby distinguished from related constructs? Does it have
a framework or set of dimensions similar to or different from
the "Big Five" dimensions of human personality? As a result, an understanding of how and when brand personality
relates to a consumer's personality and thereby influences
consumer preference has remained elusive (see Sirgy 1982).
Furthermore, no research has been conducted to develop
systematically a reliable, valid, and generalizable scale to
measure brand personality. Currently, researchers rely on

measurement scales that tend to be ad hoc (e.g., checklists,
photo-sorts, symbolic analogy) or taken directly from personality psychology but not validated in the context of
brands (Kassarjian 1971). As a result, the theoretical generalizability and implications stemming from the findings in
the research on the symbolic use of brands are questionable.
The objective of this research is to address these limitations by drawing on research on the "Big Five" human personality structure to develop a theoretical framework of
brand personality dimensions (Norman 1963; Tupes and
Christal 1958) and a reliable, valid, and generalizable scale
that measures these dimensions.
THE BRAND PERSONALITY CONSTRUCT
Brand personality is defined formally here as "the set of
human characteristics associated with a brand." To illustrate,
Absolut vodka personified tends to be described as a cool,
hip, contemporary 25-year old, whereas Stoli's personified
tends to be described as an intellectual, conservative, older
man. In contrast to "product-related attributes," which tend
to serve a utilitarian function for consumers, brand personality tends to serve a symbolic or self-expressive function
(Keller 1993).
It is argued that the symbolic use of brands is possible because consumers often imbue brands with human personality traits (termed animism; e.g., Gilmore 1919). Consumers
easily can think about brands as if they were celebrities or
famous historical figures (Rook 1985) and as they relate to
one's own self (Fournier 1994), which may be due in part to
the strategies used by advertisers to imbue a brand with personality traits such as anthropomorphization (e.g., California Raisins), personification (e.g., Jolly Green Giant), and
the creation of user imagery (e.g., Charlie girl). Through
such techniques, the personality traits associated with a
brand, such as those associated with an individual, tend to be

*Jennifer Aaker is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Anderson School of
Management, University of California, Los Angeles. The author gratefully
acknowledges the help of Richard Bagozzi, Lauren Block, Susan Broniarczyk, Lee Cooper, Gavan Fitzsimons, Jim Lattin, Durairaj Maheswaran,
Don Morrison, Bernd Schmitt, the editor, and the reviewers; as well as
Andre Richards, David Spengler, and Steve Goldstein at Levi-Strauss, who
provided the funding for much of this research. Great amounts of thanks to
Kevin Lane Keller who provided insight and support at each stage of this
research.

347

Journal of Marketing Research
Vol. XXXIV (August 1997),347-356

348
relatively enduring and distinct. For example, the personality traits associated with Coca-Cola are cool, all-American,
and real; these traits are relatively enduring (Pendergrast
1993) and differentiate Coke from its competitors (e.g., Pepsi being young, exciting, and hip; Dr Pepper being nonconforming, unique, and fun; Plummer 1985).
Motivated by this logic, previous research has suggested
that the greater the congruity between the human characteristics that consistently and distinctively describe an individual's actual or ideal self and those that describe a brand, the
greater the preference for the brand (e.g., Malhotra 1988;
Sirgy 1982). However, the empirical exploration of this hypothesis has been handicapped by a limited conceptual understanding of the brand personality construct and the psychological mechanism by which it operates.
Antecedents of Brand Personality
Although human and brand personality traits might share
a similar conceptualization (Epstein 1977), they differ in
terms of how they are formed. Perceptions of human personality traits are inferred on the basis of an individual's
behavior, physical characteristics, attitudes and beliefs, and
demographic characteristics (Park 1986). In contrast, perceptions of brand personality traits can be formed and influenced by any direct or indirect contact that the consumer has
with the brand (Plummer 1985). Personality traits come to
be associated with a brand in a direct way by the people
associated with the brand-such as the brand's user
imagery, which is defined here as "the set of human characteristics associated with the typical user of a brand"; the
company's employees or CEO; and the brand's product
endorsers. In this way, the personality traits of the people
associated with the brand are transferred directly to the
brand (McCracken 1989). In addition, however, personality
traits come to be associated with a brand in an indirect way
through product-related attributes, product category associations, brand name, symbol or logo, advertising style, price,
and distribution channel (Batra, Lehmann, and Singh 1993).
In addition to personality characteristics, researchers
(Levy 1959, p. 12) argue that brand personality includes demographic characteristics such as gender ("Usually it is hard
to evade thinking of inanimate things as male or female"),
age ("Just as most people usually recognize whether something is addressed to them as a man or a woman, so are they
sensitive to symbols of age"), and class ("The possession of
mink is hardly a matter of winter warmth alone"). Similar to
personality characteristics, these demographic characteristics also are inferred directly from the brand's user imagery,
employees, or product endorsers and indirectly from other
brand associations. For example, driven by distinct user imagery, Virginia Slims tends to be thought of as feminine,
whereas Marlboro (currently) tends to be perceived as masculine. Partly due to the relative recency with which the two
brands entered the market, Apple is considered to be young,
and IBM is considered to be older. On the basis of their different pricing strategies, Saks Fifth Avenue is perceived as
upper class, whereas Kmart is perceived as blue collar.
Measuring Brand Personality
To examine how the relationship between brand and
human personality may drive consumer preference, two
types of brand personality scales are used. The first type are

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 1997
ad hoc scales, which typically are composed of a set of traits
ranging from 20 to 300. However, though useful, these
scales tend to be atheoretical in nature-often developed for
the purposes of a specific research study. As a result, key
traits may be missing from such scales. Furthermore, the
traits that are selected often are chosen arbitrarily, which
casts doubt on the scales' reliability and validity.
The second type of brand personality scales are those that
are more theoretical in nature, but are based on human personality scales that have not been validated in the context of
brands (e.g., Bellenger, Steinberg, and Stanton 1976; Dolich
1969). However, though some dimensions (or factors) ofhuman personality may be mirrored in brands, others might
not. As a result, the validity of such brand personality scales
often is questionable, leading researchers to argue that "if
unequivocal results are to emerge [in the literature on the
symbolic use of brands] consumer behavior researchers
must develop their own definitions and design their own instruments to measure the personality variables that go into
the purchase decision" (italics in original; Kassarjian 1971,
p.415).
In this research, a framework of brand personality dimensions is developed. By isolating these distinct dimensions
versus treating brand personality as a unidimensional construct, the different types of brand personalities can be distinguished, and the multiple ways in which the brand personality construct influences consumer preference may be
understood better.
In addition, a scale is developed to provide a basis for theory-building on the symbolic use of brands. Drawing on research by Malhotra (1981), who outlines a process of scale
development for measuring self, person, and product constructs, reliability and validity are established by relying on
subjects representative of the U.S. population, systematically selecting from a large pool of traits to establish content
validity, and demonstrating the robustness of the five dimensions with an independent set of brands and subjects.
Perhaps most important, this framework and scale are
generalizable across product categories. Beyond practical
benefits, a generalizable framework and scale enable researchers to understand the symbolic use of brands in general versus the symbolic use of brands within a particular
category. As a result, the symbolic nature of brands can be
understood at the same level as the utilitarian nature of
brands, which tends to be captured by models that are generalizable across product categories (e.g., multi-attribute
model; Fishbein and Ajzen 1975). Therefore, like the multiattribute model, which sheds insight into when and why
consumers buy brands for utilitarian purposes, a cross-category framework and scale can provide theoretical insights
into when and why consumers buy brands for self-expressive purposes.
In contrast, consider the difficulties of a theoretician's attempt to explore hypotheses regarding antecedents and consequences of brand personality using personality scales that
apply only to a single product category. It would be difficult
to use cross-category stimuli, explore possible moderating
effects of product type, or examine the psychological mechanism that drives the symbolic use of brands across product
categories, individuals, and cultures. Thus, product category-specific personality scales are of limited use in building
theory.

Dimensions of Brand Personality
WHAT IS BRAND PERSONALITY?

To establish content validity, the development of a comprehensive and representative set of personality traits and
the process of identifying a set of stimuli are described.
Personality Trait Generation
Overview. In the first stage of personality trait generation,
a set of 309 candidate traits was created by eliminating
redundancy from trait lists optioned from three sources: personality scales from psychology, personality scales used by
marketers (academics and practitioners), and original qualitative research. In the second stage, this set of traits was
reduced to a more manageable number (114).
First stage. Considerable research in psychology has converged on a stable, robust, and reliable factorial composition
of human personality, the "Big Five." A series of scales that
have been used to develop and refine the "Big Five," including the original work (Norman 1963; Tupes and Christal
1958), NEG Model (McCrae and Costa 1989), Big Five Prototypes (John 1990), ACL (Piedmont, McCrae, and Costa
1991), and Inter-Circumplex Model (McCrae and Costa
1989), contributed a total of 204 unique traits.
In addition, personality scales used by academics (Alt and
Griggs 1988; Batra, Lehmann, and Singh 1993; Levy 1959;
Malhotra 1981; Plummer 1985; Wells et al. 1957) and practitioners (an advertising agency, a market research supplier,
and a client company) added a total of 133 unique traits.
Finally, to ensure that the list was complete and the traits
were familiar and meaningful to people, a free-association
task was conducted. Subjects (n = 16, 50% female, mean
age = 25) were paid $40 each to participate in a study on the
types of personality traits associated with brands. Subjects
were asked to write down the personality traits that first
came to mind when thinking about two brands in three types
of product categories (as identified by Ratchford 1987 in the
Appendix; think-feel dimensions): symbolic (jeans, cosmetics, and fragrance), utilitarian (computers, electronics, and
appliances), and both symbolic and utilitarian (automobiles,
beverages, and athletic shoes). I The symbolic-utilitarian
framework (Katz 1960) was used here and in subsequent
studies as a systematic way to select brands that span a variety of categories and serve multiple functions, so as to enhance the generalizability of the resulting scale. The 295
unique traits resulting from this task were added to the pool
of personality traits.
The result of the first trait generation stage left 309 nonredundant candidate personality traits.
Second stage. In the second trait generation stage, the 309
traits were reduced to a more manageable number. Subjects
(n = 25, 70% female, mean age = 33) were paid $20 each to
participate in a study on the types of personality traits assoITo ensure that the pair of brands, which also vary on the symbolic-utilitarian continuum, in a product category were selected systematically, an
independent set of subjects (n = 20, 50% female, mean age = 28) was asked
to rate the extent to which 36 brands in nine product categories were relatively more "symbolic (i.e., self-expressive) versus utilitarian (i.e., functional)" in nature. The brands that received the highest rating on the "symbolic" dimension are listed first, followed by the brands that received the
highest rating on the "utilitarian" dimension: jeans (Guess, Wrangler), cosmetics (Rev lon, Mary Kay), fragrance (Obsession, Chanel), computers
(IBM, Apple), electronics (GE, Sony), appliances (Maytag, Kitchen Aid),
cars (Porsche, Volvo), beverages (Diet Coke, Calistoga) and athletic shoes
(LA Gear. Adidas).

349
ciated with brands. To communicate the brand personality
concept to subjects, subjects were given an example of the
personality of a brand in a symbolic product category
(Wrangler jeans-macho, rough, and sturdy), a utilitarian
product category (Pepto Bismal stomach medication--calm,
sweet, and giving), and a product category that was both
symbolic and utilitarian (Dr Pepper soft drink-individualistic, gregarious, and bold). In addition, to reduce the
chances of focusing on a particular brand or product category, subjects were told, "Since this study is not about any
brand or product category in particular, try to think of as
many different types of brands in various product categories
when you evaluate each trait." Subjects rated how descriptive the 309 traits were of brands in general (I = not at all
descriptive, 7 = extremely descriptive). To isolate the most
relevant traits, the cutoff for the final list of personality traits
was a scale rating of 6 (very descriptive), thereby leaving
114 personality traits for the study.
Stimuli Selection

Three criteria guided the selection of a comprehensive and
representative set of brands: First, salient, well-known brands
were chosen so that a national sample could be used; second,
a wide variety of brands representing a spectrum of personality types was selected to enhance the scope of the scale; and
third, a range of product categories, both symbolic and utilitarian, was drawn upon to enhance scale generalizability.
To identify the brands, an EquiTrend study (1992) was
used. Here, 131 brands in 39 product categories and services
were rated by a national sample on both "salience" (proportion of consumers who have an opinion about the brand) and
"brand personality" (on the basis of 30 personality traits).
The brands selected all had high salience ratings (above
50%). In addition, they represented different personality
profiles as determined by a clustering procedure in which
the 131 brands fell into nine distinct clusters. Four brands
were chosen randomly from each of these clusters on the basis of one guiding criteria: Approximately the same number
of brands were to be included from symbolic, utilitarian, and
symbolic/utilitarian types of product categories. This set of
37 brands included those that serve symbolic functions (e.g.,
clothing, cosmetics, fragrance), utilitarian functions (e.g.,
film, pain relievers, toothpaste), and both symbolic and utilitarian functions (e.g., computers, soft drinks, tennis shoes).
For a list of the brands, see Table I.
Choosing a large number of brands has the advantage of
increasing the generalizability and robustness of the measurement scale. Its disadvantage, however, is possible subject fatigue and boredom, which potentially could result in
response bias. To minimize this problem, one brand from
each of the nine clusters was selected and placed into one of
four "Brand Groups," such that each Brand Group contained
a similar profile of brands. In this way, personality heterogeneity in each of the Brand Groups similar to that of the total sample of brands was maintained. Finally, one brand
(Levi's jeans) was included in each of the four Brand
Groups so that the extent to which the four distinct groups
of subjects differed in their brand personality perceptions
could be assessed. Thus, a total of 37 brands were included.
No significant differences were found among the mean
ratings of Levi's jeans in the four groups, which suggests
high levels of agreement of the human characteristics asso-

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 1997

350

Table 1
FOUR BRAND GROUPS OF TEN BRANDS
Brand Group I

Crest toothpaste
Campbell's soup
Kmart stores
Porsche automobiles
Reebok athletic shoes
Michelin tires
Diet Coke cola
MTV station
IBM computers
Levi's jeans

Brand Group 2

Brand Group 3

Brand Group 4

Kodak film
Hershey's candy bar
Pepsi Cola soft drinks
Oil of Olay lotion
AMEX credit cards
Sony television
Advil pain reliever
MCI telephone service
Mercedes automobiles
Levi's jeans

Lego toys
Hallmark cards
Lee jeans
Charlie perfume
ESPN station
AT&T phone service
Apple computers
Avon cosmetics
Lexus automobiles
Levi's jeans

Cheerios cereal
Mattei toys
Saturn automobiles
Guess? jeans
Nike athletic shoes
CNN station
Revlon cosmetics
McDonald's restaurants
Visa credit cards
Levi's jeans

ciated with a particular brand. Furthermore, the original ratings on the EquiTrend personality traits for the nine sets of
four brands were examined to confirm their high levels of
similarity; each of the four brands within each set were similar on all personality traits.
METHOD
Subjects

The external validity and generalizability of the brand
personality scale depended on the subjects on which the
scale was based. Therefore, a nonstudent sample was used;
one that represented the U.S. population with respect to five
demographic dimensions (gender, age, household income,
ethnicity, and geographic location) as identified in the 1992
U.S. Bureau of the Census. For example, 56% of the sample
was female, 20% was 18-24 years of age, 34% had a household income of more than $50,000, 10% was African-American, and 20% lived in the Northeast. The subjects in the
four Brand Groups were selected to have the same profiles
as the total sample. Unless otherwise specified, the same
demographic profile of subjects is used in all remaining
stages of this research.
To stimulate a high return rate, a total of 1200 questionnaires was sent via Federal Express to subjects from a national mail panel. Approximately 55% of the subjects returned the questionnaires (n = 631).
Procedure

Subjects, who participated in the study in exchange for a
gift of their choosing and a chance to win three first prizes
of $250 and five second prizes of $50, received the following set of instructions:
Most of the following questions are about a variety of
brands of products or services. We would like you to
think of each brand as if it were a person. This may
sound unusual, but think of the set of human characteristics associated with each brand. For example, you
might think that the human characteristics associated
with Pepto Bismal are kind, warm, caring, soothing,
gentle, trustworthy and dependable. The human characteristics associated with Dr Pepper might be non-conforming, fun, interesting, exciting and off-beat. We're
interested in finding out which personality traits or human characteristics come to mind when you think of a
particular brand.
Using a five-point Likert scale (I = not at all descriptive,
5 = extremely descriptive), subjects were asked to rate the

extent to which the 114 personality traits describe a specific
brand.s Primarily positively valenced traits were used
because brands typically are linked to positive (versus negative) associations and because the ultimate use of the scale
is to determine the extent to which brand personality affects
the probability that consumers will approach (versus avoid)
products.
Subjects repeated the rating task for the nine additional
brands in the particular Brand Group. To control for primacy and recency effects, the order in which the traits were
presented for each brand was counterbalanced. In addition,
the order in which the ten brands were presented in the questionnaire was rotated completely.
IDENTIFYING THE BRAND
PERSONALITY DIMENSIONS

Because the objective of this stage was to identify the
brand personality dimensions as perceived in consumers'
minds, rather than the individual differences in how different people respond to single brands, a state (versus trait) "0"
analysis was used where the correlation matrix for the personality traits (n = 114) correlated across the brands (n = 37)
is analyzed, and the scores of each brand on each personality trait are averaged across subjects (n = 631). The 114 x
114 correlation matrix was factor-analyzed using principal
components analysis and a varimax rotation. A five-factor
solution resulted on the basis of the following criteria:
I. All five factors had eigenvalues greater than one.
2. A significantdip in the Scree plot followed the fifth factor.
3. The first five factors were the most meaningful, rich, and

interpretable.!

4. The five-factor solution explained a high level of variance in
brand personality (92%).
5. The five-factor solution was the most stable and robust, as
illustrated by subsample factor analyses described subsequently (e.g., males versus females, younger versus older
subjects).
2A Likert scale was preferred over a semantic-differential scale because
the objective of this study was to determine the extent to which a brand can
be described by certain human characteristics (i.e., brand personality content and strength), rather than to determine when brands are associated with
negative versus positive personality characteristics (i.e., brand personality
valence).
3Although at least nine traits loaded on each of the first five factors, only
three traits loaded on the sixth ("special," "classic," and "tasteful") and seventh ("big," "successful," and "leader") factors. No traits loaded on any
remaining factors. More detailed information as well as the raw correlation
matrix and factor scores are available from the author.

Dimensions of Brand Personality

351

With the exception of four traits (urban, proud, healthy,
and flexible), all of the traits had high loadings ( > .60) on
one of the five factors and relatively low loadings on the
other four factors. Because traits that load below .40 do not
add to measure purification (Nunnally 1978), these four
traits were removed and the factor analysis rerun. The result
was an easily interpretable five-factor solution with high
loadings and communalities for each of the traits. Moreover,
the variance explained in each of the factors was relatively
high (see Table 2).
The names determined to represent best the types of concepts subsumed in each of the five dimensions were Sincerity (e.g., typified by Hallmark cards), Excitement (e.g.,
MTV channel), Competence (e.g., The Wall Street Journal
newspapers), Sophistication (e.g., Guess jeans), and
Ruggedness (e.g., Nike tennis shoes)."
ASSESSING THE STABILITY OF THE BRAND
PERSONALITY DIMENSIONS

One limitation associated with factor analysis is potential
differences in the meaning of the personality traits among
distinct groups of people. Therefore, to test the generality of
the five brand personality dimensions and to determine if the
measurement scale can be used in future research with particular groups of subjects (e.g., students), separate principal
component factor analyses (with varimax rotation and unrestricted number of factors to be extracted) were run on four
subsamples of subjects; males (n = 278), females (n = 353),
younger subjects (n = 316), and older subjects (n = 315).
The similarity of the results from the four principal components factor analyses was assessed both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Qualitatively, an inspection of the results
shows that the three criteria for similar factor structures
were met (Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum 1957): (1) the
same number of factors were extracted-five; (2) the same
type of five factors resulted (i.e., the same traits loaded on
the same factors as in the total-sample factor analysis); (3)
relatively similar weights for the five factors existed among
the four subpopulations. In addition, the variance explained
by each factor in the four groups was approximately the
same. The largest difference was for Sincerity, which explained 27% of the variance for the younger subject sample
versus 31 % of the variance for the older subject sample.
Quantitatively, factor congruence correlations (the average

4These names were chosen after the second measurement phase but are
reported here to simplify the terminology used. Three of these names were
represented in trait form in the five dimensions (sincere. exciting. and
rugged).

factor correlations between the subsamples) were calculated
and ranged from .92 to .95. Although no statistical tests are
associated with this coefficient, the factor structure is interpreted as essentially invariant if congruence coefficients are
higher than .90 (Everett 1983).
REPRESENTING THE FIVE BRAND
PERSONALITY DIMENSIONS: THE FINAL
SET OF PERSONALITY TRAITS

The goal of the next phase was to identify the traits that
most reliably, accurately, and comprehensively represent the
five dimensions. Therefore, a facet identification phase was
conducted, whereby each set of items in the five factors
identified in the principal components analysis was factoranalyzed individually. The result of those five factor analyses was a set of "facets." To provide a reliable representation
of each facet (Nunnally 1978), three traits from each facet
were selected.
Facet Identification

Because many of the factors are broad, personality psychologists (e.g., Church and Burke 1994; McCrae and Costa
1989) focus on different "facets" subsumed by each factor to
select representative traits that provide both breadth and
depth and to serve as a framework for establishing the similarities and differences among alternative conceptions of the
"Big Five." To identify the facets, the set of items in each
factor (which resulted from the principal components analysis) is factor-analyzed individually, a process that results in
an unconstrained set of facets. For example, the Extroversion factor of human personality consists of six facets:
Warmth, Gregariousness, Assertiveness, Activity, Excitement-Seeking, anti Positive Emotions. However, it should be
noted that these facets are not factors in and of themselves,
but rather are "used to select and refine items ... to improve
the scales, not to revise the constructs" (Church and Burke
1994, p. 107).
Therefore, in this research, the set of items in each of the
five factors was factor-analyzed individually using principal
components analysis, a varimax rotation scheme, and an unrestricted number of factors to be extracted. The result of the
five individual factor analyses was a total of 15 facets: Sincerity and Excitement each had four facets, Competence had
three, and Sophistication and Ruggedness each had two.
The next stage was to select the best traits represented in
each of the 15 facets to be included in the scale. To add to
the scale's reliability and comprehensiveness while minimizing trait redundancy, a clustering procedure outlined by
Nunnally (1978) was followed, whereby three clusters were

Table 2
FIVE DIMENSIONS OF BRAND PERSONALITY

Name
Sincerity
Excitement
Competence
Sophistication
Ruggedness

Dimension

Variance
Explained

Eigenvalue

Traits with Highest
Item-to- Total Correlations

I
2
3
4
5

26.5%
25.1%
17.5%
11.9%
8.8%

31.4
27.9
14.2
9.2
6.7

Domestic. honest. genuine. cheerful
Daring. spirited. imaginative. up-to-date
Reliable. responsible. dependable. efficient
Glamorous. pretentious, charming, romantic
Tough, strong. outdoorsy, rugged

352

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 1997

formed for each facet.> Next, the trait with the highest itemto-total correlation in each cluster was identified, leaving 45
traits (3 traits for each of the 15 facets) to be included in the
final Brand Personality Scale. All of these traits had high
item-to-total correlations on both the facets (ranging from
.75 to .98) and their factors (ranging from .50 to .97), thereby ensuring high internal consistency. See Figure 1 for the
brand personality framework, which includes the five dimensions and 15 facets.

Time I and Time 2 on the 45 traits was .80, ranging from .49
to .90. Three traits with test-retest correlations below .60
were dropped from the scale. Based on the remaining 42trait scale, the test-retest correlations for each of the five factors were as follows: Sincerity = .75, Excitement = .74,
Competence = .76, Sophistication = .75, and Ruggedness =
.77, all of which met Nunnally's (1978) criterion of testretest scores of greater than .70 at this stage of research.

ARE THE FIVE BRAND PERSONALITY
DIMENSIONS RELIABLE?

Cronbach's alphas were calculated for each of the five
dimensions using the 42-trait scale. The resulting values
were high: Sincerity = .93, Excitement = .95, Competence =
.93, Sophistication = .91, and Ruggedness = .90. In addition,
all traits within each of the five dimensions had high itemto-total correlations (averaging .85, all exceeding .55),
which indicate high levels of internal reliability.

To determine the degree to which the five brand personality dimensions will yield consistent results, reliability was
assessed in two ways: test-retest correlations and Cronbach's alpha.
Test-Retest Reliability

A random subset of 200 subjects (50 in each of the four
Brand Groups) was selected from the original sample of
subjects. To minimize both potential memory effects, in
which subjects might remember their responses to the original questionnaire, and "brand personality" effects, in which
differences in the responses at Time 1 and 2 might differ
because of gradual changes in the brand personalities over
time, the test-retest questionnaire was sent two months after
the original questionnaire. To avoid systematic bias, all 114
traits were included in the test-retest questionnaire.
The test-retest sample was composed of 81 subjects (a
41 % return rate). The average Pearson correlation between
SIn this clustering procedure, the trait with the highest item-to-total correlation within a facet was identified and formed the nucleus of the first
cluster. Then, the traits that were correlated most highly with the nucleus
trait were identified (r > .90), forming the first cluster in the facet. Next, the
nucleus for the second cluster was obtained by identifying the trait with the
next highest item-to-total correlation in the facet. Traits with relatively high
correlations with the second nucleus and relatively low correlations (r <
.89) with the first nucleus were then identified to form the second cluster.
This procedure was repeated until all clusters of the facet were identified
(which was three clusters for 13 of the facets and four for the remaining 2
facets, with only one trait in the final fourth cluster). For more details, see
Church and Burke (1994).

Cronbach's Alpha

CONFIRMING THE BRAND PERSONALITY
DIMENSIONS

The factor analysis conducted in the first measurement
purification phase raises two questions: First, to what extent
are the five dimensions based on the particular brands
selected as stimuli, and therefore biased if another set of
brands were used? Second, to what extent are the five
dimensions a function of the particular subject sample, and
therefore would change if another sample was used? To
answer these questions, an additional phase of research was
conducted: the confirmation of the five dimensions of brand
personality using a second independent sample of brands
and subjects.
Subjects and Procedure

A total of 250 questionnaires was sent via Federal
Express to subjects from a national mail panel. The end
sample included 180 subjects (a 72% response rate) with the
same demographic profile as those in the first phase. Subjects followed the identical procedure as in the first measurement purification phase, except for two changes: (1) 42
personality traits were used (versus 114) and (2) a different
set of brands was used.

Figure 1
A BRAND PERSONALITY FRAMEWORK

Dimensions of Brand Personality

353

Table 3

GENERAL DISCUSSION

CONFIRMATORY SAMPLE OF BRANDS
Marriott hotels
Macy's stores
The Wall Street Journal newspapers
Liz Claiborne clothing
Marlboro cigarettes
Maytag appliances
Metropolitan Life insurance
Taster's Choice coffee
Bic razors
Newsweek magazines

Holiday Inn hotels
Sears stores
USA Today newspapers
Benetton clothing
Virginia Slims cigarettes
KitchenAid appliances
Prudential insurance
Maxwell House coffee
Gillette razors
People magazines

Stimuli

The second sample of brands was drawn from the same
source as the original set of brands (EquiTrend 1992). Of the
39 product categories used in the original EquiTrend study,
23 were used in the first study. Of the remaining 16 product
categories, the 10 product categories that included more
than one brand were selected. Next, the two brands with the
highest salience ratings (all higher than 50%) in these 10
product categories were selected, for a total of 20 brands.
However, unlike the first measurement purification phase,
these brands were not chosen on the basis of their personality, so as to provide (1) a randomly chosen independent sample of brands and (2) a more stringent test of the five-factor
structure. See Table 3 for a list of these brands.
Analysis

Because the objective of the second measurement purification stage was to determine the extent to which the five
dimensions were robust over a new set of brands and subjects, a confirmatory factor analysis (Generalized Least
Squares was conducted), estimating a five-factor model for
42 traits. When the five factors were allowed to correlate the
fit statistics suggested a good model fit (cf. Bagozzi 'and
Heatherton 1994; Bentler 1990): the confirmatory fit index
(CFI; Bentler 1990) = .98, goodness-of-fit index (GFI) =
.91, adjusted goodness-of-fit index (AGFI) = .86, root mean
square residual (RMSR) = .07, and Chi-square = 9,216.80 6
(with 809 degrees of freedom; p < .01). When the factors
were restricted to be orthogonal, the fit statistics were CFI =
.94, GFI = .86, AGFI = .85, RMSR = .15, and Chi-square =
9,447.11 (with 819 degrees of freedom; p < .01). Finally, to
provide convergent support of the robustness of the structure, an exploratory principal components factor analysis
was conducted using a varimax rotation scheme and an
unconstrained number of factors to be extracted. The results
showed that the same number of factors resulted, the same
type of five factors resulted, and similar weights for the five
factors existed. Moreover, factor congruence correlations for
the five factors were high, ranging from .97 to .99, which
provides support for the stability of the five-factor structure.
For a list of the final set of personality traits that measure the
five dimensions of brand personality, see Appendix A.

6The chi-square is of limited value in this context and greater weight
should be given to other fit statistics "because [the chi-square statistic J is
sensitive to sample size and can lead to a rejection of a model differing in
a trivial way from the data" (Bagozzi and Heatherton 1994, p. 45).

Summary of the Research

The objective of this research was to develop a framework
of brand personality dimensions and a reliable, valid, and
generalizable scale to measure the dimensions. To identify
the brand personality dimensions, a total of 631 subjects
rated a subset of 37 brands on 114 personality traits. The
results of an exploratory principal components factor analysis suggest that consumers perceive that brands have five
distinct personality dimensions: Sincerity, Excitement,
Competence, Sophistication, and Ruggedness. The results of
a series of factor analyses run on subsets of subjects established the robustness of the brand personality dimensions. In
addition, high levels of reliability of the five dimensions
were established through test-retest correlations and Cronbach's alphas. Finally, the results of a confirmatory factor
analysis relying on 180 subjects, 20 brands in ten product
categories, and 42 personality traits provided additional support for the stability of the five dimensions. In summary, the
results of these analyses demonstrate that the framework of
brand personality dimensions, as represented by the 42-item
Brand Personality Scale, is reliable, valid, and generalizable.
The Symbolic Use of Brands: Brand Personality Versus
Human Personality

This research has both theoretical and practical implications. Theoretically, the brand personality framework developed in this research suggests that one reason for the weak
findings in the self-congruity literature may be due to the
asymmetric relationship in the structure of brand versus
human personality. Although it could be argued that three
brand personality dimensions relate to three of the "Big
Five" human personality dimensions (i.e., Agreeableness
and Sincerity both capture the idea of warmth and acceptance; Extroversion and Excitement both connote the
notions of sociability, energy, and activity; Conscientiousness and Competence both encapsulate responsibility,
dependability, and security), two dimensions (Sophistication
and Ruggedness) differ from any of the "Big Five" of human
personality (Briggs 1992). This pattern suggests that brand
personality dimensions might operate in different ways or
influence consumer preference for different reasons. For
example, whereas Sincerity, Excitement, and Competence
tap an innate part of human personality, Sophistication and
Ruggedness tap a dimension that individuals desire but do
not necessarily have. This premise is consistent with the
advertising created for prototypical Sophisticated brands
(e.g., Monet, Revlon, Mercedes), in which aspirational associations such as upper class, glamorous, and sexy are a
focus. Similarly, Ruggedness brands (e.g., Marlboro,
Harley-Davidson, Levi's) tend to glamorize American ideals
of Western, strength, and masculinity.
If true, this premise would suggest that one reason for the
weak empirical support for self-congruity effects (both actual and ideal) is the focus on matching the personality between a brand and a consumer at the aggregate level (i.e.,
across all personality traits). Rather, this research suggests
that dimensions of personalities must be examined (Kleine,
Kleine, and Kernan 1993; see also Kleine, Kleine, and Allen
1995). Furthermore, the importance of these dimensions
must be examined in order to understand their centrality to

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 1997

354
the self (Markus 1977; Markus and Wurf 1987) and the extent to which they influence preference for brands across
situations.
Practical applications of this research also exist. This is
the first attempt to develop a measurement scale that is
based on a representative sample of subjects, a comprehensive list of traits, and a systematically chosen set of brands
across product categories. Therefore, practitioners have an
alternative to the ad hoc scales currently used. Moreover, the
scale can be used to compare personalities of brands across
product categories, thereby enabling researchers to identify
benchmark personality brands. To aid this process, a set of
personality trait norms is provided in Appendix A.
The Antecedents, Consequences, and Processing of
Brand Personality

Assuming that having a brand personality is important,
the question arises: How does a brand go about developing

one? The brand personality framework and scale developed
in this research also can be used to gain theoretical and practical insight into the antecedents and consequences of brand
personality, which have received a significant amount of
attention but little empirical testing. In terms of antecedents,
many have suggested that brand personality is created by a
variety of marketing variables (e.g., user imagery, advertising, packaging; cf. Batra, Lehmann, and Singh 1993; Levy
1959; Plummer 1985). However, the extent to which these
variables independently and interdependently influence
brand personality has yet to be determined. With the use of
the Brand Personality Scale, the variables can be manipulated systematically and their impact on a brand's personality measured. Similarly, in terms of consequences,
researchers suggest that brand personality increases consumer preference and usage (Sirgy 1982), evokes emotions
in consumers (Biel 1993), and increases levels of trust and
loyalty (Fournier 1994). These assertions can be tested by

Appendix A
A BRAND PERSONALITY SCALE
(Means and Standard Deviations)'

Traits

Mean

Standard
Deviation

down-to-earth
family-oriented
small-town
honest
sincere
real
wholesome
original
cheerful
sentimental
friendly
daring
trendy
exciting
spirited
cool
young
imaginative
unique
up-to-date
independent
contemporary
reliable
hard working
secure
intelligent
technical
corporate
successful
leader
confident
upper class
glamorous
good looking
charming
feminine
smooth
outdoorsy
masculine
Western
tough
rugged

2.92
3.07
2.26
3.02
2.82
3.28
2.81
3.19
2.66
2.23
2.95
2.54
2.95
2.79
2.81
2.75
2.73
2.81
2.89
3.60
2.99
3.00
3.63
3.17
3.05
2.96
2.54
2.79
3.69
3.34
3.33
2.85
2.50
2.97
2.43
2.43
2.74
2.4\
2.45
2.05
2.88
2.62

1.35
1.44
1.31
1.35
1.34
1.33
1.36
1.36
1.33
1.26
1.37
1.36
1.39
1.38
1.38
1.39
1.40
1.35
1.36
1.30
1.36
1.32
1.28
1.43
1.37
1.39
1.39
1.45
1.32
1.39
1.36
1.42
1.39
1.42
1.30
1.43
1.34
1.40
1.42
1.33
1.43
1.43

*Based on n =9, 910

Facet

Facet Name

Factor Name

Mean

Standard
Deviation

(la)
(la)
(la)
(Ib)
(lb)
(lb)

Down-to-earth

Sincerity

2.72

.99

(Ie)

Wholesome

Excitement

2.79

1.05

Competence

3.\7

1.02

Sophistication

2.66

1.02

Ruggedness

2.49

1.08

(Ic)
(Id)
(Id)
(Id)
(2a)
(2a)
(2a)
(2b)
(2b)
(2b)
(2c)
(2c)
(2d)
(2d)
(2d)
(3a)
(3a)
(3a)
(3b)
(3b)
(3b)
(3c)
(3c)
(3c)
(4a)
(4a)
(4a)
(4b)
(4b)
(4b)
(5a)
(5a)
(5a)
(5b)
(5b)

Honest

Cheerful
Daring
Spirited
Imaginative
Up-to-date
Reliable
Intelligent
Successful
Upper class
Charming

Outdoorsy
Tough

Dimensions of Brand Personality
systematically manipulating distinct dimensions of a brand's
personality (e.g., Sincerity) and examining their impact on
key dependent variables. Theoretically, this learning would
contribute to an overall understanding of the symbolic use of
brands. Practically, it would provide insight into the variables that influence brand personality, as well as those that
are influenced by brand personality.
Further research also is needed to examine how brand
personality information is processed. Past research demonstrates that under conditions of high motivation or ability,
brand attributes tend to be processed systematically (Maheswaran and Chaiken 1991). However, less is known about
attitude formation under conditions of low motivation or
ability. One possibility is that brand personality information,
used as a heuristic cue, might influence consumer attitudes
and attenuate the processing of brand attribute information
under low motivation. Another is that, due to the matching
process required to determine if a brand personality and
one's own personality are congruent versus incongruent,
brand personality information might require systematic processing, and therefore should influence attitudes additively
under high motivation. A final possibility that merits exploration is that brand personality could bias brand attribute information, in which the brand attributes are interpreted differently given the personality associated with a brand (cf.
Chaiken and Maheswaran 1994).

The Symbolic Use of Brands Across Cultures
Finally, the brand personality framework and scale developed here have important implications for researchers examining the perceptions of brand personality across cultures.
For example, the extent to which brand personality dimensions are cross culturally generalizable must be examined.
Although research has shown that the human personality
dimensions remain robust across cultures (Paunonen et al.
1992), the same may not be so for brand personality because
of differences in the antecedents of the two constructs. Consequently, the current scale might not be appropriate for
measuring brand personality in a different cultural context.
Additional research is needed to determine the extent to
which these brand personality dimensions are stable across
cultures and, if not, theoretically why they might be altered.
Answers to these questions will shed insight into the extent
to which a brand's personality (versus the brand's attributes)
should remain constant across cultures, what dimensions of
brand personality are valued across cultures, and how consumers use brands across cultures (cf. Aaker and Maheswaran 1997).
Finally, little is known about the psychological mechanism by which brand personality operates across cultures.
However, recent research in cultural psychology suggests
that the symbolic use of brands differs considerably across
cultures (Aaker and Schmitt 1997). For example, in individualist cultures, where independence, autonomy, and uniqueness are valued (Markus and Kitayama 1991), consumers are
more likely to use brands to express how they are different
from members of their in-group. In contrast, in collectivist
cultures, where interdependence, conformity, and similarity
are valued (Markus and Kitayama 1991), consumers are
more likely to use brands to express how they are similar to
members of their in-group. Such research would demonstrate that the symbolic or self-expressive use of brands is ro-

355
bust across cultures, while the nature of that self-expression
differs significantly.
REFERENCES
Aaker, Jennifer and Durairaj Maheswaran (1997), "The Impact of
Cultural Orientation on Persuasion," Journal of Consumer Research, forthcoming.
- - - and Bernd Schmitt (1997), "The Influence of Culture on
the Self-Expressive Use of Brands," Working Paper #274,
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management.
Alt, Michael and Steve Griggs (1988), "Can A Brand Be Cheeky?"
Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 4 (6), 9-16.
Bagozzi, Richard P. and Todd F. Heatherton (1994), "A General
Approach to Representing Multifaceted Personality Constructs:
Application to State Self-Esteem," Structural Equation Modeling, I (1),35-67.
Batra, Rajeev, Donald R. Lehmann, and Dipinder Singh (1993),
"The Brand Personality Component of Brand Goodwill: Some
Antecedents and Consequences," in Brand Equity and Advertising, David A. Aaker and Alexander Biel, eds. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Belk, Russell W. (1988) "Possessions and the Extended Self,"
Journal of Consumer Research, 2 (September), 139-68.
Bellenger, Danny N., Earle Steinberg, and Wilbur W. Stanton
(1976), "The Congruence of Store Image and Self Image," Journal of Retailing, 52 (Spring), 17-32.
Bentler, Peter M. (1990), "Comparative Fit Indexes in Structural
Models," Psychological Bulletin, 107, 238--46.
Biel, Alexander (1993) "Converting Image into Equity," in Brand
Equity and Advertising, David A. Aaker and AlexanderBiel, eds.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Briggs, Steven (1992), "Assessing the Five-Factor Model of Personality Description," Journal of Personality, 60 (2), 253-93.
Chaiken, Shelly and Durairaj Maheswaran (1994), "Heuristic Processing Can Bias Systematic Processing: Effects of Source
Credibility, Argument Ambiguity, and Task Importance on Attribute Judgment," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66 (3), 460-73.
Church, Timothy A. and Peter J. Burke (1994), "Exploratory and
Confirmatory Tests of the Big Five and Tellegen's Three and
Four-Dimensional Models," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66 (I), 93-114.
Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr. (1979), "A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of Marketing Constructs," Journal of Marketing
Research. 16 (February), 64-73.
Digman, John M. (1990), "Personality Structure: Emergence of
the Five-Factor Model," Annual Review of Psychology, 41,
417--40.
Delich, Ira J. (1969), "Congruence Relationship Between Self-Image and Product Brands," Journal of Marketing Research, 6
(February), 80-84.
Epstein, Seymour (1977), "Traits are Alive and Well," in Personality at the Crossroads, D. Magnusson and N.S. Endler,eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 83-98.
EquiTrend (1992), Total Research Corporation, Princeton, NJ.
Everett, John E. (1983), "Factor Comparability as a Means of Determining the Number of Factors and Their Rotation," Multivariate Behavioral Research, 18, 197-218.
Fishbein, Martin and leek Ajzen (1975), Belief, Attitude. Intention
and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fournier, Susan (1994), "A Consumer-Brand Relationship Framework for Strategy Brand Management" unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Florida.
Gilmore, George W. (1919), Animism. Boston: Marshall Jones
Company.
Halliday, Jean (1996), "Chrysler Brings Out Brand Personalities

356
with '97 Ads," Advertising Age (September 30), 3.
John, Oliver (1990), "The 'Big Five' Factor Taxonomy: Dimensions of Personality in the Natural Language and in Questionnaires," in Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, L.A.
Pervin, ed. San Francisco: Harper, 66-100.
Kassarjian, Harold H. (1971), "Personality and Consumer Behavior: A Review," Journal of Marketing Research, 8 (November)
409-18.
Katz.Daniel (1960), "The Functional Approach to the Study of Attitudes," Public Opinion Quarterly, 24, 163-204.
Keller, Kevin L. (1993), "Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity," Journal of Marketing, 57
(January), 1-22.
Kleine, Robert E., Susan Schultz Kleine, and Jerome B. Kernan
(1993), "Mundane Consumption and the Self: A Social-Identity
Perspective," Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2 (3), 209-35.
Kleine, Susan Schultz, Robert E. Kleine III, and Chris T. Allen
(1995), "How Is a Possession 'Me' or 'Not Me'? Characterizing
Types and an Antecedent of Material Possession Attachment,"
Journal of Consumer Research, 3 (December), 327---43.
Levy, Sidney J. (1959), "Symbols for Sales," Harvard Business Review, 37 (4), 117-24.
Maheswaran, Durairaj and Shelly Chaiken (1991), "Promoting
Systematic Processing in Low Motivation Settings: Effect of Incongruent Information on Processing Judgment," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 13-25.
Malhotra, Naresh K. (1981), "A Scale to Measure Self-Concepts,
Person Concepts and Product Concepts," Journal of Marketing
Research, 23 (November), 456-64.
- - - (1988), "Self Concept and Product Choice: An Integrated
Perspective," Journal of Economic Psychology, 9, 1-28.
Markus, Hazel (1977), "Self-Schemata and Processing Information
About the Self," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
35 (2), 63-78.
- - - and Shinobu Kitayama (1991), "Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion and Motivation," Psychology
Review, 98, 224-53.
- - - and Elissa Wurf (1987), "The Dynamic Self-Concept: A
Social Psychological Perspective," Annual Review of Psychology, 38 (2), 299-337.
McCracken, Grant (1989), "Who Is the Celebrity Endorser? Cultural Foundations of the Endorsement Process," Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (3), 310-21.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, AUGUST 1997
McCrae, Robert R. and Paul T. Costa, Jr. (1989), "The Structure of
Interpersonal Traits: Wiggins's Circumplex and Five-Factor
Model," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56 (4),
586-95.
Norman, Warren T. (1963), "Toward an Adequate Taxonomy of
Personality Attribute: Replicated Factor Structure in Peer Nomination Personality Ratings," Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 66, 574-83.
Nunnally, Jum C. (1978), Psychometric Theory. New York: MeGraw-Hill, Inc.
Osgood, Charles E., George J. Suci, and Percy H. Tannenbaum
(1957), The Measurement of Meaning. Chicago: University of
Illinois Press.
Park, Bernadette (1986), "A Method for Studying the Development
of Impressions of Real People," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 907-17.
Paunonen, Sampo v., Douglas N. Jackson, Jerzy Trzebinski, and
Friedrich Forsterling (1992), "Personality Structure Across Cultures: A Multimethod Evaluation," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62 (3), 447-56.
Pendergrast, Mark (1993), For God, Country and Coca-Cola. New
York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
Piedmont, Ralph L., Robert R. McCrae, and Paul T. Costa, Jr.
(1991), "Adjective Check List Scales and the Five-Factor Model,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60 (4),630-37.
Plummer, Joseph T. (1985), "Brand Personality: A Strategic Concept For Multinational Advertising," in Marketing Educators'
Conference. New York: Young & Rubicam, 1-31.
Ratchford, Brian (1987), "New Insights About the FCB Grid,"
Journal ofAdvertising Research, 27 (August/September), 24-26.
Rook, Dennis W. (1985), 'The Ritual Dimension of Consumer Behavior," Journal ofConsumer Research, 12 (December), 251-64.
Sirgy, Joseph (1982), "Self-Concept in Consumer Behavior: A
Critical Review," Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (December)
287-300.
Tupes, Ernest C. and Raymond E. Christal (1958), "Stability of
Personality Trait Rating Factors Obtained Under Diverse Conditions," USAF WADS Technical Report No. 58-61. Lackland Air
Force Base, TX: U.S. Air Force.
Wells, William, Frank J. Andriuli, Fedele J. Goi, and Stuart Seader
(1957), "An Adjective Checklist for the Study of 'Product Personality,''' Journal of Applied Psychology, 41,317-19.

