632

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 23, No. 6, July 2017, pp. 632–636

Jurisdiction-specific articles
The Austrian philanthropic Innovation
Foundation for Education
Michael Petritz and Matthias Malaschofsky*

Abstract
As part of a big education initiative, the Austrian
government has introduced the Act on the Public
Innovation Foundation for Education. This new
public foundation represents an interesting possibility for philanthropic initiatives to gain public
attention and to attract public and private funds.
The Innovation Foundation for Education foundation may grant, even to foreign investors who
found an Austrian charitable foundation, up to
30 per cent of the initial capital of such foundation.

Austrian foundations
The most common forms of foundations in Austria are
private foundations, which may be established for any
purpose and are most often used as family foundations. Currently there are more than 3000 private
foundations registered in the commercial register.
Most of these private foundations pursue the purpose
to support a specific family; only 200 serve a charitable
purpose.1 Besides Private Foundations, Austria offers
the ‘charitable foundation’ or the ‘charitable fund’,
which are regulated by a separate set of rules. These
rules were modernized by the Austrian government in
2015 accompanied by several tax reliefs to improve the
attractiveness of the Austrian charitable foundation/

fund and to increase the money invested in charity
from Austrian benevolent persons.2 In order to push
modernization in the (Austrian) education system, the
Austrian government has passed the Innovation
Foundation bill in 2016. Its aim is to increase the
level of innovation within the educational sector by
establishing a public foundation.

Austria offers the ‘charitable foundation’ or the
‘charitable fund’, which are regulated bya separate set ofrules.These rules were modernized by
the Austrian government in 2015 accompanied
by several tax reliefs to improve the attractiveness of the Austrian charitable foundation/fund
and to increase the money invested in charity
from Austrian benevolent persons. In order to
push modernization in the (Austrian) education
system, the Austrian government has passed
the Innovation Foundation billin 2016

The Innovation Foundation for
Education
The Innovation Foundation is based on the Austrian
Innovation Foundation for Education Act, which
entered into force on 1 January 2017 and which is
based on the Charitable Foundation Act of 2015.

* MMag Michael Petritz, Tax Partner, and Matthias Malaschofsky, MSc, Tax Advisor, KPMG Alpen-Treuhand GmbH, Wirtschaftsprüfungs- und
Steuerberatungsgesellschaft, Porzellangasse 51, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Tel:þ43 (1) 31332 – 3304; Fax: þ43 (1) 31332 – 3500
1. For an overview on the Austrian Private Foundation refer to M Petritz and A Kampitsch, ‘Austria: The Austrian Private Foundation’ (2014) 20(6) Trusts &
Trustees 541.
2. See A Kampitsch and M Petritz, ‘The Austrian Charitable Foundation reform of 2015’ (2016) 22(6) Trusts & Trustees 626.
ß The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/tandt/ttx081

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 23, No. 6, July 2017

The main purpose of the Innovation Foundation
will be ‘to increase the Austrian educational standard and innovation competence of all ages through
competitive support of innovative projects in research and education’. Therefore, an institutional
evolution or development with a sustainable forward-looking approach is the purpose of this
public foundation.

The main purpose of the Innovation
Foundation will be ‘to increase the Austrian
educational standard and innovation competence of all ages through competitive support
of innovative projects in research and
education’

Means to achieve the purpose
To achieve the Innovation Foundation’s purpose the
act provides for different means:
 Grants to programmes which have applied for support to the Foundation.
 Drawing up of an annual map for educational innovation which is internationally visible.
 Awards of quality seals for educational innovation.
 Conduct of strategic studies to enhance effectivity,
efficiency, and impact orientation.
The foundation awards grants in the following
categories (‘actions’) in order to improve the educational standards and innovation competences of all
ages:
 Strategic research to improve and renew the education system.
 Transformation of the education system in key
areas such as:
 education and research;
 business and education;
 development of the education market; and
3. ibid.

633

 integrated development projects in Research–
Education–Innovation.
 Sensitization.
Institutions such as schools, universities, companies, research, or charitable entities that are
participating in the educational landscape have to
be involved, in order to make sure that the funds
are used rightfully. Furthermore, the action lines are
to be operationalized through three-year programmes
and public tenders according to the objective and
transparent rules of the European Union.

Institutions such as schools, universities, companies, research, or charitable entities that are
participating in the educational landscape
have to be involved, in order to make sure that
the funds are used rightfully

Capital
In the beginning, the capital of the Public Innovation
Foundation will be EUR 50 million.

Charitable purpose
Usually, the financial authorities assess whether a foundation, association, etc is charitable or not and hence is
subject to certain tax benefits.3 However, in case of the
Innovation Foundation for Education, the law itself
provides for the charitable status and no further
assessment by the financial authorities is necessary.
Moreover, there is a special provision enacted in the
income tax act which provides for a deduction of donations to the Innovation Foundation for Education
for Austrian taxpayers.

However, in case of the Innovation Foundation
for Education, the law itself provides for the
charitable status and no further assessment
by the financial authorities is necessary

634

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Building a map for educational innovation
The Innovation Foundation is required to start building a map with all supporting entities and companies
which:
 have been rewarded a grant from the foundation;
 filed an application to be included in the map; and
 have been awarded the seal of quality for educational innovation.
The collected information will then be made available to the public.

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 23, No. 6, July 2017

establishment’ (‘Gründungserklärung’) has to be submitted to the responsible tax office, which examines
whether the declaration fulfils the prerequisites
stated in the Federal Tax Code.4 The tax office will
then issue a decree stating that the declaration is in
line with the Federal Tax Code which provides legal
certainty
for
the
Foundation
Board
(‘Stiftungsvorstand’).

The purpose ofthe sub-foundation has to be in
line with the (charitable) purpose of the
Innovation Foundation for Education

Possibility to establish sub-foundations
In order to establish public–private partnerships, the
Innovation Foundation is allowed to establish ‘subfoundations’ together with partners from the private
sector. It is the aim of the legislator to make different
organizations or initiatives collaborate and support
the Innovation Foundation. Such sub-foundations
have the advantage that they can act independently
from any public influence as long as the results of
their audits are fine. Since Trust & Trustees ‘Private
Foundations: A World Review’ focuses on initiatives
funded by the private sector, the following remarks
focus on the mentioned sub-foundations.

In order to establish public^private partnerships, the Innovation Foundation is allowed to
establish ‘sub-foundations’ together with partners from the private sector

Founders
There are no restrictions on who can be the founder of such foundation. Founders may be legal
as well as natural persons; even unlimited or
limited partnerships and association may be
founders.

Legal person
The sub-foundation is a legal person that has rights
and duties according to the Austrian Charitable
Foundation Act as well as the Innovation
Foundation for Education Act. As part of the official
public status, the sub-foundations that are established
with the Innovation Foundation for Education are
entitled to use the official seal of the Austrian
Federal Republic next to their name.

Capital
Obligatory charitable purpose
The purpose of the sub-foundation has to be in line
with the (charitable) purpose of the Innovation
Foundation for Education. This means that the actions mentioned above have to be applicable to the
new sub-foundation as well. However, when a new
sub-foundation is established, the ‘declaration of
4. Bundesabgabenordnung, BAO.

The minimum capital of the sub-foundation is EUR
50,000 and it must be made available immediately to
the Foundation. Whenever the foundation’s capital
falls below the minimum capital, the foundation
will be dissolved. If the founder does not contribute
the minimum capital in cash but in kind, an audit is
compulsory.

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 23, No. 6, July 2017

The Innovation Foundation for Education may
provide up to 30 per cent of the total sub-foundation’s capital, as long as it is ensured that third parties
provide at least 70 per cent of the capital of the respective sub-foundation.

Compulsory bodies
The compulsory bodies of the sub-foundation—such
as the bodies of any other charitable foundation pursuant to the Charitable Foundations Act—consist of
the Board of the Foundation (‘Stiftungsvorstand’), the
Auditor (‘Rechnungsprüfer’ or ‘Stiftungsprüfer’) and—
if the charitable foundation is sufficiently large—the
Supervisory Board (‘Aufsichtsorgan’). The sub-foundation is managed and represented by the Board of
the Foundation, which has to draw up annual statements. The auditor then checks these statements. In
case that the Foundation is sufficiently large, the auditor must be a qualified auditor/auditing firm, in any
other case no specific credentials are necessary.
Because of the fact that public money is contributed,
the federal Court of Auditors (‘Rechnungshof’), which
is the official auditor for public funds, examines the
activities of the sub-foundation as well.

Tax incentives
Together with the reformed Charitable Foundation
Act, tax incentives for the Innovation Foundation
and especially the sub-foundations have been broadened to make a charitable engagement in the field
of education more attractive. Some of these incentives
are presented in the following.

Donation privilege
The so-called ‘donation privilege’ is only applicable to
Austrian residents. As mentioned above, the subfoundation’s purpose has to be in line with the (charitable) purpose of the Innovation Foundation for
Education. Therefore, the sub-foundation is granted

635

the same privileges as the public Innovation
Foundation itself. One of the privileges—besides the
charitable status and the connected tax privileges—is
the ‘donation privilege’, which allows any donator of
the Innovation Foundation or its sub-foundations to
deduct its donation from his/her income (profit).
However, there are two restrictions on the deduction:
 If the taxable profit is EUR 5 million or below, a
maximum of EUR 500,000 may be deducted. The
deduction, however, is limited to the actual profit.
Hence, no tax loss may be the result of a privileged
donation.
 If the taxable profit is above EUR 5 million, a maximum of 10 per cent of the profit may be deducted.
Examples:
Taxpayer’s annual profit: EUR 1,000,000; taxpayer donates EUR 200,000 to the Innovation Foundation and/or
to one of its sub-foundations. The donation is fully tax
deductible, because the profit is below EUR 5,000,000
and the donation is below the limit of EUR 500,000.

Taxpayer’s annual profit: EUR 6,000,000; taxpayer
donates EUR 1,000,000 to the Innovation
Foundation and/or to one of its sub-foundations.
The donation is tax deductible only in the amount
of EUR 600,000, because the profit is above EUR
5,000,000 and hence the donation privilege is limited
to 10 per cent of the profit.

No entry tax
Endowments to Austrian foundations (either private
or charitable foundations) are in principle subject to
an entry tax of 2.5 per cent of the value of the assets
endowed. However, there is no entry tax if the receiving foundation enjoys charitable status. As the
Innovation Foundation for Education as well as its
sub-foundations are charitable in nature, there is no
entry tax on the money donated to these foundations.

636

Jurisdiction-specific articles

As the Innovation Foundation for Education as
well as its sub-foundations are charitable in
nature, there is no entry tax on the money
donated to these foundations

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 23, No. 6, July 2017

charitable organization (and hence also for such
transfers to the Innovation Foundation and/or its
sub-foundations). Real estate thus may be transferred
to any of these foundations without any transfer tax
or entry fee.

No real estate transfer tax

Summary

Moreover, there is a tax exemption for the gratuitous
transfer of real estate to charitable organizations.
Normally, such transfers would be subject to real
estate transfer tax (RETT). However, if it is a
gratuitous transfer to a charitable organization
no RETT is due. Moreover, also the Entry
Tax Equivalent (‘Stiftungseingangssteueräquivalent’)
which is usually levied in case of transfers of real
estate property to foundations does not apply to gratuitous transfers made to the Innovation Foundation
and/or its sub-foundations. Hence, gratuitous transfers of real estate to any of these are RETT-free. This
exemption just applies to real estate located in
Austria. Foreign real estate must be examined under
local law.
Further, the entry fee of 1.1 per cent on the value
which is levied for registering the ownership of a real
estate property in the land register is not applied in
case of a gratuitous transfer of real estate to a

Education, research, and innovation are key components of a modern society, which enhance growth,
wealth, and quality of life. Therefore, the Innovation
Foundation delivers a fantastic starting point to increase educational innovation throughout the system.
With the possibility to grant subsidies of up to 30 per
cent of the starting capital to sub-foundations established together with private partners and the tax privilege for donations to the Innovation Foundation or
its sub-foundations, Austria implemented some favourable tax incentives.

With the possibility to grant subsidies of up to
30 per cent of the starting capital to sub-foundations established together with private partners and the tax privilege for donations to the
Innovation Foundation or its sub-foundations,
Austria implemented some favourable tax
incentives

MMag Michael Petritz is a tax partner with KPMG, specializing in advising HNWIs and UHNWIs. In addition, he lectures and publishes on estate planning tax issues and is the current president of STEP Austria.
E-mail: mpetritz@kpmg.at,www.kpmg.at.
Matthias Malaschofsky, MSc, is a tax advisor with KPMG and specializes in the same field.
E-mail: mmalaschofsky@kpmg.at, www.kpmg.at.

