KAREN PAGE WINTERICH and MICHAEL J. BARONE*
Across five studies, the authors investigate how social identification
influences consumer preference for discount-based promotions (i.e.,
cents-off deals) versus donation-based promotions (in which purchase
results in a donation to a charitable cause). In doing so, they demonstrate
the interplay between self-construal and a specific social identity (i.e.,
that associated with the particular charity featured in a donation-based
promotion) on consumers’ preferences for these two types of promotions.
The results show that, in general, consumers possessing interdependent
self-construals prefer donations to a greater extent than those with
independent self-construals. However, the findings further indicate that
these effects of self-construal are attenuated if (1) the donation-based
promotion does not involve a charity that is identity congruent or (2) a
cause-congruent identity is more salient than self-construal at the time of
decision making. The authors also identify boundary conditions of charity
efficiency and product type for these self-construal effects. In addition to
demonstrating how multiple identities interact to influence consumer
promotion preferences, the authors discuss important managerial
implications regarding the use of discount versus donation-based
promotions.
Keywords: promotions, donations, self-construal, identity, cause-related
marketing

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash? Social
Identity Effects on Consumer Choice for
Donation Versus Discount Promotions
Imagine going to purchase some bottled water and being
faced with two options: One brand offers a traditional,
cents-off price discount to induce purchase; rather than providing a discount, a second brand ties full-price purchase of
its product to a charitable donation equal to the deal offered

by the first brand. Do you select the offer that provides a
direct benefit to you through a reduced price or that which
benefits a charitable cause in the form of a donation? Does
your decision further depend on dispositional tendencies
(i.e., whether you are inclined to consider the welfare of
others) and/or how strongly you identity with the cause that
benefits from your purchase of the second brand? And do
factors associated with both the charity (i.e., how efficiently
it operates) and the product (i.e., whether it is indulgent)
affect your preference?
We investigate these questions, all of which have important theoretical and pragmatic implications. Given that promotional activities constitute a significant percentage (in
many instances, more than half) of firms’ marketing budgets (Ailawadi et al. 2006), a large research literature has
evolved examining the effectiveness of discount-based promotions. Although they are capable of improving important

*Karen Page Winterich is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Smeal College of Business, Pennsylvania State University (e-mail: kpw2@psu.edu).
Michael J. Barone is Professor of Marketing and University Scholar, College of Business, Department of Marketing, University of Louisville (email: michael.barone@louisville.edu). The authors contributed equally to
this article. Data for four of the studies reported here were collected in the
Jeffrey S. Conant Behavioral Research Laboratory while the first author
was on the Marketing Faculty in the Mays Business School at Texas A&M
University. The authors appreciate helpful comments on earlier versions of
this article from Jennifer Argo and Sharon Shavitt as well as the beneficial
comments from the entire review team. This research was supported in part
by a research grant from the Smeal College of Business, Pennsylvania
State University. James Bettman served as associate editor for this article.
© 2011, American Marketing Association
ISSN: 0022-2437 (print), 1547-7193 (electronic)

855

Journal of Marketing Research
Vol. XLVIII (October 2011), 855–868

856

marketing metrics (e.g., sales volume, store traffic; see
Aribarg and Arora 2008), discounts can also adversely
affect price sensitivity and brand equity (Blattberg and Neslin 1990). These potentially harmful effects of price discounts have prompted managers to consider alternative
sales promotion tactics, including donation-based promotions, in which product purchase triggers contributions to
charities. Similar to traditional deals, donation-based promotions can increase sales response (Krishna and Rajan
2009), possibly without the negative effects of discounts
(Arora and Henderson 2007; Henderson and Arora 2010).
The emergence of donation-based promotions in the marketplace is evidenced by a substantial increase in annual
spending on this form of sales promotion, from roughly
$100 million in 1990 to more than $1.5 billion in 2009 (IEG
2009). One reason donation-based promotions are becoming more commonplace in promotional strategies lies in
their effectiveness: 80% of consumers report that they
would switch to a brand that supports a cause when it is
equal in price and quality to other brands (Cone 2010).
However, although consumers want companies to engage in
cause-based marketing, only 19% of consumers indicate
they are willing to buy a more expensive brand to support a
cause (Cone 2010), suggesting that many still prefer discount-based promotions.
The growing reliance on donation-based promotions has
prompted investigations of such offers relative to traditional
deals. A notable difference between these two promotional
approaches is that traditional discounts generate favorable
outcomes for the purchaser, whereas donation-based promotions trigger rewards that benefit an entity—a social cause
or charity—other than the purchaser (Arora and Henderson
2007). This distinction is meaningful because it creates the
potential for the relative impact of these two types of promotions to be influenced by social identification processes,
through which an association with other people or groups
(e.g., donating to a charity) can contribute to the consumer’s
self-image. In particular, the noneconomic (i.e., social)
benefits associated with donation-based promotions may
make consumer evaluations of these offers particularly susceptible to social identification effects. However, while

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011

extant research has considered the impact of consumer identities on evaluations of charitable appeals (e.g., Arnett, German, and Hunt 2003; Shang, Reed, and Croson 2008) and
on traditional deals (e.g., Barone and Roy 2010), the interactive influence of multiple identities on the effectiveness
of donations versus discounts has yet to be examined.
To address this void, we study the interplay of selfconstrual (e.g., a consumer’s general tendency to identify
with groups) and, more specific, cause-related social identities
(e.g., a consumer’s level of identification with the particular
charity featured in a donation-based promotion). Examining
the interactivity between these two potentially competing
social identities on consumer preference for discounts versus donations adds to our understanding of social identification processes and, in doing so, addresses calls for further
inquiry into the influence of multiple and malleable social
identities (Oyserman 2009; Shavitt, Torelli, and Wong
2009). Accordingly, we present five studies that represent
an initial examination into the potential interactive effects
between self-construal and cause-related social identities.
Study 1 demonstrates that when the cause is congruent with
the consumer’s identity, self-construal influences promotion
evaluation, with interdependent (independent) consumers
preferring donations (discounts). Building on this general
finding, Studies 2a and 2b demonstrate that identity salience
moderates the effect of self-construal on promotion preference for identity-congruent causes. In addition to the boundary conditions established in these two studies, we also
document the role of two other moderators of these selfconstrual effects. Study 3 demonstrates that inefficient charities can decrease the likelihood of interdependent consumers to choose the donation-based promotion, whereas
Study 4 shows that the likelihood of independent consumers
choosing the discount promotion is reduced when the promotion is associated with purchase of an indulgent product.
Figure 1 presents a framework summarizing the general
theoretical relationships that we propose to exist between
these variables as well as an overview of the program of
studies undertaken to empirically assess these relationships.

Figure 1

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Charity Efficiency
(Study 3)

Product Type
(Study 4)
Promotion Preference
(Studies 1, 2a, 2b)
and Choice

Self-Construal Tendency
Identity Salience
(Studies 2a, 2b)
Identity Congruence
(Studies 1, 2a, 2b)

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Given that both discounts and donations entail costs that
can adversely affect a firm’s bottom line, a critical question
involves the return on investment available from these two
forms of sales promotion. However, only a handful of investigations examine the impact of donations relative to traditional discounts. In what seems to be an initial inquiry into
this issue, Strahilevitz and Myers (1998) observe that the
effectiveness of donations (vs. discounts) was enhanced for
hedonic versus utilitarian products. More recently, Henderson and Arora (2010) conclude that donations can be more
efficient than discounts because of enhanced brand preference and lower deployment costs, particularly when both
promotions involve low incentive values (Arora and Henderson 2007). Because such findings establish contingencies into consumers’ relative preference for discounts versus donations, they provide some initial insight into this
promotional strategy dilemma. Nonetheless, given the nascent stage of research into this issue as well as the increasing complexity of donation-based promotions (e.g., coverage, customization options; see Arora and Henderson 2007),
additional work exploring when and why donations may
yield response advantages over traditional deals is warranted to gain a more complete and nuanced understanding
of consumer sensitivity to these promotional approaches. In
an effort to provide such insight, we consider the role of a
previously unexplored aspect of consumer choice involving
discounts and donations in the form of social identification
processes.
Self-Construal Versus Cause-Related Social Identity Effects
on Promotion Preference

Social identification reflects the extent to which people
perceive that they are connected with a group (Oyserman
2009) and pertains to any self-view that involves consideration of others (Brewer and Gardner 1996). The processing
of information germane to social identification is governed
by people’s self systems, which can contain multiple, and
possibly hierarchically ordered, social identities (Markus
and Wurf 1987). In this context, self-construal represents
one form of social identity that reflects people’s general disposition to adopt interdependent construals emphasizing
group relationships or independent construals highlighting
their individuality (Brewer and Gardner 1996; Singelis
1994). As such, self-construals are likely to be chronically
accessible during decision making (Markus and Kitayama
1991) and highly relevant to a wide range of judgments
(Markus and Wurf 1987; Oyserman 2009). In addition, people may hold more specific social identities (e.g., a “causerelated identity”) that reflect their level of identification
with a particular charity. As examples, whereas urban citizens may identify strongly with the Fresh Air Fund, armed
forces personnel may exhibit higher levels of identification
with a cause such as Cell Phones for Soldiers. As more specific forms of social identity, cause-related identities are
likely to be applicable to a more finite set of evaluations
than self-construal (Markus and Wurf 1987; Oyserman
2009).
Identifying the scope of their evaluative influence is
important in predicting the range of judgments that may be
affected by self-construal and cause-related identities.

857

Given their wide-ranging applicability, self-construal
should a priori shape consumers’ preferences for donations
versus discounts. In particular, because they benefit others
(i.e., charity recipients), donation-based promotions should
be more favorably evaluated by interdependent consumers,
an expectation consistent with research indicating that such
people prefer situations that provide advantages to others
over themselves (Swaminathan, Page, and Gürhan-Canli
2007; Zhang and Shrum 2009). In contrast, because discounts provide consequences that primarily benefit the purchaser, these deals should be more compatible with the
goals held by people with independent self-construals
(Barone and Roy 2010) and should therefore be evaluated
more favorably by these consumers.
Nonetheless, under certain conditions, cause-related
identities may also affect promotion preferences. In this
regard, contextual factors associated with a judgment may
constrain the influence of self-construal, creating the potential for specific social identities to affect evaluations
(Markus and Wurf 1987; Oyserman 2009; Shavitt, Torelli,
and Wong 2009). The presence of certain contextual cues
(e.g., the charity featured in a donation-based promotion)
can make social identities that pertain to a cause salient during decision making, enhancing their influence on evaluations (e.g., LeBoeuf, Shafir, and Bayuk 2010; Oyserman
2009; Reed 2004; Shavitt, Torelli, and Wong 2009). In the
following section, we detail how the effect of self-construal
on promotion preference is likely to depend on whether
donation-based promotions activate a specific, cause-related
identity that is congruent with (and therefore relevant to) the
interests of consumers.
The Role of Identity-Congruence

The dynamic nature of self systems suggests that a person’s self-construal may be accessible along with other
social identities at any given time, depending on factors
associated with the decision at hand (Oyserman 2009;
Shavitt, Torelli, and Wong 2009). As guides to information
processing, self systems are particularly likely to be activated during judgments that people view as important or
self-relevant (Markus and Wurf 1987). In our framework,
the cause referenced in a donation-based promotion should
serve as a cue that evokes a related social identity (Reed
2004). When the cause is congruent with the interests of target consumers, the donation-based promotion should activate a cause-related identity as well as other elements of the
self system, including the person’s self-construal tendency
(Markus and Wurf 1987). If so, both self-construal and specific cause-related identities may be accessible to the point
at which they possess the potential to influence promotion
preferences.
However, given the fundamental role that construals are
posited to play in decision making (Markus and Kitayama
1991; Markus and Wurf 1987; Oyserman 2009), including
consumer judgments (Ahluwalia 2008; Hamilton and
Biehal 2005; Zhang and Shrum 2009), all else being equal,
we expect such self-views to govern the influence of causerelated identities on promotion preference. When a donation
features an identity-congruent cause that cues a related
social identity, we expect interdependent consumers to prefer donations and independent consumers to prefer discounts. In contrast, when the charity is incongruent with the

consumer’s identity, neither self-construal nor the causerelated identity are likely to be sufficiently engaged during
decision making (Reed 2004; Shang, Reed, and Croson
2008) to influence consumer preferences for donation promotions. We explore these possibilities in Study 1.
STUDY 1: THE ROLE OF IDENTITY-CONGRUENCE

Method

A total of 168 undergraduate students (52% female) participated in the study for research credit. In a three-level,
one-factor, between-subjects design, we randomly assigned
participants to evaluate one of three sales promotions for a
regional bottled water brand. After evaluating the promotional
offer, participants completed a measure of self-construal.
Promotion type. We assigned participants to one of three
promotion conditions (discount, identity-congruent donation, or identity-incongruent donation). The discount promotion offered consumers a 15-cent discount on each purchase, while the donation promotion offered a 15-cent
donation from each full-price purchase to a charity to fight
hunger. According to research indicating that students form
strong identities to their university (Arnett, German, and
Hunt 2003), the promotion in the congruent donation condition included a 15-cent donation to a university-affiliated,
local charity fighting hunger (i.e., AggiesCAN), while the
incongruent donation condition involved an international
charity fighting hunger that was not associated with the
school (i.e., World Vision). A pretest (N = 53) indicated that
participants perceived the local charity (M = 5.32) as more
identity-congruent than the international charity (M = 4.33;
t = 2.24, p < .05; on a seven-point scale); importantly, a
measure of charity evaluation (“bad/good,” “negative/positive,” “unfavorable/favorable”;  = .96) indicated that the
two charities were perceived equally favorably (on a ninepoint scale; Mlocal = 8.44 vs. Mnonlocal = 8.08; t = 1.77, not
significant [n.s.]). Both donation conditions used actual
charities and included a description of the charity adapted
from the organization’s website.
Self-construal and promotion preference. Participants
then completed Singelis’s (1994) scales for independent (12
items;  = .68) and interdependent (12 items;  = .67)
chronic self-construals (1 = “strongly disagree, and 7 =
“strongly agree”). We constructed a self-construal index as
follows: (interdependent – independent)/(interdependent +
independent) (see Escalas and Bettman 2005), with higher
scores reflecting greater interdependence (M = .004, SD =
.09). These responses were not affected by the promotion
type manipulation (F(2, 167) = .59, n.s.). We assessed promotion evaluations with three nine-point scales (“bad/good,”
“negative/positive,” and “unfavorable/favorable”;  = .95).
Results

Promotion evaluation. We anticipated an interaction
between self-construal and promotion type such that interdependent consumers should more positively evaluate
donation-based promotions involving an identity-congruent
cause, whereas independent consumers should more positively evaluate discount-based promotions. We conducted
an analysis of covariance with promotion evaluation as
the dependent variable and self-construal (measured continuously), the three levels of promotion type, and the self-

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011

construal ¥ promotion type interaction as independent
variables. Although neither the effect of self-construal nor
promotion type was significant, the expected self-construal ¥
promotion type interaction was significant (F(2, 167) =
5.34, p < .05; Figure 2).1 To analyze this interaction, we
examined the effect of self-construal on promotion evaluation for each promotion type. For the identity-congruent
donation, self-construal was significant such that the more
interdependent participants were, the more positively they
evaluated the offer (F(1, 48) = 5.90, p < .05). For the discount,
self-construal was also significant (F(1, 56) = 4.62, p < .05),
as the favorability of evaluations was positively related to
independence level. However, when the donation involved
an incongruent cause, self-construal was not significant
(F(1, 61) = .59, n.s.).
Discussion. Study 1 provides support for the effects of
self-construal and identity congruence on promotion preference. We found that interdependent consumers evaluated a
donation featuring a congruent (local) charity more favorably than independents. Moreover, as we anticipated, this
effect of self-construal did not carry over to an incongruent
donation involving a nonlocal cause. These findings indicate that self-construal may only affect promotion preferences when the cause associated with the donation triggers
a relevant social identity. Our results also suggest that independent consumers evaluate a discount more favorably than
do interdependent consumers. Notably, we obtained these
findings using a between-subjects design, mitigating concerns regarding potential self-presentation biases associated
with the within-subject designs employed in subsequent
studies.
1Given the potential relationship between self-construal and gender
(Ahluwalia 2008; Markus and Kitayama 1991), we also conducted analyses that included gender. In this and all remaining studies, we found that
(1) gender did not significantly interact with other design factors and (2)
including gender as a covariate did not influence any of the observed
results or any substantive conclusions drawn from such findings.

Figure 2

STUDY 1: EFFECT OF IDENTITY CONGRUENCE AND SELFCONSTRUAL ON PROMOTION EVALUATIONS
More
Favorable
9
7

Promotion Evaluation

858

5
3

Discount-based promotion
Congruent, donation-based promotion
Incongruent, donation-based promotion

1
–1 SD (Independence)
+1 SD (Interdependence)
Less
Self-Construal
Favorable

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

In our theorizing to this point, we have accorded causerelated identities a somewhat secondary role in decision
making, allowing them to serve primarily to engage consumer self-construals that, in turn, affect judgment. Consequently, we expected self-construals to govern the influence
of cause-related identities on promotion preferences under
ceteris paribus conditions. In the following section, we consider how the relative salience of self-construal and a causerelated identity during decision making may influence consumers’ promotion preferences. In doing so, we draw on
models of situated cognition indicating that specific social
identities may, in certain contexts, have a heightened impact
on decisions (Oyserman 2009). Specifically, we consider
the potential for promotion preferences to be driven by
cause-related identities to a greater extent than they are
influenced by self-construals. Note that this possibility suggests that, rather than playing a supplemental role as
demonstrated in Study 1, specific (i.e., cause-related) social
identities may under certain circumstances supplant selfconstrual with regard to their evaluative impact. We examine this potential impact of identity salience on consumer
preferences for discounts versus donations in the following
two studies.
STUDIES 2A AND 2B: THE ROLE OF IDENTITY
SALIENCE

When multiple consumer identities (e.g., self-construals,
cause-related identities) are activated during decision making, ensuing judgments should be governed by identity
salience effects (i.e., by the relative salience of these accessible identities; LeBoeuf, Shafir, and Bayuk 2010; Reed
2004). This rationale is consistent with findings revealing
the influence of identity salience on a multitude of consumer
judgments, including preferences for corporate social responsibility initiatives and nonprofit giving (e.g., Arnett, German, and Hunt 2003; Reed 2004). Presuming that donationbased promotions involve causes that consumers view as
relevant (i.e., under conditions of identity congruence), promotion preference should be dependent on the relative
salience of self-construal compared with cause-related identities. When self-construal holds a salience advantage, we
expect to replicate the findings from Study 1 such that interdependent consumers prefer donations more than independent consumers. In contrast, when a cause-related identity
holds a salience advantage, the influence of this identity
should dominate the effects of self-construal (Reed 2004).
In such instances, consumers should prefer donations that
benefit an identity-congruent cause regardless of their selfconstrual tendencies (i.e., both independent and interdependent consumers will prefer donations over discounts).
Finally, as demonstrated in Study 1, when donation-based
promotions are not congruent with an identity, preferences
should not be affected by self-construals or cause-related
identities regardless of which component of the self system
enjoys greater salience.
Study 2a

We randomly assigned 225 undergraduate students (33%
female) participating in the study for research credit to a 2
(cause congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) ¥ 2 (salience:
self-construal vs. cause identity) ¥ 2 (promotion order: dis-

859

count vs. donation first) between-subjects design with selfconstrual as a measured, continuous variable.2
Identity salience. Participants first completed two tasks,
the order of which was counterbalanced to achieve the
salience manipulation: (1) completion of self-construal
scales, assessed as relative interdependence ( = .90) versus
independence ( = .83) using the same approach described
in Study 1 (M = .01, SD = .10), and (2) a writing task
designed to elicit their cause-related (university) identity,
which was more congruent with the university-affiliated
charity featured in the congruent cause condition than the
international charity referenced in the incongruent cause
condition (for a similar procedure, see Reed 2004). Thus, if
participants completed the self-construal measure (writing
task) second, their self-construal (cause identity) should be
more salient.
To ensure that the salience manipulation operated as
intended, we conducted a pretest (N = 84) using undergraduate students from the same population as the main study.
After completing both tasks (i.e., the self-construal scale
and the writing task eliciting their university identity), participants responded to two seven-point measures: (1) “At
this moment, to what extent are you thinking more about
how you view your relationships and interact with others in
general than your identity specifically as a [university
name] student?” and (2) “At this moment, to what extent are
you thinking about your identity as a [university name] student?” We conducted a repeated-measures analysis, which
indicated a significant interaction between salience condition and self-construal measure (F(1, 82) = 21.44, p < .05).
As desired, participants in the self-construal-salient condition indicated that they were thinking more about their general relationships with others than those in the university
identity–salient condition (M = 5.51 vs. 4.29; t = 3.17, p <
.05). In contrast, participants in the university identity–
salient condition reported thinking more about their university affiliation than those in the self-construal-salient condition (M = 5.05 vs. 3.56; t = 4.09, p < .05). Collectively,
these results indicate that the identity salience manipulation
operated in the desired way.
Cause congruence. Next, participants viewed a discount
for a regional bottled water brand presented side-by-side with
one of two donations featuring either a congruent or an incongruent cause. As in Study 1, both causes were actual charities: The congruent (local) cause was identical to that used
in Study 1 (i.e., AggiesCAN), but the incongruent (nonlocal)
cause was different than that referenced in Study 1 (i.e.,
Second Harvest). We conducted a pretest (N = 70), which
indicated that participants perceived the local charity as
more congruent with their identity than the nonlocal (international) charity (Mlocal = 5.41 vs. Mnonlocal = 4.24; t = 3.28,
p < .05; seven-point scale) and that the two charities were
evaluated equally favorably (Mlocal = 7.56 vs. Mnonlocal =
7.97; t = 1.83, n.s.; nine-point scale).
Promotion preference. After viewing the two promotions,
participants responded to four items (for all items, see the
Web Appendix at http://www.marketingpower.com/jmroct11)
to indicate their promotion preference (1 = “definitely Pro2Because promotion order did not have a significant effect on promotion
preference in Study 2a or any subsequent studies, we collapse across this
factor in our analyses.

Results

Promotion preference. Recall that we expect (1) interdependent (independent) consumers to have a greater preference for identity-congruent donations (for discounts)
when self-construal is more salient, (2) consumers to prefer
identity-congruent donations regardless of self-construal
tendency when a cause-related identity is more salient, and
(3) preferences not to be affected by either identity when the
donation features an identity incongruent cause. These predictions suggest a three-way interaction of self-construal,
identity congruence, and identity salience. To evaluate this
expectation, we conducted a regression analysis with all
variables mean-centered (Aiken and West 1991). We present
the results in both Table 1 and Figure 3.
Most critical to testing our framework, the salience ¥
donation cause ¥ self-construal interaction was significant
( = .14 (2.34), t = 2.14, p < .05). To assess this interaction
more completely, we regressed promotion preference on the
interaction of self-construal and salience separately for congruent and incongruent donations (Aiken and West 1991).
When the featured cause was not congruent with participants’ social identity, this interaction was not significant ( =
.06 (3.26), t = .69, n.s.). In contrast, when the donation featured an identity-congruent cause, the self-construal ¥
salience interaction was significant ( = –.22 (3.33), t =
–2.33, p < .05). We further explored this interaction by
examining the simple slope of self-construal in each salience
condition. When a congruent cause-related social identity
was more salient, the effect of self-construal was not significant ( = –.18 (2.42), t = –1.34, n.s.). However, when selfconstrual enjoyed greater salience, interdependent (vs. independent) consumers reported greater preference for the
congruent donation ( = .41 (2.37), t = 2.66, p < .05). Collectively, these findings support our theorizing by indicating that self-construal affects preferences only for congruent donations when self-construal is more salient than social
identity; in contrast, when a cause-related identity is more
salient, preferences for the congruent donation are unaffected by self-construal.
Study 2b

We randomly assigned 252 undergraduate students (54%
female) participating for research credit to a 2 (primed selfTable 1

EFFECT OF SELF-CONSTRUAL, IDENTITY CONGRUENCE,
AND IDENTITY SALIENCE ON PROMOTION PREFERENCE
(STUDY 2A)
Independent Variable

Self-construal (SC)
Identity congruence (IC)
Identity salience (IS)
SC ¥ IC
SC ¥ IS
IC ¥ IS
SC ¥ IC ¥ IS
*p < .05.

Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficient
Coefficient
Estimate
Estimate
.62
–.34
.23
–2.75
–2.74
.02
4.99

.04 (1.16)
–.09 (.24)
.13 (.12)
–.08 (2.33)
–.15 (1.17)
.00 (.24)
.14 (2.34)

t-Value
.54
–1.44
1.98*
–1.18
–2.35*
.06
2.14*

construal: interdependent vs. independent) ¥ 2 (cause congruence: congruent vs. incongruent) ¥ 2 (salience: low vs.
high, measured continuously as importance of business student identity) ¥ 2 (promotion order: discount first vs. donation first) ¥ 2 (product promotion amount: 50-cent cereal vs.
20-cent bottled beverage) mixed design with cause congruence and product promotion amount as within-subject factors. Thus, participants evaluated a discount and a donation
for a bottled beverage brand and a discount and a donation
for a cereal brand, randomly viewing the cause-(in)congruent
donation promotion with either the cereal or beverage
brand. We collapsed across promotion amount in all subsequent analyses, given that this factor did not interact with
other design factors or influence our results.
Self-construal. In contrast to the previous studies, we
manipulated self-construal by having participants write how
they were similar to (interdependent) or different from
(independent) their friends and family (Trafimow, Triandis,
and Goto 1991). A six-item scale adapted from Hamilton
and Biehal (2005) served as the manipulation check, with
Figure 3

STUDY 2a: EFFECT OF IDENTITY SALIENCE, CONGRUENCE,
AND SELF-CONSTRUAL ON PROMOTION PREFERENCES
7

Preference for Donation-Based Promotion

motion A,” and 7 = “definitely Promotion B”). We averaged
responses to form a preference index ( = .85).

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011

A: Congruent (Local) Charity

6
5
4
3
2
1

University identity salient
Self-construal salient
–1 SD (Independent)
+1 SD (Interdependent)
Self-Construal
B: Incongruent (Non-Local Charity)

7

Preference for Donation-Based Promotion

860

6
5
4
3
2
1

University identity salient
Self-construal salient
–1 SD (Independent)
+1 SD (Interdependent)
Self-Construal

Results

Promotion preference. We tested whether the pattern of
results for Study 2a would replicate using measured student
identity salience and manipulated self-construal. A regression analysis revealed a significant identity salience ¥ donation cause ¥ self-construal interaction ( = –.15 (.14), t =
–2.47, p < .05; see Table 2 and Figure 4). We further
assessed this three-way interaction by examining the selfconstrual ¥ identity salience interaction in each level of the
donation cause factor (congruent, incongruent). This analysis revealed a significant interaction only when the cause
was congruent with participants’ identities—that is, for the
donation supporting the Educational Foundation ( = –.20
(.19), t = –2.41, p < .05; for the donation made to the Action
Table 2

EFFECT OF SELF-CONSTRUAL, IDENTITY CONGRUENCE,
AND IDENTITY SALIENCE ON PROMOTION PREFERENCE
(STUDY 2B)
Independent Variable

Self-construal (SC)
Identity congruence (IC)
Identity salience (IS)
SC ¥ IC
SC ¥ IS
IC ¥ IS
SC ¥ IC ¥ IS
*p < .05.

Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficient
Coefficient
Estimate
Estimate
.27
.52
.23
.12
–.12
–.02
–.33

.12 (.14)
.23 (.14)
.10 (.13)
.05 (.14)
–.05 (.13)
–.01 (.13)
–.15 (.14)

t-Value
1.98*
3.84*
1.70
.89
–.88
–.12
–2.47*

for Healthy Kids cause,  = .09 (.19), t = 1.11, n.s.). We followed up the significant two-way interaction associated with
the Educational Foundation cause by examining the simple
slope of self-construal at one standard deviation above and
below the average score for identity salience. When business school identity was less salient, self-construal affected
preferences such that interdependent consumers reported
greater preference for the congruent donation than independent consumers ( = .38 (.27), t = 3.16, p < .05). However, when participants’ business school identities were
more salient, the simple slope of self-construal was not significant ( = –.03 (.27), t = –.24, n.s.), replicating the effect
observed in Study 2a.
Discussion

Studies 2a and 2b both provide support for our framework by indicating that self-construal affects preferences
only for identity-congruent donations, provided that selfconstrual is more salient than a cause-related social identity
Figure 4

STUDY 2b: EFFECT OF BUSINESS STUDENT IDENTITY
SALIENCE, CONGRUENCE, AND SELF-CONSTRUAL ON
PROMOTION PREFERENCE
A: Congruent Charity (Educational Foundation)

7

Preference for Donation-Based Promotion

higher scores indicating greater interdependence (for all
items, see the Web Appendix at http://www.marketingpower.
com/jmroct11). Confirming the success of this manipulation, participants in the interdependent condition reported a
greater interdependent focus than those in the independent
condition (Minter = 4.16 vs. Mindep = 3.81; t = 3.82, p < .01).
Identity salience. We measured student identity salience
by the degree to which participants identified with being a
business student (“To what extent do you consider yourself
to be a serious business student?” 1 = “not at all,” and 7 =
“very much so”; M = 5.09, SD = 1.56). This item was
embedded in a set of filler measures. Presumably, the more
strongly participants identified with being a business student, the more salient this specific social identity should be
compared with their self-construal level. Correspondingly,
responses indicating weaker identification levels should
reflect a lower salience of the business student identity than
self-construal.
Cause congruence and promotion preference. The donation featured a cause that should be viewed as either congruent (Educational Foundation) or incongruent (Action for
Healthy Kids) with participants’ business student identity.
As desired, participants perceived the Educational Foundation
(M = 3.70 on a seven-point scale) as more congruent with
their identity than Action for Healthy Kids (M = 2.83, t =
5.31, p < .05). Moreover, participants evaluated both of
these (actual) nonprofit organizations equally favorably (M =
8.10 vs. M = 8.14; t = –.34, n.s.). Participants reported their
promotion preferences using the four items in Study 2a ( =
.90).

861

6
5
4
3
2
1

High business identity
Low business identity
Independent
Interdependent
Self-Construal Prime

B: Incongruent Charity (Action for Healthy Kids)
7

Preference for Donation-Based Promotion

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

6

High business identity
Low business identity

5
4
3
2
1

Independent
Interdependent
Self-Construal Prime

862

during promotion evaluation. In contrast, when participants’
cause-related identities were more salient, preferences for
donation-based promotions were not influenced by selfconstrual. Furthermore, we show the robustness of these
effects across the two studies through the use of measured
and manipulated self-construal, measured and manipulated
identity salience, two cause-related identities (university
and business student), four charities, three product categories, and three incentive amounts (in Study 2a, 15 cents
for bottled water; in Study 2b, 50 cents for cereal and 20
cents for beverages).
One consistent finding in these studies is that, assuming
identity congruence and sufficient self-construal salience,
consumers with interdependent self-construals exhibit
stronger preferences for donations than consumers with
independent self-construals. As we noted previously, such a
preference is consistent with the motives these consumers
possess involving the welfare of others. A primary objective
of Study 3 is to identify contexts in which the donation promotion may not be perceived as providing as great a benefit
to others, thereby attenuating the effect of interdependent
self-construal on promotion preferences. A secondary objective of this study is to demonstrate that these preference
effects hold in a context involving actual choices participants make rather than the self-reported preferences assessed
in the preceding studies, given the potential shortcomings
associated with the latter measures.3
STUDY 3: THE MODERATING EFFECT OF CHARITY
EFFICIENCY

Thus far, our findings demonstrate that, under conditions
of identity congruence, interdependent consumers prefer a
donation-based promotion that facilitates collectivist goals
(e.g., to connect with and help others) that are presumed to
guide the behaviors of these consumers. Over the past several years, there has been increased attention in the media
and among consumers regarding the accountability and
effectiveness of charities (Gordon, Knock, and Neely 2009),
spawning organizations such as Charity Navigator (the
largest nonprofit rater) that provide guides to intelligent giving by evaluating charity efficiency (i.e., the degree to
which the monies collected by a charitable organization
actually benefit the associated cause).
The presence of high efficiency ratings may facilitate
charitable giving—including selection of donation-based
promotions—by serving to offset the general stereotype
many consumers hold for nonprofit entities as incompetent
(Aaker, Vohs, and Mogilner 2010).4 In contrast, ratings that
reflect a charity’s inefficiency may promote skepticism,
which undermines consumer response to corporate social
responsibility initiatives (Barone, Miyazaki, and Taylor

3We appreciate two anonymous reviewers’ suggestions to examine both
these issues.
4This line of thinking may cause one to question the self-construal and
cause-related social identity effects observed in the preceding studies, which
did not manipulate charity efficiency. Note, however, that these effects
were limited to identity-congruent conditions in which participants were
familiar with and/or identified with the causes featured in the donationbased promotions and that participants evaluated such causes relatively
favorably in pretests. Accordingly, it seems unlikely that participants would
have applied any general stereotype they held for nonprofits such as charities to the specific identity-congruent causes employed in these studies.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011
2000), including donation-based sales promotions. Indeed,
previous research has shown that the availability of Charity
Navigator ratings affects consumer giving, with declining
ratings resulting in fewer contributions to organizations
(Gordon, Knock, and Neely 2009). This effect of rating
information may be particularly influential among people
whose giving is prompted by collectivist goals (i.e., providing assistance to others), such as interdependent consumers.
We propose that when consumers perceive the charity
featured in a donation-based promotion as an inefficient
steward of the funds it collects, the benefits provided to
other people presumed to drive preferences for such offers
may be undermined to the point at which they become less
attractive relative to the personal benefits (cost savings)
associated with price discounts (Henderson and Arora
2010). When consumers view the charity as more efficient
in its efforts to benefit a social cause, however, the presumed benefits of donations and discounts should remain
intact, prompting a preference for donations observed in the
prior studies. Note that this influence of charity efficiency
on promotion preferences should be limited to people with
interdependent self-construals who are predisposed to considering alternative courses of action based on the consequences each holds for helping others (Brewer and Gardner
1996; Markus and Kitayama 1991). Conversely, variation in
charity efficiency seems unlikely to affect the decisions of
consumers possessing independent self-construals, given
the relative indifference of these consumers with respect to
the welfare of others in general and toward donation-based
sales promotions in particular. To examine these possibilities, we manipulated efficiency ratings associated with an
identity-congruent cause featured in a donation-based promotion in Study 3.
Method

A total of 133 university staff and students (78% female;
Mage = 30.64 years, SD =14.32 years, range = 19–63 years)
participated in the study. Participants first completed the
self-construal measure used in Studies 1 and 2a (introduced
as a “personality study”) and then took part in an ostensibly
unrelated market research study soliciting their evaluations
of local companies partnering with a charitable organization
called America’s Harvest that (unbeknownst to participants)
was a fictitious organization. After receiving some information about the charity (which included the charity efficiency
manipulation), participants were asked to choose one of two
coupons as a token of appreciation for their involvement.
One coupon offered $1 off the purchase of any hot coffee or
tea at a local university coffee bar, and the other coupon
offered a $1 donation to America’s Harvest with the fullprice purchase of a hot coffee or tea.5 After making their
coupon choice, participants completed a charity efficiency
manipulation check and were debriefed. The debriefing
informed participants of the fictitious nature of the charity
described but assured participants that their coupon was
5We note that when participants were making the coupon choice, the
donation coupon was described as benefiting America’s Harvest. Because
this is a fictitious organization and the coupons could actually be
redeemed, the printed coupon they received after making their choice indicated the specific details for redeeming their coupon at the local university
coffee bar; the rationale was explained in detail to participants in the
experimental debriefing.

valid and that it could either be redeemed for a beverage at
the coffee bar (for those selecting the discount) or would
generate a donation at an existing local food bank (for those
choosing the donation).
Self-construal. We assessed independent (12 items,  =
.72) and interdependent (12 items,  = .76) chronic selfconstruals (1 = “strongly disagree,” and 7 = “strongly
agree”) as in the previous studies. Positive scores indicated
relative interdependence (M = .01, SD = .09).
Charity efficiency. We randomly assigned participants to
one of two charity efficiency conditions. After reading a
brief description of America’s Harvest (portrayed as a
domestic hunger-relief charity that had originated in the
Midwest but was expanding its efforts to the local region),
participants in the low- (high-) efficiency condition were
told that America’s Harvest had received two (four) out of
four stars from Charity Navigator (described as an independent rater of charities) and were further informed that
this poor (positive) rating was due to its inefficient (efficient) use of funds. Additional details indicating the percentage of total revenues that supported the program’s mission of hunger relief compared with administrative
expenses (adapted from Charity Navigator’s website) were
also provided.
Pretest participants (N = 33) viewed the charity as less
efficient at using its funds in the low-efficiency (two-star)
condition (M = 2.90) than in the high-efficiency (four-star)
condition (M = 4.83; t = 3.20, p < .01). Participants also
believed that they could put their own money to better use
than would the charity to a greater extent in the two-star (vs.
four-star) condition (M = 5.30 vs. 4.22; t = 2.03, p < .05).
Consistent with the findings of previous research (e.g.,
Aaker, Vohs, and Mogilner 2010), participants in the lowefficiency condition also believed that the charity was less
competent (M = 3.30 vs. 5.10; t = 3.80, p < .05) and thus
were more skeptical of the organization (M = 5.30 vs. 3.91;
t = 2.40, p < .05) than participants in the high-efficiency
condition. Importantly, identity congruence did not differ by
charity efficiency condition (M = 3.74 vs. 3.30; t = .66,
n.s.).
Results

Manipulation check. After making their choice, participants responded to the following measure: “How efficient is
America’s Harvest at using funds for its mission’s programs
relative to other charities?” (1 = “not efficient at all,” and 7 =
“very efficient”). Participants in the high-efficiency condition
(M = 5.59) perceived the charity as more efficient (t = 11.54,
p < .01) at using its funds than those in the low-efficiency
condition (M = 2.93).
Coupon choice. We theorized that interdependent consumers’ preference for donation-based promotions we
observed previously would be attenuated when the cause
associated with such promotions involved an inefficient
charity. To examine this expectation, we conducted a binary,
logistic regression. Self-construal was not significant, but the
effect of charity efficiency was significant (b = .46, 2(1) =
5.16, p < .05). More important, the predicted self-construal ¥
charity efficiency interaction on coupon choice was significant (b = .48, 2(1) = 4.83, p < .05). To interpret this interaction, we examined the simple slope of self-construal by
charity efficiency. As we predicted, when the charity was rated

863

as inefficient, self-construal did not influence promotion
choice (b = –.32, 2(1) = .98, n.s.). In contrast, and consistent
with results from our previous studies, when the charity
received high efficiency ratings, interdependent consumers
were more likely to select the donation than were independent consumers (b = .64, 2(1) = 4.83, p < .05). We present
the results in Figure 5 by conducting median splits of selfconstrual.
Discussion. When the donation promotion featured an
efficient charity, the results of Study 3 confirm our previous
findings, as evidenced by interdependent participants’
heightened preference for the donation. However, this preference was eliminated when the donation-based promotion
benefited an “inefficient” charity. Thus, findings from Study
3 both corroborate (in the efficient charity condition) and
qualify (when an inefficient charity was involved) our
results reflecting interdependent participants’ preferences
for donations.
These findings also qualify our previous conclusions about
the role of identity congruence. We show that the influence
of self-construal and cause-related social identities is limited
to when donation-based preferences involve a charity
whose efforts are relevant to consumer interests (Studies 1
and 2). In Study 3, we find that the moderating influence of
charity efficiency indicates that identity congruence may
not necessarily be sufficient to produce such effects. These
results demonstrate a boundary condition for donation preferences of interdependent consumers. In contrast, in Study
4, we aim to identify a theoretically based variable that
attenuates the discount preference of independent consumers documented in our previous studies.
STUDY 4: THE MODERATING ROLE OF PRODUCT
TYPE

As we noted previously, price discounts primarily benefit
purchasers of the featured product rather than other people.
This benefit is compatible with the individualistic goals
Figure 5

STUDY 3: EFFECT OF SELF-CONSTRUAL AND CHARITY
EFFICIENCY ON PROMOTION CHOICE
100%
Proportion Choosing Donation-Based
Promotion

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

2-star rating
4-star rating

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

55%
30%
28%

20%

Interdependent
Independent
Self-Construal

864

held by independent consumers that shape their preference
for discounts over donations. Note that effects consistent
with this expectation obtained in our previous studies
employed products (e.g., bottled water, cereal, coffee) that
could be considered nonindulgent items. Although the purchase and consumption of such items are typically presumed to be relatively guilt-free, the same cannot be said of
more indulgent products (Khan and Dhar 2006; Strahilevitz
and Myers 1998). In addition to inducing feelings of guilt,
the purchase/use of indulgent products is difficult for consumers to justify. As we detail next, these differences in
indulgent versus nonindulgent products may affect the promotion preferences of independent consumers.
Prior work has demonstrated that the negative feelings
(e.g., guilt) associated with indulgent products can be compensated for by linking the purchase of such items to charitable donations (Strahilevitz and Myers 1998). The “warm
glow” that characterizes the moral satisfaction people feel
as a result of charitable giving (e.g., Andreoni 1990; Kahneman and Knetsch 1992) can provide an affective balance to
the guilt induced by indulgent products (Khan and Dhar
2006). In particular, the guilt that accompanies the purchase
of indulgent products may create an impetus for independent consumers to be more positively inclined to buy such
products when doing so triggers a donation to a charity.
Thus, these people should exhibit stronger preferences for
donation-based promotions when purchasing indulgent
items, insofar as the warm glow of making a donation
affords a means of affectively accommodating the guilt
associated with such products. However, when buying nonindulgent (e.g., healthy) products that do not engender feelings of guilt, independent consumers should (as observed
previously) prefer discount-based promotions that satisfy
their individualistic motives. In contrast, as documented in
our prior studies, interdependent consumers should prefer
donation-based promotions and should do so regardless of
product type insofar as their motives are more chronically
aligned with collectivist goals (e.g., helping others), even
when the product does not elicit guilt.
In addition to investigating these possibilities, we also
explore the extent to which promotion choice subsequently
influences consumer identities.6 As demonstrated in prior
research (LeBoeuf, Shafir, and Bayuk 2010; Reed 2004), as
well as in our previous studies, identity salience can significantly influence choice behaviors. A relatively unexplored
issue in the literature involves whether choice can shape
social identities. For example, engaging in prosocial “helping” behaviors can positively influence self-attributions and
self-esteem (Weinstein and Ryan 2010). The warm glow or
moral satisfaction that arises from altruistic behaviors
(Andreoni 1990; Kahneman and Knetsch 1992) such as
choosing a donation-based promotion may subsequently (and
positively) affect social identity (e.g., moral identity; Aquino
et al. 2009). This potential for the choice of a donationbased behavior to heighten a consumer’s moral identity
accessibility may, however, depend on his or her chronic
self-construal tendencies. The postchoice identity consequences arising from choosing donation-based promotions
may be particularly pronounced for independent consumers

6We appreciate an anonymous reviewer’s suggestion to examine this
effect.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011
who, because of their predispositions, are not likely to frequently perform behaviors that help others. In contrast,
selecting a donation-based promotion may have less of an
impact on the postchoice identities of interdependent consumers in light of their chronic tendencies toward engaging
in helping behaviors. To the best of our knowledge, the
potential influence of promotion choice on postchoice identity has not yet received empirical attention.
Method

A total of 168 undergraduate students (47% female) participated in the study for research credit. Participants first
completed the Singelis (1994) scales for independent (12
items,  = .74) and interdependent (12 items,  = .83)
chronic self-construals used in our previous studies, with
positive scores indicating relative interdependence (M =
.01, SD = .10). After a 15-minute unrelated filler task, participants were informed they would complete a market
research shopping study. In this task, participants chose
between a discount and donation promotion for either an
indulgent (M&M/Mars candy bar) or a healthy (Special K
90-calorie bar) snack product. Specifically, participants
were informed that two different promotions (manipulated
on a within-subject basis) were being evaluated for use in
selling a snack bar (which retailed for $1) to the market. For
the discount promotion, participants received the snack bar
and 50 cents; for the donation promotion, participants
received the snack bar with 50 cents donated to the same
university-affiliated charity used in Studies 1 and 2a (i.e.,
AggiesCAN). The particular promotion participants chose
to receive (promotion choice) served as the dependent
variable.7
Next, participants indicated the extent to which their promotion choice said something about the importance they
placed on various identities (i.e., being part of a larger
group, being intelligent, being independent, and being a
moral person). We used responses to these (seven-point)
measures, adapted from Aquino et al. (2009), to gauge the
accessibility of various social identities participants potentially held, including their moral identity (i.e., being a moral
person). This measure of moral identity accessibility is consistent with, and should presumably reflect the effects of,
the “community feeling” (Aquino et al. 2009; Grouzet et al.
2005) as well as the warm glow and moral satisfaction arising from altruistic behaviors (Andreoni 1990; Kahneman and
Knetsch 1992) such as choosing a donation-based promotion.
Results

Promotion choice. We anticipated that, for nonindulgent
products, the findings from Study 4 would replicate the
effect of self-construal on promotion preferences observed
in our previous studies, with interdependent consumers
exhibiting a stronger tendency to select donations than independents. However, we theorized that this self-construal
7We note that the percentage of participants choosing the donation-based
promotion in this study was higher than that observed in our prior studies.
We believe this may have occurred because participants were unexpectedly
receiving 50 cents when choosing the price discount rather than giving 50
cents when making the donation. In addition, the visibility of their choice to
the experimenter may also have increased their preference for the donationbased promotion.

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

Figure 6

STUDY 4: EFFECT OF SELF-CONSTRUAL AND PRODUCT
TYPE ON PROMOTION CHOICE

Proportion Choosing Donation-Based
Promotion

100%
90%

89%

80%

80%

93%
87%

70%
60%
50%

Candy bar
Special K bar
Interdependent
Independent
Self-Construal

Figure 7

STUDY 4: EFFECT OF SELF-CONSTRUAL AND PROMOTION
CHOICE ON MORAL IDENTITY ACCESSIBILITY
7
6

Moral Identity Accessibility

effect would be eliminated for promotion preferences
observed with respect to indulgent products because of the
elevated preferences of independent consumers for donations under such conditions. We conducted a binary logistic
regression, which revealed the predicted self-construal ¥
product type interaction (b = –.56, 2(1) = 4.48, p < .05).
Neither the effect of self-construal nor product type was significant. To interpret this interaction, we examined the simple slope of self-construal for each product type. When the
promotion pertained to a healthy product, interdependent
respondents were more likely to choose the donation than
were independent respondents (b = .91, 2(1) = 4.54, p <
.05). However, when the promotion pertained to an indulgent product, self-construal did not influence promotion
choice (b = –.21, 2(1) = .45, n.s.). We illustrate the results
by conducting median splits of self-construal (see Figure 6).
Postchoice identity. We also explored whether selfconstrual and promotion choice influenced participants’
postchoice identity—in particular, their sense of moral identity. We found that the interaction of self-construal and promotion choice influenced moral identity (b = –.15, t =
–2.11, p < .05). When consumers chose the discount promotion, moral identity did not differ by self-construal (b = .04,
t = .39, n.s.). In contrast, after choosing the donation-based
promotion, independent consumers reported placing a
greater importance on being a moral person than did interdependent consumers (b = –.26, t = –2.56, p < .05; see Figure 7). These results suggest that the moral identity of interdependent consumers, who have chronic goals to benefit the
welfare of others and who presumably tend to engage in
behaviors that benefit others, is relatively unaffected by a
single instance of such behavior (in particular, their choice
of a donation-based promotion). However, the sense of
moral identity that independent consumers experienced was
more salient after selecting the donation-based promotion.
Presumably, the moral identity of these consumers, who are

865

5
4
3

Independent self-construal
Interdependent self-construal

2
1

Discount

Promotion Choice

Donation

not predisposed toward engaging in altruistic behaviors, is
shaped to a much greater extent by situational factors (i.e.,
their promotional choice) than by their chronic, dispositional tendencies. To help alleviate the potential for demand,
we also measured other postchoice identities. We found that
these postchoice identity measures did not pertain to participants’ moral identities and did not reveal any interactive
effect of self-construal and promotion choice.8
GENERAL DISCUSSION

This research adds to the knowledge of an increasingly
used form of sales promotions that links product purchase
to charitable donations (Henderson and Arora 2010;
Krishna and Rajan 2009). Specifically, we provide an initial
inquiry into how multiple social identities may influence
consumer preferences for discounts versus donations. As
such, we make a meaningful contribution to the theoretical
understanding regarding the interplay of multiple identities
by examining interactive effects between self-construal and
specific (e.g., cause-related) social identities on consumer
decision making (Markus and Wurf 1987; Oyserman 2009).
From a more pragmatic angle, we provide insight into the
managerially important question of when managers should
invest their promotional budgets to fund discounts versus
donations. In the following subsections, we discuss these
contributions in greater detail.
Theoretical Implications

Consumer research has identified both the congruence
and the salience of social identities as factors that significantly influence consumer evaluations (LeBoeuf, Shafir,
and Bayuk 2010; Reed 2004). Moreover, research has recognized that consumers may hold multiple identities and
that these identities are malleable and may be organized
hierarchically (Markus and Kitayama 1991; Oyserman
2009). However, empirical work on the interplay of multiple identities is rather limited (see Winterich, Mittal, and
8We conducted analysis with product type as a factor, but it did not have
a significant effect, nor did it interact with self-construal or promotion
choice; thus, we excluded it from all reported postchoice identity analysis.

866

Ross 2009). We attempt to fill this void in the literature by
examining the relative influence of self-construal and
cause-related social identities.
By demonstrating the moderating roles of identity congruence and identity salience, we also shed light on the
process through which social identities influence consumer
decisions. In this regard, several findings from the current
research serve to temper earlier conclusions about self system effects on decision making. For example, the chronic
accessibility of self-construal suggests that it may have a
relatively pervasive influence on judgment that is unlikely
to be constrained by contextual factors (Markus and Wurf
1987). We suggest that self-construal effects on promotion
evaluations may be circumscribed to certain conditions on
the basis of the congruence and salience of accessible social
identities. We also show that the influence of self-construal
may depend on contextual factors associated with these
offers in terms of the efficiency of the charity featured in the
donation-based promotion as well as the specific product
being promoted. In providing such evidence, we demonstrate that the influence of self-construal may be not only
chronic but also situationally derived (Markus and Wurf
1987; Oyserman 2009). In qualifying the expectation that
self-construal will have omnibus effects on judgment, we
provide support for models of situated cognition (Oyserman
2009), in this case, with respect to the influence of multiple
social identities. Also, though considered here in the context
of promotion preferences, we provide broader insights into
how consumers’ multiple social identities may combine to
influence judgments in other consumer decision-making
domains (e.g., brand extension evaluations; Ahluwalia 2008).
We also offer a contribution to the sales promotions literature. Given the vast number of studies that have examined sales promotions and social identification independently, there is a surprising dearth of research considering the
nexus of these two areas. Although notable exceptions exist
(e.g., Barone and Roy 2010), this previous research has been
limited to investigating how social identification affects
evaluations of traditional discounts. Thus, in looking at how
multiple social identities that exist in a self system can
shape preferences for discounts versus donations, we provide a novel contribution to the promotions literature. More
specifically, we enhance the understanding of sales promotions that involve charitable donations by demonstrating
that evaluations of such offers may be influenced by social
identification processes unexplored in previous research on
this form of sales promotion (e.g., Arora and Henderson
2007; Henderson and Arora 2010; Krishna and Rajan 2009).
Although we focus on examining how social identification influences promotion choice, we also present some preliminary findings suggesting that consumers’ choices subsequently influence the accessibility of their identities.
Although the notion that identities can influence evaluations
and choice is well established (LeBoeuf, Shafir, and Bayuk
2010; Oyserman 2009; Reed 2004), the extent to which
these behaviors subsequently influence a person’s identity
is not fully understood. Although research on licensing
effects (e.g., Khan and Dhar 2006) demonstrates that committing to an altruistic act provides consumers with a basis
for rationalizing subsequent indulgent behaviors also provides some initial insight into this possibility, additional
work in this area is sorely needed. In particular, longitudinal

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011

investigations might prove particularly probative in assessing whether consumers’ choice of donation-based promotions holds lasting, quasi-permanent identity implications.
To this end, it may be worthwhile to consider whether the
influence of promotion choice on consumer identities is sufficiently robust to extend to subsequent consumption behaviors. For example, if consumers can manage their guilt by
purchasing indulgent products using donation-based promotions (as observed in Study 4), it is possible that this promotion preference will in turn also increase the quantity of the
product purchased and/or the level of satisfaction consumers attribute to the resulting consumption experience; it
may also make consumers more likely to consider donationbased promotions in the future. Clearly, how promotion
preferences subsequently affect consumers’ social identification and choice represents an area ripe for further inquiry.

Managerial Implications

Because different benefits are offered by traditional price
discounts and tie-ins with charitable causes, managers need
to have an understanding of the conditions under which
consumers will prefer donations versus discounts. We suggest that embracing donations would be appropriate when
such offers involve causes that are relevant to target consumers, particularly when these people are prone to adopting interdependent self-construals. Given the importance of
identity congruence to the success of donation-based promotions, marketing managers of national or international
companies may want to affiliate with one charity in their
corporate social responsibility efforts in general (and with
regard to designing donations in particular) as a means of
simplifying their promotional strategies.
Nonetheless, it is important for managers to consider the
heightened preference associated with donations involving
causes that are congruent with the specific social identities
held by target consumers. In selecting a partner charity,
then, managers must recognize that consumers can hold
multiple social identities and that associating brands with a
cause that is relevant to one of these identities will lead to
increased response rates for the promotion. Although this
strategy may be especially beneficial in targeting donations
to interdependent consumers, we suggest, on the basis of
findings from Studies 2a and 2b, that the effectiveness of
these tactics with regard to all consumers may be heightened by selecting relevant charities that are capable of making social identities particularly salient during promotional
evaluations. Allowing customers to choose which charity
their purchases support (e.g., K–12 school of choice with
Target REDcard) is a feature of promotional programs managers may want to consider to promote identity congruence
and, in doing so, enhance the response rates associated with
donation-based offers.
We provide sharper insight into this issue by delineating
the role of factors such as charity efficiency and product
type on consumer response to donation-based promotions in
Studies 3 and 4. Such findings hold implications regarding
the benefits obtained for both the company and the charity
affiliated with the donation-based promotion. In this regard,
Study 3 shows that, given the vast array of choices consumers have in supporting charities, managers should
emphasize the efficiency of the charity their firms have
elected to partner with in formulating their donation-based

Warm Glow or Cold, Hard Cash?

promotions. It may further benefit managers to consider
deploying donation-based promotions when they market
goods in relatively indulgent product categories because
such offers may facilitate consumers in their efforts to offset the guilt associated with such purchases.
We propose that interdependent consumers prefer donations more than independent consumers because these offers
benefit others. Would this pattern of effects be observed if
promotions offered benefits to others that did not pertain to
a charity? For example, if promotions provided benefits to
other people (e.g., A Friend Eats Free), or promotional
rewards benefitted for-profit organizations rather than the
consumer or nonprofits (e.g., 2% cash back of your total
purchase is given to your for-profit employer), would interdependent consumers continue to prefer these forms of
“other-rewarding” promotions compared with those that
directly reward the purchaser (e.g., discounts)? Along somewhat related lines, we focus on the relative preference of
interdependent versus independent consumers for donationbased promotions without much consideration for absolute
preferences. How would the general preference of interdependent (independent) consumers for donations (discounts) observed here be affected by variability in the
incentive level associated with these two forms of sales promotions? For example, would interdependent consumers
maintain their preference for donations when confronted
with discount levels that far exceed the charitable contribution generated by their purchase, or vice versa? Furthermore, will interdependent consumers continue to choose
donations when the reward to the self is of greater magnitude (i.e., donate $100 to local charity when opening a
checking account vs. receive $100 cash for opening a
checking account)? Examining consumer sensitivity to
trade-offs in the incentives associated with discounts and
donations represents a fruitful area for further research.
REFERENCES

Aaker, Jennifer, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Cassie Mogilner (2010),
“Nonprofits Are Seen as Warm and For-Profits as Competent:
Firm Stereotypes Matter,” Journal of Consumer Research, 37
(August), 224–37.
Ahluwalia, Rohini (2008), “How Far Can a Brand Stretch? Understanding the Role of Self-Construal,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 35 (June), 337–50.
Aiken, Leona and Stephen West (1991), Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.
Ailawadi, Kusum, Bari Harlam, Jacques César, and David Trounce
(2006), “Promotion Profitability for a Retailer: The Role of Promotion, Brand, Category, and Store Characteristics,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 43 (November), 518–35.
Andreoni, James (1990), “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow Giving,” The Economic
Journal, 100 (June), 464–77.
Aquino, Karl, Dan Freeman, Americus Reed, Vivien K.G. Lim,
and Will Felps (2009), “Testing a Social Cognitive Model of
Moral Behavior: The Interaction of Situational Factors and
Moral Identity Centrality,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97 (1), 123–41.
Aribarg, Anocha and Neeraj Arora (2008), “Brand Portfolio Promotions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45 (August),
391–402.
Arnett, Dennis B., Steve D. German, and Shelby D. Hunt (2003),
“The Identity Salience Model of Relationship Marketing Suc-

867

cess: The Case of Nonprofit Marketing,” Journal of Marketing,
67 (April), 89–105.
Arora, Neeraj and Ty Henderson (2007), “Embedded Premium
Promotion: Why It Works and How to Make It More Effective,”
Marketing Science, 26 (July/August), 514–31.
Barone, Michael J., Anthony D. Miyazaki, and Kimberly A. Taylor
(2000), “Does One Good Turn Deserve Another? Examining the
Influence of Cause-Related Marketing Efforts on Consumer
Choice,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28 (2),
250–64.
——— and Tirthankar Roy (2010), “Does Exclusivity Always Pay
Off? Exclusive Price Promotions and Consumer Response,”
Journal of Marketing, 74 (March), 121–32.
Blattberg, Robert C. and Scott A. Neslin (1990), Sales Promotions:
Concepts, Methods and Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brewer, Marilynn B. and Wendi Gardner (1996), “Who Is ‘We’?
Levels of Collective Identity and Self Representations,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 71 (1), 83–93.
Cone (2010), “Cone LLC Releases the 2010 Cone Cause Evolution Study,” (September 15), (accessed October 28, 2010),
[available at http://www.coneinc.com/cause-grows-consumerswant-more].
Escalas, Jennifer E. and James R. Bettman (2005), “Self-Construal,
Reference Groups, and Brand Meaning,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 32 (December), 378–89.
Gordon, Teresa P., Cathryn L. Knock, and Daniel G. Neely (2009),
“The Role of Rating Agencies in the Market for Charitable Contributions: An Empirical Test,” Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 28 (6), 469–84.
Grouzet, Frederick M.E., Tim Kasser, Aaron Ahuvia, Jose Miguel
Fernandez Dols, Youngmee Kim, Sing Lau, et al. (2005), “The
Structure of Goal Contents Across 15 Cultures,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89 (5), 800–816.
Hamilton, Rebecca W. and Gabriel J. Biehal (2005), “Achieving
Your Goals or Protecting Their Future? The Effects of SelfView on Goals and Choices,” Journal of Consumer Research,
32 (September), 277–83.
Henderson, Ty and Neeraj Arora (2010), “Promoting Brands
Across Categories with a Social Cause: Implementing Effective
Embedded Premium Programs,” Journal of Marketing, 74
(November), 41–60.
IEG (2009), “Sponsorship Spending on Causes to Total $1.55 Billion in 2009,” (accessed January 27, 2010), [available http://www.
sponsorship.com/IEGSR/2009/07/27/Sponsorship-SpendingOn-Causes-To-Total-$1-55-Bill.aspx].
Kahneman, Daniel and Jack L. Knetsch (1992), “Valuing Public
Goods: The Purchase of Moral Satisfaction,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 22 (1), 57–70.
Khan, Uzma and Ravi Dhar (2006), “Licensing Effect in Consumer Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (May),
259–66.
Krishna, Aradhna and Uday Rajan (2009), “Spillover Effects of
Cause-Related Products in a Product Portfolio,” Management
Science, 55 (9), 1469–85.
LeBoeuf, Robyn A., Eldar Shafir, and Julia Bayuk (2010), “The
Conflicting Choices of Alternating Selves,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 111 (1), 48–61.
Markus, Hazel and Shinobu Kitayama (1991), “Culture and the
Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion and Motivation,”
Psychological Review, 98 (April), 224–53.
——— and Elissa Wurf (1987), “The Dynamic Self-Concept: A
Social Psychological Perspective,” Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 299–337.
Oyserman, Daphna (2009), “Identity-Based Motivation: Implications for Action-Readiness, Procedural-Readiness, and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19 (3),
250–60.

868

Reed, Americus, II (2004), “Activating the Self-Importance of
Consumer Selves: Exploring Identity Salience Effect on Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research, 31 (2), 286–95.
Shang, Jen, Americus Reed II, and Rachel Croson (2008), “Identity Congruency Effects on Donations,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 45 (June), 351–61.
Shavitt, Sharon, Carlos J. Torelli, and Jimmy Wong (2009), “Identity-Based Motivation and Opportunities in Consumer
Research,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19 (3), 261–66.
Singelis, Theodore (1994), “The Measurement of Independent and
Interdependent Self-Construals,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20 (5), 580–91.
Strahilevitz, Michal and John G. Myers (1998), “Donations to
Charity as Purchase Incentives: How Well They Work May
Depend on What You Are Trying to Sell,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 24 (March), 434–46.
Swaminathan, Vanitha, Karen L. Page, and Zeynep Gürhan-Canli
(2007), “‘My’ Brand or ‘Our’ Brand: The Effects of Brand Relationship Dimensions and Self-Construal on Brand Evaluations,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 34 (August), 248–59.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2011
Trafimow, David, Harry Triandis, and Sharon Goto (1991), “Some
Tests of the Distinction Between the Private Self and the Collective Self,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60
(May), 649–55.
Weinstein, Nena and Richard M. Ryan (2010), “When Helping
Helps: Autonomous Motivation for Prosocial Behavior and Its
Influence on Well-Being for the Helper and Recipient,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 98 (2), 222–44.
Winterich, Karen Page, Vikas Mittal, and William T. Ross Jr.
(2009), “Donation Behavior Toward In-Groups and OutGroups: The Role of Gender and Moral Identity,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 36 (2), 199–214.
Zhang, Yinlong and L.J. Shrum (2009), “The Influence of SelfConstrual on Impulsive Consumption,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 35 (February), 838–50.

