Academy o/Management fieview, 1989, Vol. 14, No. 4, 516-531

Theory Construction as
Disciplined Imagination
KARL E. WEICK

The University of Michigan
The process of theory construction in organizational studies is portrayed as imagination disciplined by evolutionary processes analogous to artificial selection. The quality of theory produced is predicted to vary as a function of the accuracy and detail present in the
problem statement that triggers theory building, the number of and
independence among the conjectures that attempt to solve the problem, and the number and diversity of selection criteria used to test the
conjectures. It is argued that interest is a substitute for validation
during theory construction, middle range theories are a necessity if
the process is to he kept manageable, and representations such as
metaphors are inevitable, given the complexity of the subject matter.
Theorists often write trivial theories because
their process of theory construction is hemmed
in by methodological strictures that favor validation rather than usefulness (Lindblom, 1987,
p. 512). These strictures weaken theorizing because they de-emphasize the contribution that
imagination, representation, and selection
make to the process, and they diminish the importance of alternative theorizing activities such
as mapping, conceptual development, and
speculative thought.
Theory cannot be improved until we improve
the theorizing process, and we cannot improve
the theorizing process until we describe it more
explicitly, operate it more self-consciously, and
decouple it from validation more deliberately. A
more explicit description is necessary so we can
see more clearly where the process can be modified and what the consequences of these modifications might be.
Theorizing consists of disciplined imagination
that unfolds in a manner analogous to artificial
selection. To understand this analogy, we
should first see descriptions of the theorizing pro-

cess and how these descriptions often misrepresent the process. Second, we can learn how
some of these misrepresentations can be corrected if theorizing is viewed as disciplined
imagination, where the "discipline" in theorizing
comes from consistent application of selection
criteria to trial-and-error thinking and the
"imagination" in theorizing comes from deliberate diversity introduced into the problem statements, thought trials, and selection criteria that
comprise that thinking. An elaboration of the
theorizing process model is thus organized
around the three components of problem statements, thought trials, and selection criteria.

Descriptions of Theory Construction
An understanding of the terms theory, validation, and quality of theory is necessary for an
understanding of the model. Theory is a dimension rather than a category (Mohr, 1982, p. 6;
Runkel & Runkel, 1984, pp. 129-130), which
means that the more fully a generalization sat-

516

isfies the criteria of a theory, the more it deserves
the label theory. By theory we mean "an ordered set of assertions about a generic behavior
or structure assumed to hold throughout a significantly broad range of specific instances"
(Sutherland, 1975, p. 9). The dimensions implied
by the definition are indicated by the terms ordered, generic, and range. As generalizations
become more hierarchically ordered, behaviors
and structures that are the focus of the generalizations become more generic, and as the range
of specific instances that are explained becomes
broader, the resulting ideas are more deserving
of the label theory.
Verification and validation are used interchangeably to mean the demonstration, beyond
pure chance, that the ordered relationship predicted by a hypothesis exists and thereby lends
support to the hypothesis (adapted from Lastrucci, 1963). Proof, in other words, consists of
verification of a probabilistic statement. As Lastrucci (1963) noted.
Thus, for example, to say that the theory oi inherited characteristics has been "validated" by
demonstrating it in a given number of predictable instances is tantamount to saying that the
expressed relationship is a reliable one. To an
increasing extent, scientists tend to avoid implications of causality by thinking of verification as
an expression of high reliability, (pp. 236-237)
Finally, a good theory is a plausible theory,
and a theory is judged to be more plausible and
of higher quality if it is interesting rather than
obvious, irrelevant or absurd, obvious in novel
ways, a source of unexpected connections, high
in narrative rationality, aesthetically pleasing,
or correspondent with presumed realities. Each
of these outcomes is more likely when theorists
develop fuller problem statements, create more
diverse thought trials, and apply multiple selection criteria more consistently to these thought
trials.
Previous Descriptions
Given these background assumptions, we
can now look more closely at what has been

said previously about the actual activities that
go on during theory construction. Unfortunately,
the literature on this topic is sparse and uneven,
and tends to focus on outcomes and products
rather than process. For example, Freese (1980),
in constructing his review of formal theorizing
for the Annuai Review of Sociology, discovered
the "incredible anarchy" of "language, conceptions, proposals, interpretations, and results of
formal theorizing" (p. 189). Freese's attempt to
impose some order on this anarchy is impressive
and recommended reading. Other suggestions
of process are found in sources such as Reynolds
(1971), Blalock (1969), Johnson, Dandekar, and
Ashworth (1984), and Merton (1967). Representative previous descriptions of process include
the work of Homans, Kaplan, and Freese.
Homans (1964) described theory construction
as the concurrent development of concepts,
propositions that state a relationship between at
least two properties, and contingent propositions whose truth or falsity can be determined by
experience (a noncontingent proposition is a
straightforward mathematical deduction). Of
particular interest is Homans' irritation with theorists who equate theory with conceptual definitions; he stated that "much official sociological
theory consists in fact of concepts and their definitions: it provides the dictionary of a language
that possesses no sentences" (p. 957). As
Homans makes clear, researchers cannot make
deductions from concepts alone even though
Parsons repeatedly tried to do so. The lesson to
be learned is that any process must be designed
to highlight relationships, connections, and interdependencies in the phenomenon of interest.
Kaplan (1964) contrasted knowledge growth
by intention with knowledge growth by extension (p. 305). This contrast, which resembles Barlett's (1958) distinction between interpolation and
extrapolation, suggests two different processes
of theory building. Intention is used when a partial explanation of a whole region is made more
and more adequate. This strategy is illustrated
by the work of Darwin and Freud, but it also
seems applicable to the work of Bateson, J. D.
517

Thompson, and Selznick. Theorizing in this
mode lays out the lines that will be followed in
subsequent theory and observation. Representative metaphors are developing a photographic negative, bringing binoculars into sharper
focus, or gradually adding light to a darkened
room.
Knowledge growth by extension is used when
a relatively full explanation of a small region is
then carried over to an explanation of adjoining
regions. This strategy is illustrated by the expansion of studies of conditioning into a concern
with more complex forms of learning. The work
of Perrow on normal accidents, Bruner on narrative rationality, and Staw on escalation illustrate this strategy. Representative metaphors include a mosaic built piece by piece, science as
an edifice that is constructed much like an erector set, and a puzzle that is gradually solved as
more pieces are put into place.
Freese (1980) made a related distinction in
which he distinguished between two strategies:
(a) the strategy of developing generalizations m
open systems through the use of inductive abstraction, a strategy evident in the work of Blau
or Thibaut and Kelley; (b) the strategy of developing predictions in hypothetical or artificial
closed systems, as represented in the work of
Harrison White or Ken MacKenzie.
Closest in spirit to the current model is Bourgeois (1979). He suggested that seven steps are
involved in building theories of the middle
range and he presented these steps as chapter
headings in a thesis. They include, (1) partitioning of the topic under investigation, (2) method of
theory construction, (3) review of literature, (4)
construction of theory-induction from empirical
base, (5) extension of theory-deduction into
propositions, (6) metaphysical elaboration, and
(7) conclusion.
Although this list suggests that theory building
is virtually indistinguishable from problem solving, there are some important subtleties. First,
Steps 3, 4, and 5 occur concurrently rather than
sequentially. Second, Step 6, metaphysical
elaboration, is described as a receptacle for the

intuitions that surface during the theory-building task. These intuitions consist of "conceptualizations that might not fit the categories delineated or forced by the imposed rigor of the general theory building" (p. 445). This wisdom of the
theoretician, expressed in discursive form, consists of speculative ideas and deductions that
may be untestable; these may be crucial outcomes of the theorizing process. Third, Bourgeois insisted that the process continuously
should weave back and forth between intuition
and data-based theorizing and between induction and deduction. He concluded with five prescriptions such as "read some of the old
masters," "ground your theory on data," and
"take advantage of serendipity."
Closest m content to our argument is Campbell's (1962, 1969, 1974) discussion of theorizing
as ideational trial and error. Campbell (1974, p.
415) argued that the process of knowledge building is an evolutionary sequence that involves
trials in the form of conjectures and errors in the
form of refutations. Thus, as Popper (1966) said,
imagination becomes a "benign environment
that permits our hypotheses to die in our stead."
Learning is viewed as a cumulative achievement, and theorizing is viewed as "selective
propagation of those few social constructions
that refer more competently to their presumed
ontological referents" (Campbell, 1986, p. 118).
Selection of these more competent social constructions is done either by the external environment or by mental selectors that represent that
external environment and select on its behalf
(Campbell, 1974, p. 430).
Although variations on Campbell's ideas form
the framework of our argument, the present
model places greater emphasis on representations as a selection environment and less emphasis on validation as the ultimate goal of theory construction.
Limitations of Previous Descriptions
While each of the authors just mentioned has
important ideas about the process of theory
building, the descriptions portray theorizing as
518

mechanistic, with little appreciation of the often
intuitive, blind, wasteful, serendipitous, creative
quality of the process. Nor do their descriptions
make clear the choice points in the process
where theorists can act differently and produce
theories of better quality. Most existing descriptions of the theorizing process assume that validation is the ultimate test of a theory and that
theorizing itself is more credible the more closely
it simulates external validation at every step.
Thus, a dual concern with accurate representation and close correspondence between concepts and operations is evident virtually from the
start in any theorizing activity. These concerns
can be counterproductive to theory generation.
Most descriptions of theory construction sound
very much like conventional linear descriptions
of problem solving (e.g., Jackson, 1975), which is
unfortunate in at least two ways. First, as Bourgeois took pains to make clear, theory building
involves simultaneous parallel processing, not
sequential thinking. One might go even further
and argue that when theorizing is modeled after
linear problem solving, the outcomes are unremarkable. Second, when theorizing is equated
with problem solving, the theorizing is dominated by the question. Does this conjecture solve
the problem? That construction is unduly narrow
because theorizing does not always originate in
response to a problem (Ziman, 1987), and the
single criterion of a solution is inadequate to
cover other reasons why a conjecture might be
selectively r e t a i n e d in theorizing (e.g.,
plausability, coherence, elegance, simplicity,
usefulness).
Rather than adopt problem solving as the
model of the theorizing process, researchers
should view theory construction as sensemaking
(e.g., Astley, 1985). Dubin (1976) pointed the way
to this usage when he remarked that "a theory
tries to make sense out of the observable world
by ordering the relationships among elements
that constitute the theorist's focus of attention in
the real world" (p. 26). The problem of sensemaking for theorists occurs precisely because
the correspondence between concepts and ob-

servables is so loose (Gergen, 1986), because
the system being studied is open rather than
closed (Henshel, 1971), and because the dissemination of earlier sensemaking alters the relationships that theorists are currently trying to or- •
der (Maclntyre, 1985).

Disciplined Imagination
When theorists build theory, they design, conduct, and interpret imaginary experiments. In
doing so, their activities resemble the three processes of evolution: variation, selection, and retention. Because the theorist rather than nature
intentionally guides the evolutionary process,
theorizing is more like artificial selection than
natural selection, and theorizing becomes more
like natural selection the more the process is
dominated by validation and empiricism.
The close parallel between theory building
and evolutionary processes can be illustrated
with the example of marine navigation by radar. The context for this event involves a ship
navigating at night along a waterway filled with
actual tugs, barges, rocks, and phantom objects
that sometimes show up on radar screens. The
problem is to avoid collisions with real objects.
To solve this problem, variations in the form of
radar emissions simulate possible routes among
the objects. The selection criteria by which
routes are evaluated consist of radar emissions
that bounce back from what are presumed to be
actual objects. The outcome of the process is selective retention of routes that avoid echoes.
Various routes are simulated, and most of the
simulated routes encounter echoes and are rejected, but a handful encounter nothing and are
retained. These evolutionary processes are
guided by representations of the environment,
not by the environment itself. The radar emissions are a substitute for actually moving
through the environment. The echoes from these
emissions are substitutes for real objects, and
the selection of echo-free routes is a substitute for
actually moving around objects when they are
encountered.
519

Theory building involves an analogous process. There is a context which, for the sake of this
illustration, will be marine navigation at night
using radar. However, the context now takes the
form of a representation built from interviews,
accident reports, firsthand observation, and intuitions. The problem is why marine captains
who use radar often collide with the objects they
see on their screen, including other ships that
also have radar (Perrow, 1984, p. 214). To solve
this problem, variations in the form of conjectures simulate possible scenarios that could explain the collisions, such as lack of ability, poor
equipment design, visual illusions, stress, fatigue, and insurance settlements. The selection
criteria by which a conjecture is selected or rejected include judgments of whether it is interesting, plausible, consistent, or appropriate.
The outcome of this selection process is a conjecture that is retained or rejected by the theorist. An example of a conjecture that might be
retained is the suggestion that captains who
view ambiguous signs on their screens interpret
those signs in the way that poses the least danger and assumes the safest reality possible (Perrow, 1984, p. 217). Given their preference for
safe interpretations, captains don't take evasive
action until it is too late.
Again, the key point is that the process is
guided by representations. The selection criteria
are especially noteworthy because this is where
the theorizing process comes closest to the issue
of validation and its substitutes. The criterion
that selected among radar emissions was the
presence or absence of echoes which were
treated as surrogates for real collisions. The criterion that selected among thought trials was
the presence or absence of an affective judgment (e.g., that's interesting, that's absurd)
which was treated as a surrogate for confirmation or disconfirmation. Neither the echo nor the
judgment provides direct evidence of real objects or valid ideas. Nevertheless, subsequent
actions unfold as if the evidence were direct.
The navigational route is altered, the interesting
conjecture is cumulated with other conjectures.

and in both cases there is selective retention of
variations that satisfy one or more criteria.
Objects are more likely to be avoided and
theoretical problems are more likely to be solved
when the problem is represented more accurately and in greater detail with assumptions
made more explicit, as a greater number of heterogeneous variations are generated, and as
more selection criteria, of greater diversity, are
applied more consistently to the variations that
are generated. Alterations in these dimensions
of the process of evolution and theory building
should have a significant effect on the quality of
the outcomes generated by these processes.
Problem Statements
The occasion for theorizing has variously
been described as a puzzling story (Polanyi,
1989), problem (Lastrucci, 1963), question
(Turner, 1987), strategic research material (Merton, 1987), specified ignorance (Merton, 1987), or
an anomaly (Schank, 1988). Regardless of how
the trigger to theorizing is described, it consists
of some description that can vary in fineness of
detail, accuracy, and explicitness of assumptions which it incorporates. The theoretical problem that trial and error thinking tries to solve is
equivalent to the adaptation problem that trial
and error locomotion tries to solve. A conjecture
that solves a theoretical problem is equivalent to
an action that discovers a niche. In both cases,
the likelihood of a solution is determined in part
by the way the environment is represented or
perceived.
The two cases differ, however, in a crucial
way. Theorists both choose the form of the problem statement and declare when their thought
trials have solved the problem they pose, a sequence that resembles artificial selection. Theorists are both the source of variation and the
source of selection. People searching for niches
also may choose the form of their problem statements, but the environment declares which of
their trials, if any, are solutions. This latter sequence resembles natural selection because the
520

Since scientists have to live in the larger society
and are supported by it in their scientific activity, it becomes probable that science works best
on beliefs about which powerful economic, political, and religious authorities are indifferent. . . . Thus static electricity (rubbing cats' fur
on amber) and magnetism were optimal foci of
scientific growth, (p. 127)

source of variation differs from the source of selection. Despite this difference, solutions in both
cases are more likely to be discovered where the
representations are fuller. Whether the problem
is to find an explanation or a competitive advantage, fuller descriptions suggest a greater number of possibilities.
The problem statements that drive the theorizing process are more complex than they appear
to be. Not only do they contain an anomaly to be
explained, but they also contain a set of assumptions that can be confirmed or disconfirmed, a
set of domain words that can be connected differently, details that can be generalized, a text
that can be sorted into form words and substance words, an implied story whose plot may
be implausible, and answers to questions not
yet asked. This richness links the problem to the
theorist's past experience and allows for more
criteria than validation to become relevant to the
process (see Kaplan's related discussion of theoretical coherence, 1964, pp. 312-319).
The choice of problem statements in organizational theorizing is complicated by the fact
that organizational theorists, unlike theorists in
other fields, are constrained in their choices. The
result is that they often work on problems that
are wide in scope, but limited in detail, inaccurate in their representation, and vague regarding the assumptions involved. The nature of the
restriction is evident in the following description.
Natural scientists pick problems they can
solve, work for colleague approbation rather
than lay approbation, collaborate with people
who share their interests and values, and seldom worry about what others think. The world of
the social scientist, poet, theologian, and engineer is dramatically different. These people
choose problems because they urgently need
solution, whether they have the tools to solve
them or not.
Now comes the crucial question: Which group
would you expect to solve problems at a more
rapid rate? Campbell (1986) put the issue this
way:

By their very nature the problems imposed on
organizational theorists involve so many assumptions and such a mixture of accuracy and
inaccuracy that virtually all conjectures and all
selection criteria remain plausible and nothing
gets rejected or highlighted.
In this context the counsel to move toward
theories of the middle range (e.g., Pinder &
Moore, 1980; Merton, 1967; Weick, 1974) or toward theories that are nearly theories (Mohr,
1982) makes a different kind of sense. Middle
range theories are solutions to problems that
contain a limited number of assumptions and
considerable accuracy and detail in the problem specification. The scope of the problem is
also of manageable size. To look for theories of
the middle range is to prefigure problems in
such a way that the number of opportunities to
discover solutions is increased without becoming infinite.
In this context it also makes sense to emphasize that we should pay just as much attention to
problems defined by theorists as to those defined
by practitioners. (See Evered and Louis, 1981,
for a related discussion of insider-outsider perspectives.) While theorists may attack tractable
rather than "relevant" problems, the outcomes
they generate remain available as solutions to
practitioner problems not yet identified. If theorizing resembles artificial selection, then theorists control both environmental selection and
the criteria for survival of conjectures. This
means that even though they may choose to
study issues about which powerful people feel
strongly, they need not. The thrust of Campbell's
remarks is that they'll be better theorists if they
don't.

521

Thought Trials
When faced with a problem, the theorist generates conjectures about ways to solve it. These
conjectures, usually in the form of if-then sentences, vary at least in the number of trials generated and the heterogeneity between trials. In
general, a theorizing process characterized by a
greater number of diverse conjectures produces
better theory than a process characterized by a
smaller number of homogeneous conjectures.
The key property is heterogeneity among
thought trials. The advantage of blind-variation,
after which thought trials are modeled, is that
the process can be "smarter" than the people
who run it. If one thought trial has a minimal
effect on the generation of the next thought trial,
then a broader range of possibilities is tried.
Given the tendency of humans to exhibit
grooved, habituated, redundant thinking (Steinbruner, 1974), this requirement of good theorizing is among the most difficult to meet regularly.
There are, however, ways to increase independence among thought trials. Campbell
(1962) argued that one implication of Simon's
work with problem solving is that variation with
a strong classification system is preferable to
variation without strong classification (p. 66). A
strong classification system, one in which an
event clearly falls in one and only one category,
is especially helpful when solutions are expected to be nonrandomly distributed. Classifications suggest when thought trials may be
variations on the same theme rather than variations on different themes.
This point can be illustrated with Astley and
Van de Ven's (1983) influential differentiation of
organizational theory into four quadrants: system-structural (01), strategic choice (02), natural selection (03), collective-action (04). Variation in thought trials within one quadrant should
be associated with fewer breakthroughs than
would variations that originate in more than one
quadrant. Thus, population ecologists (03) or
social constructionists (02) who work within

522

their paradigm should generate less interesting
theories that are less important because the
thought trials have dependencies among them.
Blind alleys will be searched longer and more
deeply when classification is weak or ignored
than when it is strong and heeded. Those who
argue for dialectical oppositions (Astley & Van
de Ven, 1983), the cultivation of paradox (Ouinn
& Cameron, 1988), conceptualization at more
than one level of analysis (Staw, Sandelands, &
Dutton, 1981), and micro-macro linkages (KnorrCetina & Cicourel, 1981) can be viewed as people suggesting that heterogeneous thought trials
are more likely than homogeneous thought trials to solve theoretical problems.
Independence among thought trials can be
achieved by other means than strong classification systems. Any device that short circuits memory, foresight, or preference in the generation of
thought trials increases the independence of
these trials.
A good example is Crovitz's (1970) finding that
in any scientific writing, such as the abstracts of
articles published in Science, there are two
kinds of words: words that might appear in any
abstract (y words) and words such as substantive nouns that are specific to particular articles
{x words). The ratio of x words to y words suggests how much jargon the article contains. Furthermore, if theorists delete the x words and
keep the y words, they have a generic structure
for theorizing. Once the content words have
been removed from an argument, theorists are
left with a perfectly good set of blanks into which
their own nouns can be inserted. Those nouns
will be put into relations with one another independent of the theorists' own preferences.
A structure of form words used by Theorist A
can generate thought trials that could not be
imagined by Theorist B, who thinks using a different structure. To insert the ideas of one structure into the forms of another structure is to increase both the heterogeneity among thought
trials and the probability of an original solution.
Weick and Orton (1986) experimented with this

tactic using content from Staw, Sandelands,
and Dutton's (1981) article on threat-rigidity cycles and found that a variety of sensible assertions could be made for topics totally different
from those involving stress. It is unlikely that similar assertions would have been made by people working within those topics.
Given the argument that independence
among thought trials is crucial for generating
good theory, it is interesting to re-examine Lave
and March's (1975) suggestion that theoretical
propositions can be generated by increasing the
generality of specific observations.
Lave and March observed that "Little men often start an argument in the presence of big
men" (p. 65). Suppose the theoretical question is.
Why does that happen? Potential answers can
be generated by enlarging the initial statement
and making it more general. Specifically, people need to make the nouns men and argument
and the verb start more general, in ways that
include the original nouns and verbs as special
cases. Thus, Lave and March changed little
men to little people to physically disadvantaged
to inequalities among people and they changed
start an argument into act verbally aggressive
and then into aggression. With these changes
they arrived at an inductive abstraction which
reads, "Among people, inequalities in one domain lead to aggression in another."
Lave and March deliberately increased the
dependencies among their thought trials by using words that include the earlier words to move
toward a higher level of generality with respect
to a single problem. In doing so, however, they
treated people (male and female humans) as a
synonym for men, a substitution which feminist
scholars (e.g., Harding, 1986; Spivak, 1987)
would question. Thus, the thought trial, in becoming more general, also becomes less capable of solving the problem of why little white
males start arguments in the presence of big
white males. The thought trial is less able to
solve the theoretical problem because it is generated within a weak classification scheme (people are pretty much alike) that is insensitive to

differences that might allow for more accurate
understanding of the determinants of aggression.
The point here is not a point about gender, but
about classification and independence. Heterogeneity among thought trials is more difficult to
achieve than it might appear. Kuhn (1962), in
fact, made his reputation on this very difficulty,
namely, that thought trials tend toward homogeneity and create paradigms. Heterogeneity
within paradigms is rare. Because preference
and experience exert such a strong effect in the
generation of thought trials, and because these
effects are in the direction of homogeneity rather
than heterogeneity, better theorizing necessitates devices that force more independence
among thought trials. These devices include
heterogeneous research teams (Weick, 1983),
eclecticism, generalists, classification which
identifies underexploited combinations, and
randomizing devices.
Selection Criteria
Self-conscious manipulation of the selection
process is the hallmark of theory construction.
As with thought trials, both the number and diversity of the selection criteria make a difference. The greater the number of diverse criteria
applied to a conjecture, the higher the probability that those conjectures which are selected will
result in good theory. Furthermore, selection criteria must be applied consistently or theorists
will be left with an assortment of conjectures that
are just as fragmentary as those they started
with. Every conjecture can satisfy some criterion. Thus, if criteria are altered each time a
conjecture is tested, few conjectures will be rejected and little understanding will cumulate.
The point about consistency is important because theorists have an investment in their
ideas. They prefer to be right rather than wrong,
bright rather than dull, clever rather than pedestrian. Those understandable preferences
can lead to subtle shifts in criteria in the interest
of preserving ideas unrelated to a problem. (Recall Bourgeois's category "metaphysical elabor523

ation.") Thus, the theory-construction process
improves when many diverse selection criteria
are applied consistently.
Alternative portraits of the nature of selection
during theory construction are suggested by the
following two quotations:
Given the laboratory ior rejecting hypotheses,
science will develop most rapidly when the widest range of guesses is being tried. If the testing
process is very expensive, then vicarious testing
through theoretical integrative efforts utilizing
the empirical base of folk-wisdom, may be used
as a preliminary, but it cannot carry the whole
load and eventually experimental confrontation
is required. (Campbell, 1961, p. 21)
Consider two social worlds. In one, mankind is
at the edge of an intellectual mastery of it, approaching a capability to lay out a structured
set of propositions describing it with scientific
precision. In the other, it is far, far from such a
mastery; and man's incompetence is compounded by social change through social learning, which is itself accelerated by such accomplishments as can be credited to social science.
His set of structured scientific propositions can
never keep up with social change. In the first of
these two worlds, the task of social science
might be argued to be first and foremost that of
achieving scientific validity. In the second, social science has to grasp (by every available
method) at whatever limited understandings
can be achieved; and they include the understandings of better conceptualization, better formulation of questions, simple reporting, illuminating speculation, rival unvalidated or untested hypotheses, among other possibilities.
Hence the task of social science is to pursue all
these understandings with caution about prematurely assigning priority to any one above
the other. (Lindblom, 1987, p. 514)

The issue being debated is an issue of selection. In an earlier example to explain why ships
collide at night, it was argued that a reaction
such as "that's interesting" was sufficienf to selectively retain a conjecture, independent of additional efforts to verify it. Eventual attempts at
verification may occur sometime later but, for
reasons discussed by Lindblom (1987), Gergen
(1986), Henshel (1971) and others, the value of a
fheory does nof ride on the outcome of those

tests. The reason it does not is that validation is
not the key task of social science. It might be if
we could do it, but we can't—and neither can
economists (Lindblom, 1987, pp. 516-517).
If validation is not a criterion for retaining conjectures, this means at least two things. First, the
criteria used in place of validation must be explored carefully since the theorist, not the environment, now controls the survival of conjectures. Second, the contribution of social science
does not lie in validated knowledge, but rather
in the suggestion of relationships and connections that had previously not been suspected,
relationships that change actions and perspectives. As Lindblom (1987) observed, "of all our
valid knowledge of the social world, most of it
seems to have been the product of lay rather
than professional inquiry. . . . A typical situation in social science is that scientific inquiry
only modestly raises the validity of a lay proposition by qualifying it" (p. 517).
If valid knowledge is difficult, if not impossible
to attain in social science, then this puts theorizing and selection in a different light. Theorizing
is no longer just a preliminary to the real work of
verification, but instead it may involve a major
portion of whatever verification is possible
within the social sciences. In fact, if there is an
inherent loose coupling between scientific concepts and the reality to which they refer (Gergan, 1986), then the only place where those
ideas may be tested adequately would be in the
imagined worlds of mental experiments, laboratory experiments, or computer simulations.
The generic selection criterion that seems to
operate most often in theorizing and that substitutes for validafion is the judgment, "that's
plausible." The centrality of plausibility to the
theorizing process can be understood in the following way. When theorists apply selection criteria to their conjectures, they ask whether the
conjecture is interesting, obvious, connected,
believable, beautiful, or real, in the context of
the problem they are trying to solve. When they
ask these questions of the conjecture, the criterion that lies behind the question incorporates
524

considerable past experience with related problems which the theorist brings to bear on the
conjecture.
The question in the Hawthorne studies asks.
Why does decreased illumination lead to increased productivity? The conjecture, "Perhaps
the people producing the output are receiving
more attention than they are used to," may be
tested against the criterion, "Is that conjecture
interesting?" When the theorist asks if the
"attention" conjecture is interesting, he or she
actually tests the conjecture of increased attention against many more observations than those
observed at Hawthorne. The conjecture is being
tested against the theorist's prior experience that
has been edited down into assumptions that are
activated when the theorist asks. Is this conjecture interesting?
The assumption is a distillation of past experience. When that assumption is applied to a specific conjecture, the assumption tests the conjecture just as if an experiment had been run.
When a conjecture is tested against an assumption, the outcome of that test is signified by one of
four reactions: that's interesting (assumption of
moderate strength is disconfirmed), that's absurd (strong assumption is disconfirmed), that's
irrelevant (no assumption is activated), and
that's obvious (a strong assumption is confirmed). Those four reactions are the equivalent
of significance tests, and they serve as substitutes for validity. The judgment that's interesting
selects a conjecture for retention and further
use. That judgment is neither capricious nor arbitrary because it is made relative to a standard
that incorporates the results of earlier tests. That
standard takes the form of an assumption, and
the conjecture is compared with this standard
during theorizing.
Thus, plausibility is a substitute for validity.
The process of theory testing by an experimental
test is mimicked by the process of conjecture testing by an assumption test. In both cases, interesting outcomes are retained, while absurd, irrelevant, or obvious outcomes are dropped.
If theorizing is driven by concerns of plausi-

bility rather than concerns of validity, it would
follow that conjectures generated during theory
construction are selected based on judgments of
their plausibility, which can be assessed by a
variety of selection criteria.
That's Interesting. "Interest" as a selection criterion has been discussed most fully by Davis
(1971), but it has also been discussed by Mohr
(1982), Wicker (1985), Daft (1983), Lundberg (1976),
and Schank (1988). This criterion has been given
prominence because it is tied more closely to
past experience and prior tests than people realize. Davis's discussion of how to write interesting theories is often read as an invitation to engage in opportunistic, flashy theorizing.
However, another way to read his discussion
is as a description of a tool that aids in diagnosing the adequacy of past understanding and the
relevance of that understanding to current theoretical problems. It is as if the person proposes a
conjecture, experiences a feeling of interest,
and then uses that reaction as a clue to dig
deeper and uncover what assumption has been
disconfirmed, what data that assumption was
based on, and what the implications for current
understanding are of those newly awakened
doubts. Whenever one reacts with the feeling
that's interesting, that reaction is a clue that current experience has been tested against past experience, and the past understanding has been
found inadequate.
An understanding of the criterion of interest
explains part of the emotional side of theorizing.
Theorists are usually pleased when their assumptions are disconfirmed, whereas nontheorists are worried when their assumptions
are disconfirmed. A disconfirmed assumption is
an opportunity for a theorist to learn something
new, to discover something unexpected, to generate renewed interest in an old question, to
mystify something that had previously seemed
settled, to heighten intellectual stimulation, to
get recognition, and to alleviate boredom. However, a disconfirmed assumption is a problem
for a nontheorist because it suggests that past
experience is potentially misleading as a guide
525

for subsequent action and that coping may be
more difficult.
A disconfirmed assumpfion interrupts a layman's well-organized activities and plans, but it
accelerates the completion of the theorist's wellorganized activities and plans. Those differential effects suggest that each should experience
quite different emotional reactions to the experience of disconfirmed assumptions. Mandler
(1975) and Berscheid (1983) argued that interruptions generate negative affect, especially when
resumption of the interrupted activity is difficult,
alternative ways to fulfill the plan are unavailable, the interrupted sequence is tightly organized, and the time interval during which the
interruption lasts is lengthy. They also argued
that positive affect occurs when obstacles are
removed, when the attainment of plans is accelerated, and when organized responses can run
more smoothly.
Thus, theorists should like disconfirmed assumptions because they accelerate the completion of their intention to build interesting theory,
but nontheorists should dislike disconfirmed assumptions because they delay the completion of
their intentions. However, once a theorist has a
strong investment in a perspective, that investment should be expressed in plans to expand
the audience for the theory and in well-organized responses that demonstrate and apply
the theory. Once those changes occur, then disconfirmation should be felt as an interruption,
and strong negative feelings should be exhibited. Generalists, people with moderately strong
attachments to many ideas, should be hard to
interrupt and, once interrupted, should have
weaker, shorter negative reactions since they
have alternative paths to realize their plans.
Specialists, people with stronger attachments to
fewer ideas, should be easier to interrupt and,
once interrupted, should have stronger, more
sustained negative reactions because they have
fewer alternative pathways to realize their
plans. Generalists should be the upbeat, positive people in the profession while specialists
should be their grouchy, negative counterparts.

That's obvious. In the context of Davis's system, the reaction that's obvious is often the occasion to drop a conjecture from further consideration. Outside Davis's system, however, the
judgment that's obvious has other meaning.
Homans (1964), for example, argued that major premises in sociological theory often go unnoticed and unstated because they seem simple
and obvious. He noted the following:
In sociology as well as in history, it is our major
premises that we are most apt to leave unstated, particularly when they are psychological. We leave them unstated not only because
they are obvious, but also because they are so
obvious that we cannot bring ourselves to take
them seriously. In the social sciences, unlike
other sciences, the general laws are the ones
men have always known most about, though
they have not always formulated them as a psychologist would—and so they can hardly believe that they are general laws. Laws are
things that have to be discovered; something
lying around in plain sight comes too cheap to
be a law. (p. 968)

Thus the reaction that's obvious may be a clue to
significance as well as a clue to triviality.
Furthermore, what is obvious to one person
clearly may be novel to someone else. Thus, the
reaction that's obvious may trigger the question.
For whom might this not be obvious? The search
for an answer to this question might help establish the boundary conditions (Dubin, 1976) inside
which a conjecture will hold true but outside of
which it won't.
That's Connected. Crovitz (1970) developed
the relational algorithm as a device to generate
novel solutions to sticky problems. He extracted
all 42 relational words that were used in the 850word language system called Basic English and
proposed that meaning essentially is established when one item is placed in one of these 42
relations to another item. Thus, in a situation
with a speaker and an audience, the event is
very different if we have a situation in which a
person speaks down to an audience, up to an
audience, about an audience, behind an audience, without an audience, among a n audi526

ence, beneath an audience, or over an audience. When faced with a theoretical problem, a
theorist can generate thought trials by selecting
pairs of domain words from the problem (e.g.,
captain, radar) and then put them together with
all possible relational words to generate conjectures about why the problem occurs.
However, the relational algorithm also embodies an important selection criterion: Is this
event connected to that event? Theorists often
assume that events are unrelated and reactions
of interest often result when unexpected connections are discovered (Davis, 1971). To discover
an unexpected connection is to discover a new
set of implications. Thus, while the relational algorithm is a valuable device to create independence among thought trials—it puts domain
words into relations that the theorist forgot
about—it also activates the selection criterion of
connections. The assumption that events are unrelated is disconfirmed when people discover
fhey are connected and the reaction that's interesting serves as a clue to retain the conjecture.
That's Believable. Many problems that spur
theory construction originate in some form of
narrative (Polanyi, 1989; Polkinghorne, 1988).
This is not surprising since, as James said, "To
say that all human thinking is essentially of two
kinds—reasoning on the one hand, and narrative, descriptive, contemplative thinking on the
other—is to say only what every reader's experience will corroborate" (cited in Bruner, 1986, p.
xiii). The standards by which narratives are
judged differ from those used to judge arguments (Weick & Browning, 1986). Stories convince, not because they are truthful, but because they are lifelike, coherent, believable,
and because they have verisimilitude (Robinson, 1981). Causality, for example, is handled
differently in arguments and narratives. Bruner
explained:

One leads to a search for universal truth conditions, the other for particular connections between two events—mortal grief, suicide, foul
play. (1986, pp. 11-12)

To judge a conjecture believable, in the context of a story, is to assess the degree to which it
makes the story one starts with into a prototypical story; "a prototypical story identifies a protagonist, a predicament, attempts to resolve the
predicament, the outcomes of such attempts,
and the reactions of the protagonists to the
situation" (Robinson & Hawpe, 1986, p. 112). If a
conjecture strengthens one of these five elements in the story that spurs theory construction,
or if it supplies an element that is missing, then
the conjecture is more likely to be retained. If,
however, the conjecture neither strengthens nor
completes, then it is likely to be rejected.
That's Beautiful. Theorists sometimes use aesthetic criteria such as beauty to select conjectures (e.g., Mohr, 1982, p. 23), although this criterion is more likely to be found in mathematical
theory construction. Representative is Poincare's interesting conjecture that wishful thinking may err in the direction of the beautiful idea:
The useful combinations [in mathematical
invention] are precisely the most beautiful, I
mean those best able to charm this special sensibility that all mathematicians know . . . when
a sudden illumination seizes upon the mind of
the mathematician, it usually happens that it
does not deceive him, but it also sometimes
happens, as I have said, that it does not stand
the test of verification; well, we almost always
notice that this false idea, had it been true,
would have gratified our natural feeling for
mathematical elegance, (cited in Campbell,
1962, p. 62)

There is no reason to believe this experience is
enjoyed only by mathematicians, and Lave and
March (1975) suggested that elegant models in
the social sciences have the capacity to generate the same feeling (pp. 61-73).
That's Real. Problem statements, thought tri-

The term then functions differently in the logical
proposition "if x, then y" and in the narrative
recit "The king died and then the queen died."

527

als, and selection criteria constructed by theorists to aid theory construction are representations of a specific, material, external referent.
Many theorists do not place as much emphasis
on representation and suggest, instead, that
ideas are selected by a more direct access to the
real world in the selection process. Mach has
said that a mental copy of the world makes deduction possible, and Campbell (1986) has said
of the selection process, "Validity must come
from the contribution of the referent of belief to
the selection processes" (p. 118). Kaplan (1964),
with typical clarity, noted that "science is governed by the reality principle, its thought
checked and controlled by the things it thinks
about" (p. 312).
There are intense debates about the degree to
which the concepts of science correspond to the
"things" it thinks about (e.g., Gergen, 1986;
Needham, 1983), but for those who favor a
tighter correspondence, and perhaps also for
those with vivid, accurate, and detailed problem statements, the criterion that's real is a viable selector.
The criterion that's real invokes a combination
of experience, practice, and convention to select
among conjectures, whereas earlier criteria
such as interest rely more heavily on imagined
realities as selectors. That difference is potentially important when theorizing is considered
as a largely internal, private process. Theorists
can imagine as well as select realities that
merely serve the interests of powerful organizational actors and not be aware that this is happening. It is a thin line from that's interesting to
that's in my best interest, from that's obvious to
that's what managers want, from that's believable to that's what managers want to hear, and
from that's real to that's the power system 1 want.
While a reality check might catch these subtle, self-serving translations of theoretical analysis into theoretical advocacy, these translations
also can be partially caught by disciplined application of evolutionary rules of thumb to
thought trials. Myths can sneak through reality

checks as well as imagined realities. Neither set
of criteria is sufficient by itself.
There obviously are many more selection criteria than those discussed here. In the last analysis, the selection involved in theory construction is a process of editing, winnowing, and sifting. Goodfield described the style of theorizing
used by a young experimental biologist named
Anna, and in doing so illustrated the delicate
sieve involved in theoretical selection:
When a suggestion is first broached in science,
however tentatively, it can be, and often is bolstered by little pieces of information which up to
that point may well have seemed extraneous.
These can now be picked up and cemented in
place. Indeed, Anna once gave a lecture called
"the Stained Glass Window Lecture," explaining that all scientists have these little pieces of
colored glass, intriguing bits of information or
facts which they didn't quite know what to do
with. They leave them lying around until,
prompted by a new idea or a new piece of information, they mentally sift and select the ones
that may help the pattern, (quoted in lohnSteiner, 1985, p. 186)

All sifting is not the same. As Campbell (1962,
p. 65) added, "the likelihood of a productive
thought increases with the wider variety of reasons one has for judging a given outcome
'interesting'. " Sifting with a greater number of
distinct criteria, a process which Campbell calls
"opportunistic multipurposedness," should produce theories that are more important.

Implications
The view that theory construction involves
imagination disciplined by the processes of artificial selection has a variety of implications and
raises a number of questions. Having made the
process of theory construction more explicit, it
now becomes clearer that theory construction
can be modified at the step where the problem is
stated (make assumptions more explicit, make
representation more accurate, make represen-

528

tation more detailed), at the step where thought
trials are formulated (increase number of trials
generated, increase heterogeneity of trials generated), and at the step where criteria select
among thought trials (apply criteria more consistently, apply more criteria simultaneously,
apply more diverse criteria).
The difficulty in making these improvements is
that many of them require independence
among activities within a step and independence between steps. Needless to say, that is
difficult, but not impossible, when all activities
take place in the mind of the same theorist. Humans are serial information processors, able to
compartmentalize, and willing to forget. Humans also can use devices that increase independence, devices such as the relational algorithm and strong classification systems, and social arrangements in the interest of independence. The minute a theorist goes public with
his or her ideas, new points of view are introduced and dependencies decrease. Social arrangements such as research teams often serve
the same function.
Suppose, however, that dependencies remain. That need not be fatal if the theorist begins with an explicit starting point or can recover
retrospectively an approximation of that starting
point. Retrieval of the starting point allows other
people to begin at the same place and see
where their thinking leads them.
Aside from the issue that the process of theoryconstruction is always threatened by dependencies among thought trials, representations and
mental selectors are a crucial component of theory construction and should not be taken lightly.
That is especially true for organizational problems. Organizations are complex, dynamic, and
difficult to observe, which means that whenever
we think about them, the thinking will be guided
by indirect evidence and visualizations of what
they may be like, often captured in metaphors.
That is not to apologize for the materials used in
theory building. Rather, it emphasizes that theorists depend on pictures, maps, and metaphors

to grasp the object of study. Theorists have no
choice, but can be more deliberate in the formation of these images and more respectful of representations and efforts to improve them. Metaphors are not just catchy phrases designed to
dazzle an audience. Instead, they are one of the
few tools to create compact descriptions of complex phenomena. The fact that theory construction makes full use of representations is its
strength, not its weakness.
The assessment that's interesting has figured
prominently throughout, because it has been
viewed as a substitute for validity. An assessment of interest represents the terminal stage of
a substantial comparison between previous experience summarized into an assumption and a
current experience summarized into a conjecture which questions that summary. The reaction that's interesting essentially signifies that an
assumption has been falsified.
The preceding arguments suggest that the
theorist is overloaded by demands to run a miniature evolutionary system in a head that suffers
from bounded rationality. That load reaffirms
the value of working toward theories of the middle range.
Much as theorists may resist the notion, most
theory construction depends on conjectures,
preserved in well-crafted sentences, that are
tested in substitute environments by people
who have a stake in the outcome of the test and
may be tempted to bias that outcome. This is
the drama that lies behind trial and error thinking and it lies close to the surface in much theory construction. However, it is a manageable
drama.
The choice is not whether to do mental testing.
Instead, the choice is how well this less than
ideal procedure can be used to improve the
quality of theoretical thinking. To build better
theory, theorists have to "think better." That
empty platitude takes on more substance when
better thinking is interpreted to mean a more
informed and deliberate use of a simulated
evolutionary system.

529

References
Astley, W. G. (1985) Administrative science as socially constructed truth. Administrative Science Quarterly, 30, 497513.
Astley, W. G., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1983) Gentral perspectives and debates in organization theory. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 28, 245-273.
Bartlett, Sir F. (1958) Thinking. New York: Basic.
Berscheid, E. (1983) Emotion. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid,
A. Christensen, J. Harvey, T. Huston, G. Levinger, E. McClintock, A. Peplau, & D. R. Peterson (Eds.), Close relationships (pp. 110-168). San Francisco: Freeman.
Blalock, H. M. (1969) Theory construction. Englewood Gliffs,
NI: Prentice-Hall.
Bourgeois, L. J., HI (1979) Toward a method of middle-range
theorizing. Academy of Management Review, 4, 443-447.
Bruner, 1. (1986) Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Campbell, D. T. (1961) Methodological suggestions from a
comparative psychology of knowledge processes. In A.
Rapoport, L. von Bertalanffy, & R. L. Meier (Eds.), Generai
systems yearbook (Vol. 6, pp. 15-29). Ann Arbor, MI: Society for General Systems Research.
Campbell, D. T. (1962) Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as m other knowledge processes.
In L. von Bertalanffy & A. Rapoport (Eds.), General systems yearbook (Vol. 7, pp. 57-70). Ann Arbor, MI: Society
for General Systems Research.

Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology (pp. 17-39). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Evered, R., & Louis, M. R. (1981) Alternative perspectives in
the organizational sciences: Inquiry from the inside and
inquiry from the outside. Academy of Management Review, 6, 385-395.
Freese, L. (1980) Formal theorizing. Annual Review of Sociology, 6, 187-212.
Gergen, K. J. (1986). Correspondence versus autonomy in
the language of understanding human action. In D. W.
Fiske & R. A. Shweder (Eds.), Metatheory in social science
(pp. 136-162). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harding, S. (1986) The science question in feminism. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Henshel, R. L. (1971) Sociology and prediction. The American Sociologist, 6, 213-220.
Homans, G. C. (1964) Contempx)rary theory in sociology. In
R. E. L. Fans (Ed.), Handbook of modern sociology (pp.
951-977). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Jackson, K. F. (1975) The art of solving problems. New York
St. Martin's Press.
lohn-Steiner, V. (1985) Notebooks of the mind. New York:
Harper.
Johnson, T., Dandeker. C , & Ashworth, C. (1984) The structure of social theory. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Kaplan, A. (1964) The conduct of inquiry. San Francisco:
Chandler.

Campbell, D. T. (1969) Variation and selective retention in
socio-cultural evolution. In L. von Bertalanffy, A. Rapoport, & R. L. Meier (Eds.), General systems (Vol. 14, pp.
69-85). Ann Arbor, MI: Mental Health Research Inst.

Knorr-Cetina, K., & Cicourel, A. (Eds.) (1981) Advances in
social theory and methodology: Towards an integration of
micro and macro sociology. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

Campbell, D. T. (1974) Evolutionary epistemology. In P. A.
Schilpp (Ed.), The philosophy of Karl Popper (Vol. 14, pp.
413-463). Lasalle, IL: Open Court.

Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The structure of scientific revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lastrucci, C. L. (1963) The scientific approach. Cambridge,
MA: Schenkman.
Lave, C. A., & March, J. G. (1975) An introduction tomodek
in the social sciences. New York: Harper & Row.

Campbell, D. T. (1986) Science's social system of validityenhancing collective belief change and the problems of
the social sciences. In D. W. Fiske & R. A. Shweder (Eds.),
Metaiheory in social science: Pluralisms and subjectivities
(pp. 108-135). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lindblom, C. E. (1987) Alternatives to validity: Some
thoughts suggested by Campbell's guidelines. Knowledge: Creation, Diffusion, Utilization, 8, 509-520.
Lundberg, C. C. (1976) Hypothesis creation in organizational behavior research. Academy of Management Review, 1, 5-12.
Maclntyre, A. (1985) How psychology makes itself true—or
false. In S. Koch & D. E. Leary (Eds.), A century of psychology as science (pp. 897-903). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Crovitz, H. F. (1970) Galton's walk. New York: Harper.
Daft, R. L. (1983) Learning the craft of organizational research. Academy of Management Review, 8, 539-546.
Davis, M. W. (1971) That's interesting. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 1, 309-344.
Dubin, R. (1976) Theory building in applied areas. In M. D.

530

Mandler, G. (1975) Mind and emotion. New York: Wiley.
Merton, R. K. (1967) Qn theoretical sociology. New York:
Free Press.

Schank, R. (1988) The creative attitude. New York: Macmillan.
Spivak, G. C. (1987) In other worlds: Essays in cultural politics. New York: Methuen.

Merton, R. K. (1987) Three fragments from a sociologist's
notebooks. Annuai Review of Socioiogy, 13, 1-28.
Mohr, L. B. (1982) Explaining organizational behavior. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Needham, R. (1983) Against the tranquility of axioms. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Stow, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1981)Threatrigidity effects in organizational behavior: A multi-level
analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 510-524.
Steinbruner, J. D. (1974) The cybernetic theory of decision.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Perrow, C. (1984) Normal accidents. New York: Basic.
Pinder, C. C , & Moore, L. F. (1980) Middie range theor/and
the study of organizations. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff.
Polanyi, L. (1989) Telling the American story. Cambridge,
MA: MIT.
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1988) Narrative knowing and the human sciences. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Popper, K. R. (1966) Of ciouds and clocks. St. Louis: Washington University Press.
Quinn, R. E., & Cameron, K. S. (Eds.) (1988) Paradox and
transformation. Cambridge, MA: Bollinger.
Reynolds, P. D. (1971) A primer in theory construction. Indi-

anapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Robinson, J. A. (1981) Personal narratives reconsidered.
Journal of American Folklore, 94, 58-85.
Robinson, J. A., & Hawpe, L. (1986) Narrative thinking as a
heurtstic process. In T. R. Sarbin (Ed.), Narrative psychology (pp. 111 -125). New York: Praeger.
Runkel, P. J., & Runkel, M. (1984) A guide to usage for writers
and students in the social sciences. Totowa, NJ: Rowman
and AUanheld.

Sutherland. J. W. (1975) Systems: Analysis, administration,
and architecture. New York: Van Nostrand.
Turner, J. H. (1987) Analytical theorizing. In A. Giddens &
J. H. Turner (Eds.), Social theory today {pp. 156-194). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Weick, K. E. (1974) Middle range theories of social systems.
Behavioral Science, 19, 357-367.
Weick, K. E. (1983) Contradictions in a community of scholars: The cohesion-accuracy tradeoff. The Review of
Higher Education, 6, 253-267.
Weick, K. E., & Browning, L. D. (1986) Argument and narration in organizational communication. Journal of Management, 12, 243-259.
Weick, K. E., & Orton, J. D. (1986) Academic journals in the
classroom. Organizational Behavior Teaching Review,
11(2), 27-42.
Wicker, A. W. (1985) Getting our of our conceptual ruts.
American Psychologist, 40, 1094-1103.
Ziman, J. M. (1987) The problem of "problem choice." iVfinerva, 25, 92-106.

Karl E. Weick (Ph.D., Ohio State University) is the Rensis Likert Professor of Organizational Behavior and
Psychology in the Graduate School of Business Administration, University of Michigan.
This is an expanded version of a symposium paper
titled "The Process of Building Good Theory," presented at The Academy of Management, August,
1988. In reworking that paper I have been helped
significantly by ]. Douglas Orton, Kim Cameron,
Richard Daft, Roger Evered, Andrew Van de Ven,
Robert Quinn, and Daniel Denison. 1 am deeply
grateful to all of them.

531

