Journal of Brand Management (2021) 28:186–198
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41262-020-00224-4

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations
Abas Mirzaei1

· Cynthia M. Webster1 · Helen Siuki1

Revised: 17 October 2019 / Accepted: 24 November 2020 / Published online: 12 January 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited part of Springer Nature 2021

Abstract
Adopting and clearly communicating a higher purpose has become a key priority for many brands. More and more commercial organizations see purposeful branding as the next competitive advantage and are aligning themselves with a worthy cause
or societal issue. Non-profit organizations (NPOs), which arguably are inherently purpose-driven, should also be leveraging
the power of brand purpose. This paper studies brand purpose within the NPO space and explores different dimensions of
purpose communicated through social media, namely Facebook. Twenty brands across five broad NPO categories of Community Development, Education/Children, Culture, International and Environment were chosen. Four key purpose dimensions
emerged: CHANGE, SUPPORT, EMPOWER, and FIGHT. Further analysis of the diversification versus concentration of
these purpose dimensions indicated that only a few of the brands communicated a single purpose on their Facebook page.
Most NPO brands examined adopted a multidimensional brand purpose. This study adds to the brand communication literature and offers managerial implications for NPOs considering brand purpose strategies.
Keywords Brand purpose · Non-profit branding · Social branding · NPO brand personality

Introduction
With the exponential growth of non-profit organizations
(NPOs) over the past four decades, in both number and
diversity, from 300,000 in 1967 to 1.56 million in 2016
(McKeever 2019), differentiation has become a crucial task
for NPOs. While adopting a higher purpose is becoming a
new competitive edge for commercial brands, NPOs, naturally higher-purpose natives, are struggling to unlock their
potential and appeal to a wider target audiences.
Branding as a key strategy to capture consumer attention
and promote community engagement in prosocial behaviors
has gained momentum in the non-profit sector (Shehu et al.
2016). Research shows NPOs that communicate their core
values and positive intentions tend to have higher levels of
engagement (Tapp et al. 1999), charitable giving (Venable
et al. 2005; Sargeant et al. 2008), fundraising efforts (Hou
* Abas Mirzaei
Abas.mirzaei@mq.edu.au
Cynthia M. Webster
Cynthia.webster@mq.edu.au
Helen Siuki
Helen.siuki@mq.edu.au
1

Macquarie University Business School, Sydney, Australia

Vol:.(1234567890)

et al. 2009; Sargeant et al. 2008), volunteer recruitment, and
retention rates (Faircloth 2005; Randle et al. 2013). Over the
past few years, many NPOs have realized the importance
of employing branding strategies to facilitate the associated
benefits. Adopting human-like characteristics and brand
personalities, for instance, are being practiced by NPOs.
Usefulness, efficiency, and dynamism (Michel and Rieunier
2012), and affect, reliability, and ethicality (Michaelidou
et al. 2015a) are among dimensions of brand personality and
image adopted by NPOs. However, NPOs, built on higher
purpose, have the potential to go beyond brand personality
and leverage on their purpose. NPOs have societal purpose
encoded in their DNA that can be clearly communicated to
attract a wider and younger generation of donors, talent, and
contributors which is a main challenge for NPOs.
In the for-profit sector, commercial brands are increasingly moving into the space of purposeful branding, using
‘woke’ communications to take a stance and draw attention
to social or environmental issues. From Benetton’s groundbreaking, controversial “Colors” campaign tackling racism, AIDS, religious oppression and the death sentence to
more recent examples like Nike’s ‘Dream Crazy’ campaign,
Gillette’s ‘The Best Men Can Be’, and Adidas’s ‘What Do
You Represent?’, more and more brands are stepping out of
their comfort zone and aligning with worthy causes to show

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	

consumers how much they care about the community (Oster
2018). Competing on purpose is now seen as a new driver of
growth with up to 75% of growth coming from brands with
a higher social purpose (Bloomberg 2019).
Despite its importance and relevance in recent years,
brand purpose and its different dimensions have not been
explored in depth, especially in the non-profit sector (Greyser and Urde 2019). The aims of this article, therefore, are to
examine multiple brands across five different NPO categories addressing the following research objectives: (RQ1) to
explore the key dimensions of brand purpose communicated
by NPOs on their social media, (RQ2) to understand how
purpose dimensions vary across brands in different NPO
categories and (RQ3) to study the degree of concentration
and heterogeneity of social media communicated brand purpose in different NPO categories. A deeper understanding of
brand purpose within the sector gives NPOs a basis to make
decisions on adopting a higher order purpose that resonates
with their brand, their stakeholders and is appropriate to the
category in which they operate.
This is the first study to explore NPO social media communicated brand purpose across different non-profit categories, breaking down the sector and investigating the
cultivated distinctions among brand purpose across the
Community Development, Education/Children, Culture,
International, and Environment categories. Given the everincreasing number of non-profit organizations and the subsequent increase in competition for donations and talent,
identifying and communicating non-profit brand purpose is
becoming an important strategy in differentiating charitable
organizations. Therefore, this research fills an important gap
in the NPO branding literature offering both theoretical and
empirical contributions. It provides an overarching perspective on the importance of going beyond adopting humanlike characteristics and personalities and adopting a higher
purpose that can be used as NPOs vision reference point.
Moreover, this paper highlights the importance of effectively
and proactively communicating the NPO’s higher purpose
on their social media platforms. While different NPOs across
different sectors may adopt different purposes, the findings
of this study contribute toward a better understanding of key
dimensions of purposefulness that can be adopted by NPOs.
Our findings also contribute to the NPO branding literature
by providing a spotlight on the diversity and the similarity
of brand purpose dimensions being communicated on NPOs
social media.
We first start with a literature review to distinguish brand
purpose from other brand-related concepts such as brand
image, meaning, and personality. Building on this foundation, we describe the social media dataset and text mining
analytic approach used to explore NPO brand purpose. We
then present our results on the main dimensions of communicated brand purpose in the non-profit sector and offer

187

actionable insights to assist NPOs to develop and clearly
communicate their brand purpose.

Brand purpose
Purpose sits at the core of a brand’s identity. It is the essence
of the brand, what it stands for, the inspirational reason the
brand exists beyond making a profit (Kramer 2017). Like
other abstract brand concepts, such as brand personality,
brand purpose is one way to attract and connect with consumers. Research shows consumers associate brands with
both their personal and social identities influencing their
actions, evaluations and consumption experiences (Escalas
and Bettman 2005; Scaraboto and Fischer 2013). Brand purpose and personality are both considered as firm-centered
brand building components. Brand purpose, the ‘why’ of
the brand, is tightly linked to the brand’s culture and values.
Whereas brand personality is the ‘who’ of the brand, the set
of human traits that forms the brand’s character, style and
tone (Greyser and Urde 2019). Together with the brand’s
core personality, a clearly articulated purpose shapes the
vision, goals, and strategies providing guidance and direction (Gartenberg et al. 2019).
Theoretically, brand purpose can be purely profit maximization; however, the concept of a higher social purpose has
gained traction. Brands are encouraged to go beyond functional benefits and wealth creation to focus on broader, more
aspirational commitments that have an impact and make a
difference in people’s lives (Aaker 2014; Quinn and Thakor 2018). Purpose can provide an umbrella framework for
examining the role of business in society (Hollensbe et al.
2014). Standing for a higher purpose is becoming a competitive advantage, linking brand purpose to future growth
drivers (Vila and Bharadwaj 2017).
This shift to adopt a higher purpose has resulted in a
change of tone in leading brands’ marketing campaigns and
skepticism by consumers. A key criticism of commercial
brands adopting a higher purpose is the lack of authenticity and relevance. This cynical view is due in part to some
consumers seeing this as an attempt by commercial brands,
mainly concerned with the bottom line, as a new marketing
tool to win progressive target audiences. In other words,
commercial brands’ motivations in adopting a higher purpose may be seen ingenuine and profit oriented. We should
note that some commercial brands, such as Patagonia and
The North Face, have been successful incorporating a higher
purpose.
In the non-profit sector, however, there tends to be a less
cynical view toward NPOs’ motivations, as NPOs are higher
purpose natives. NPOs are socially conscious serving society and working for the common good. Environmental protection, delivering emergency medical aid, defending human

188

rights, and safeguarding cultural heritage are among the
social purposes advanced by NPOs like Sierra Club, Doctors without Borders, Amnesty International and the Global
Heritage Fund. With the lack of authenticity out of the equation for most reputable NPOs, effective communication of
a clear higher purpose is crucial in appealing to and attracting a wider target audiences. Yet, no research to date has
examined NPO brand purpose. Much of the NOP research
instead examines the related brand concepts of brand image,
personality, and meaning.

Brand personality, image, and meaning
Consumers tend to treat brands as if they are human. Brands
are described as trustworthy, fair, and virtuous, or on the
other end of the spectrum unreliable, dishonest, and unethical. Relying on visual, verbal, or rhetorical cues, consumers
evaluate different brands as potential candidates to start a
relationship and connect with brands they share human-like
characteristics, personalities, meanings, and mindsets. As
consumers, we develop relationship with brands and bring
our feelings to such relationships. We give brands credit or
blame them for their actions, we label them the coolest or
dullest, we even troll them. The consumer–brand relationship has become more important than ever (Batra 2019).
The process of forming a consumer–brand relationship
starts with finding human-like features in brands. Consumers may notice a human-like name, gender, face or a
human-like voice (Amazon Alexa, Michelin Man) which
may influence their decisions and choices. For example,
Hur et al. (2015), examining the impact of products with
human-face features on consumers desire to try a tempting
product, found that high-calorie cookies with human shape
and name, reduced the conflict between consumption desire
and self-control. As another example, in a computer game
study, Kim et al. (2016) found laptops with a human face
on the screen-reduced players’ perceived level of autonomy
which in turn reduced their level of enjoyment. Besides tangible and objective brand features, consumers also look for
subjective and conceptual human-like cues, categorizing
brands based on their personality traits, and the meanings
they communicate.
In evaluating brand meanings, consumers have different perspectives and motivations and thus form different
conscious and subconscious expectations. Brands that go
beyond providing functional benefits and offer symbolized
“meanings” that enable consumers to form and express their
desired identity are the most appealing to consumers (Malär
et al. 2011; Batra 2019). Some consumers see brands as a
tool for self-improvement, while others use brands to communicate their desired selves.

A. Mirzaei et al.

The level of overlap between the consumer and abstract
brand concepts like image, personality, and meaning
becomes extremely important and costly to miss (Malär
et al. 2011). This is because consumers start evaluating the
extent to which those human-like features are in sync with
their own personalities, meanings, and sense of self. Offering human-like characteristics with a high overlap, therefore, can contribute to the formation of a consumer–brand
relationship. The congruity is crucial in further developing the relationship, and the greater the overlap, the closer,
stronger, and more positive the relationship (Park and John
2010; Batra et al. 2012).
Brand concepts, therefore, are key reference points for
the level of brand attachment versus brand avoidance in consumer–brand relationships. Previous research in brand personality has provided several categorizations. After Aaker’s
(1997) seminal paper on brand personality conceptualization, offering categories such as sincerity, excitement, and
ruggedness, others have tried to overcome the shortcomings of Aaker’s brand personality dimensions, examining
several personality traits such as integrity, sincerity, excitement, sophistication, and trendiness. Criticizing the lack
of generalizability and its loose definition (Geuens et al.
2009; Avis et al. 2014; Rauschnabel et al. 2016), several
researchers have provided alternative brand personality
dimensions. Geuens et al. (2009) proposed responsibility, activity, aggressiveness, simplicity, and emotionality
as dimensions of brand personality. Freling et al. (2011)
proposed three dimensions for brand personality, including
favorability, originality, and clarity. On the most basic level,
Malone and Fiske (2013) show consumers’ perceptions of
brand personalities can be classified into two key categories:
warmth (associated with brand characteristics) and competence (related to the brand’s ability).

Non‑profit brand personality, image,
and meaning
Similar to commercial brands, communicating the right
brand personalities, images and meanings can also lead to
benefits for brands operating in the non-profit sector. Positive
NPO brand perceptions can lead to engaging the community
in prosocial behaviors (Shehu et al. 2016) and increasing the
level of charitable giving (Venable et al. 2005; Sargeant et al.
2008). It can also influence fundraising efforts (Hou et al.
2009; Sargeant et al. 2008), volunteer recruitment, and talent
retention rates (Faircloth 2005).
While there is extensive research on commercial brands,
few studies investigate non-profit brands, with much of the
research based on commercial brand conceptualizations.
This is despite their differences with NPOs, providing social
benefits for the community compared to commercial brands’

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	

economic priorities. Work on NPO brand personality dimensions is mostly informed by Aaker’s (1997) brand personality conceptualization. Examining non-profit stakeholders’
brand personality perceptions in a series of studies, Venable
et al. (2005) found that charity brands also have human-like
personalities; however, the types differ compared to commercial brands. While sophistication and ruggedness are
similar to commercial brands, Venable et al. (2005) identified integrity and nurturance as two new charity brand personality dimensions.
Sargeant et al. (2008) extend the research on NPO brand
personality and propose general personality dimensions
shared by non-profits, like benevolence, support, progression, and conservatism. The conservatism dimension, in
particular, is referred to organizations that are identified by
participants as devout, holy, and religious. Conservatism
was found to be mainly applied to NPOs such as church
and parachurch. Moreover, the majority of respondents in
the study were over 40 years old, with 36% being 60+ years
old. This suggests that conservatism was perceived as an
important personality trait, mostly by older participants
evaluating the personality of churches and parachurches.
Sargeant et al. (2008) also suggest NPOs can communicate
distinctive personalities based on two main categories: emotional engagement and performance. Brands can generate
emotional engagement through strong, bold, fun, and inspiring traits, while standing out based on performance requires
a brand to be associated with traits like prudent, efficient,
and effective. To differentiate themselves, the researchers
recommend charities focus on emotional engagement, charity voice, character of service, and the extent to which the
organization is perceived as traditional, however, brands
best incorporate shared personality dimensions like benevolence, and progression to signal their position within the
NPO sector. While Sargeant et al’s (2008) findings offer a
general recommendation toward incorporating personality
dimensions, they suggest prioritizing the progression dimension over conservatism in order to appeal to younger target
audiences.
Previous research also suggests that to appeal to the
younger generation on social media, brands focusing on
altruistic, other-oriented motivations are more effective than
brands promoting self-driven ends. Paulin et al.’s (2014) findings suggest focusing on higher purposes such as being supportive and caring can result in greater empathetic identification with social causes (Paulin et al. 2014). Consumer social
responsibility is also another angle that has been looked at to
understand younger generations’ participation in social initiatives. Johnson and Chattaraman (2019) suggest that supporting
others and getting involved in socially responsible participation among young consumers have both social-signaling and
self-signaling abilities. Millennials, however, have mixed
reputation when it comes to prosocial behaviors. On the one

189

hand, they are known for the Me Me Me generation who only
care about themselves (Cleary 2017; Stein 2013); on the other
hand, there are studies suggesting millennials are generous
(Schulte 2015) or even the most generous and the most careful
(Calderwood 2017). Koczanski and Rosen (2019), conducting a panel study, analyzed the charitable donation behavior
of younger generations vs. previous generations. They found
that subject to factors such as making a gift and the economic
background, millennials give substantially more than older
generations. However, the catch is that millennials are less
likely to make a donation at all (Koczanski, and Rosen 2019).
Kovic and Hänsli (2018) analyzing the difference in attitudes
toward non-profit organizations among different generations
(Baby Boomers, Generation X, and Millennials) found minor
intergenerational differences. According to Kovic and Hänsli
(2018), millennials are as interested in and willing to engage
with NPOs as previous generations. Recent research finds that
social media platforms such as Facebook can be a useful tool
in order to get the word out about non-profit organizations
and to recruit episodic volunteers among millennials (Lee
2020). Using the Minnesota Adolescent Community Cohort
Study database, Lee (2020) examining the impact of millennials’ Facebook usage and volunteering in civic engagement
found a bell-shaped relationship. This suggests that a moderate
Facebook engagement online can result in offline participation
in associated activities and volunteering. Thus, it is crucial
for brands to provide prosocial content on social media that
potentially can result in greater engagement of millennials in
charitable and socially responsible activities.
Bennett and Gabriel (2003) take a slightly different
approach and look at NPO brand image and reputation. They
suggest compassion, idealism, and taking a non-political
stance as some of the key dimensions. Michel and Rieunier (2012) also focus on NPO brand image and propose
usefulness, efficiency, affect, and dynamism as successful strategies. Michaelidou et al. (2015b) further validated
and extended Michel and Rieunier’s (2012) brand image
categorization and proposed usefulness, efficiency, affect,
dynamism, reliability, and ethicality as dimensions of charity brand image. Table 1 provides a summary of non-profit
brand personality measurements. As shown in Table 1, the
lack of higher order purpose is evident, as the majority of
brand personality, meaning, and image dimensions are functional and emotional, with no clear contribution to the community, having a positive influence on society, or being a
part of a larger purpose-driven change initiative.

Data and methodology
To explore how brand purpose is communicated within the
NPO sector, we studied four brands within five different
non-profit categories using Charity Navigator classification.

190

A. Mirzaei et al.

Table 1  Summary of main non-profit brand personality/image conceptualization
Authors

Brand personality/image

Methodology

Non-profit sector/organizations

Bennett and Gabriel (2003)

Compassion
Reputation
Dynamism
Popularity
Political orientation
Idealism
Focus on beneficiaries
Integrity
Ruggedness
Sophistication
Nurturance
Benevolence
Progression
Conservatism
Emotional Engagement
Tradition
Service
Voice
Usefulness
Efficiency
Affect
Dynamism
Usefulness
Efficiency
Affect
Dynamism
Reliability
Ethicality

Quantitative (survey)

Oxfam, The Royal Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA), Barnardos, The
Cancer Research Campaign, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
(NSPCC), SCOPE

Qualitative (interview,
focus group) quantitative (survey)

Health, environment/rights, and arts/humanities

Quantitative (survey)

Visual impairment (V.I.), children, animal welfare

Qualitative (interview)
Quantitative (survey)

Red Cross, The AFM-Téléthon (French Muscular
Dystrophy Association), UNICEF, Handicap
International, Doctors Without Borders

Quantitative (survey)

Barnardo’s
BBC Children

Venable et al. (2005)

Sargeant et al. (2008)

Michel and Rieunier (2012)

Michaelidou et al. (2015a)

The selected NPOs were among the top 100 NPOs overall
(according to TOPNONPROFIT.COM), and therefore top
in their own categories. Moreover, among the top NPOs,
we chose the ones with an active Facebook presence, those
that regularly posted content on their Facebook page. The
non-profit brands within each category are as follows:
Community Development (Ashoka, Do Something, Global
Giving, Kiva), Education/Children (Barnardos, Pencils of
Promise, Room to Read, Save the Children), International
(Acumen, Charity Water, Direct Relief, United Way), Culture (Art Institute of Chicago, Metropolitan Museum of Art
(Met), Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), New York Public
Library (NYPL)) and Environment (Green Peace, Nature
Conservancy, Oceana, Sierra Club). All 20 selected nonprofit brands had active Facebook brand pages and posted
regularly. Data consisted of brand communicated text posted
by the 20 brands on their respective Facebook brand pages.
For each non-profit brand, their latest 150 recent posts were
retrieved, for a total of 3000 posts.
Leximancer was used to analyze the text. Leximancer is
a text analysis method based on the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) approach which uses a nonlinear machine learning algorithm together with a clustering algorithm to identify
key concepts, themes, and their interrelationships (Smith and
Humphreys 2006). This approach was particularly suitable

for this research as it allowed us to identify the most frequent
brand concepts and to capture the co-occurrence of brand
purpose themes that emerged from the Facebook posts.
Data analysis proceeded as follows. First, we separately
conducted LDA in Leximancer for each brand to discover
key concepts, followed by a visual mapping to explore
the themes. This step was repeated for all brands in each
category.
Second, after identification and exploration, we classified
brand concepts into brand purpose and meaning/personality.
In doing so, we classified attributes and adjectives describing “who” the brand wants to be into brand personality.
Adjectives like innovative, wise, sustainable, and charitable, for instance, were classified as the brand personality a
brand is willing to communicate to their target audiences.
We also classified the verbs used in communicating the mission and the “why” of the brand under brand purpose. Verbs
like change, transform, empower, and support, signaling the
ultimate goal of the brand, were classified as purpose.
Third, we then delved deeper into NPO purpose, breaking down purpose into its main dimensions. In doing so,
we first used Leximancer to generate the key concepts
and attributes. We then coded the attributes into purpose
dimensions. There were two coders involved in this initiative; interreliability test was carried out, in which the

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	

list of Leximancer-generated attributes were coded into
four main purpose dimensions by two coders and a Kappa
score was calculated to examine the degree of agreement
between them. A Kappa score of 90% indicated a strong
agreement, placing the Kappa score in the ‘almost perfect’
agreement (Landis and Koch 1977; Carneiro and Garbero
2018).” The purpose score for each brand was calculated
based on the ratio of the number of times a purpose dimension appeared for a brand to the total number of times
across all brands. For instance, Charity: Water scored 0.03
for the purpose SUPPORT, at it appeared six times for
Charity: Water, and 205 times in total across 20 brands
(6/205 = 0.03).
Fourth, we mapped each brand across the four different NPO categories based on the identified brand purpose
dimensions, illustrating the extent to which brand purpose
dimensions vary across non-profit categories.
Fifth, to assess the heterogeneity of brand purpose dimensions, which is the extent to which a dimension is dominant
for each brand in each category, we calculated the level of
purpose concentration (or the degree of variation) using the
Herfindahl concentration index (HHI). To assess the extent
to which a purpose dimension is dominant within a brand,
following Tirunillai and Tellis (2014), we used the Herfindahl index which is a measure of concentration. In doing so,
we first computed the percentage share, the relative percentage of a communicated purpose:

Percentage share (𝛼) ∶

191

HHI =

n
∑

𝛼2.

1

Results
Table 2 shows the key brand concepts with the highest frequency and relevance that emerged from the analysis. Many
of these concepts are consistent with brand personality and
image concepts like sustainable, innovative, social, moral,
and committed. While some of these concepts are shared
across non-profit categories, each sector also communicates
its own distinct concepts. As shown in Fig. 1, being innovative, for instance, is shared across all four categories, followed by committed as the second most popular concept
which is common across three non-profit categories. Passionate, social, sustainable, honor, and different are communicated in at least two categories. We also find different
non-profit categories have their own unique communicated
meanings. Being adventurous, for example, is tied to the
environment category, while activist is communicated by
community development brands whereas being moral and
diverse are associated with charities in the international
category.
Addressing the first research question, ‘exploring the key
dimensions of brand purpose communicated by NPOs, it

Number of times a dimension was communicated by brand X
Total Number of times all dimensions were communicated by the brand

We then calculated HHI as the average percentage share
across brands within a sector:

was found that in addition to adopting certain personalities
and images, non-profit brands in different categories push

Table 2  NPO brand purpose and personality/image across categories
Sector

Purpose

International

Action, aid, care, challenge, change, education, impact
Make a difference, emergency, fund, help, inspire, learn, opportunity, philanthropy, power, provide, safe, supply, support
Education (children)
Act (urgently), care, change, educate, empower, give hope,
help, impact, inspire, lifesaving, protect, provide, support,
transform
Community development Care, challenge, change
Changemakers, collaboration, empower, help, hope, impact,
inspire, opportunity, provide, support, transform
Environment

Culture

Action, challenge, change
Defend, make a difference, discover, emergency, fight, help,
impact, inspire, justice, opportunity, power, protect, provide,
stop
Learn, inspire, impact, explore, stop, help, change, fund, support, power

Personality/image
Innovation, committed
Honor, passionate, moral, rugged, generous, diverse
Innovation
Different, social
Emotional
Innovation, committed, different, honor, passionate,
social, sustainable
Activist, charitable, collective, creative, dedicated,
green, leading, powerful, safe, wise
Innovation, committing
Sustainable
Adventure, clean, environmental, renewable
Modern, ancient, artistic, contemporary, important,
special, social, perfect, exclusive, creative

192
Fig. 1  Commonality of brand
concepts across NPOs

A. Mirzaei et al.
4

3

2

for social, economic or environmental purposes. Some are
common across the five categories, and some are unique
to each. While adjectives describe brand personalities and
images, adjectives are used for perceived brand attitudes.
Brand purpose is communicated with verbs that describe
the mission and vision of an NPO. Saving lives, empowering
community, providing opportunity, and educating people are
among some of the common purposes that emerged from
the analysis of brand content on Facebook. While NPOs in
the Environment category heavily focus on fighting against
deforestation and extinction, NPOs in Community Development tend to focus on providing shelters and supporting the
homeless to help change and transform their situation. Purpose in the Education/Children and International categories
similarly focuses on caring, helping, changing, and supporting those in need. However, in the culture sector, empowering through educating was the key purpose.

Fig. 2  From brand purpose to
brand personality and positioning

Safe

Wise

Rugged

Powerful

Renewable

Moral

Green

Leading

Generous

Environmental

Diverse

Emotional

Dedicated

Creative

Collective

Clean

Charitable

Adventure

Activist

Sustainable

Social

Honor

Passionate

Different

Committed

0

Innovation

1

As shown in Fig. 2, mapping the combination of brand
purpose and other brand concepts can provide a broader
picture of what a non-profit brand stands for and is trying
to communicate. For instance, a non-profit brand can adopt
empowering as its brand purpose and choose being wise
as its personality and therefore communicate a wise brand
that dedicates its efforts in empowering the community. As
another example, a brand in the Education/Children sector,
with the purpose of protecting and supporting children, may
adopt an innovative and emotional brand personality with
fighting against abuse and exploitation as its purpose.

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	

193

Dimensions of non‑profit brand purpose
communicated on social media
In order to more specifically address the first research question on the key dimensions of NPO purpose, all the identified brand purpose types in Table 2 were further classified to develop a broader set of non-profit brand purpose
dimensions. Based on the similarity of purpose concepts, we
extract four main dimensions of non-profit brand purposes.
For instance, as shown in Table 3, concepts like make a difference, impact, transform, and lifesaving are classified into
an overall purpose dimension of ‘CHANGE’. Concepts like
aid, care, provide, supply, and help form the second main
purpose dimension of ‘SUPPORT’. The third dimension of
non-profit brand purpose ‘EMPOWER’ is based on concepts
like opportunity, empower, educate/learn, and challenge.
The final purpose dimension ‘FIGHT’ includes concepts
like fight, stop, protect, act, and defend.
Figure 3 maps the five non-profit categories on the main
non-profit purpose dimensions based on the average number of times each of the concepts is listed in Table 3. For
instance, the number of times the ‘Support’ purpose dimension emerged in its underlying concepts such as aid, care,
provide is first calculated for each brand and then averaged across four brands in each sector. As shown in Fig. 3,
‘FIGHT’ appears as the main purpose for brands in the Environment sector, while ‘SUPPORT’ is the key purpose for the
Education/Children category. Purpose for the culture category has the least diversity and mostly focused on one main
purpose, that of inspiring and empowering through educating. Overall, the results indicate Community Development
NPOs heavily communicate ‘EMPOWER’ and ‘CHANGE’
as its two key purpose dimensions while International NPOs
seem to center on all four purpose dimensions.
To address the RQ2, better understanding how purpose
dimensions vary across brands in different NPO categories, Table 4 compares the distribution of purpose dimensions across the five non-profit categories. A review shows
the variation in purpose dimensions and the concentration
of dimension in different sectors. As shown in Table 4,
based on the number of concepts found for each purpose,

CHANGE
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
FIGHT

SUPPORT

0

EMPOWER
International

Education (Children)

Environment

Culture

Community Development

Fig. 3  Non-profit brand purpose dimensions across five sectors

certain dimensions like SUPPORT and CHANGE are
common across all sectors and FIGHT is more unique to
the Environment sector.
Comparing brands in each category, Fig. 4 shows purpose consistency among the non-profit brands in the Education/Children and Environment categories. Brands in
Education/Children are mostly focused on the SUPPORT
and EMPOWERING dimensions of purpose, and less
focused on the CHANGE and FIGHT dimensions (Fig. 4,
Panel B). In contrast, non-profit brands in Environment
appear to be heavily communicating the components of
FIGHT as a key purpose dimension (Fig. 4, Panel D).
Unlike Education/Children, Culture, and Environment,
where NPOs communicate one or two purpose dimensions,
brands in the International and Community Development
categories are more diverse and connected to multiple
purpose dimensions. In the Community Development
category, for instance, CHANGE and EMPOWER are the
key purpose dimensions for Ashoka, while Do Something
communicates the FIGHT dimension of purpose, and
Kiva’s main purpose is EMPOWER (Fig. 4, Panel C). The
Culture sector is relatively less purpose focused based on
the social media communicated content.

Table 4  Distribution of purpose dimensions across different nonprofit categories

Table 3  Main dimensions of NPO purpose
Change

Support

Empower

Fight

Change
Make a difference
Lifesaving
Impact
Give hope
Transform

Support
Aid
Care
Provide
Supply
Fund
Help

Empower
Opportunity
Power
Challenge
Educate/learn
Inspire

Fight
Stop
Protect
Act/emergency
Defend

Change
Support
Empower
Fight

International

ComEducation/chil- munity
developdren
ment

Environment

Culture

3
7
4
1

6
4
2
2

3
2
2
4

2
3
3
1

4
4
2
–

194

A. Mirzaei et al.

International

Education (Children)

CHANGE
0.15
0.1
0.05
FIGHT

SUPPORT

0

FIGHT

Charity: Water

Direct Relief

United Way

Barnardos

Community Development

0.3
0.2
0.1
SUPPORT

0

FIGHT

Do Something

Room to Read

Save the Children

CHANGE
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

SUPPORT

EMPOWER

EMPOWER
Ashoka

Pencils of Promise

Environment

CHANGE
0.4

FIGHT

SUPPORT

EMPOWER

EMPOWER
Acumen

CHANGE
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Global Giving

Green Peace

Kiva

Nature Conservancy

Oceana

Sierra Club

Culture
CHANGE
0.15
0.1
0.05
FIGHT

SUPPORT

0

EMPOWER
Art Institute of Chicago

MET

MoMA

NYPL

Fig. 4  a–e Average popularity of purpose dimensions for each brand across five sectors

Heterogeneity and concentration of purpose
In order to address RQ3, examining the degree of concentration and heterogeneity of social media communicated
brand purpose in different NPO categories, we employed
Herfindahl index (HHI). HHI is an opposite measure for
diversity; a low HHI score indicates a diverse communicated brand purpose with high heterogeneity. On the other
hand, a high HHI score reflects a high concentration and

low purpose diversity. As shown in Table 5, column 2, the
index varies across brands in different sectors, from 29%
for Nature Conservancy to 82% for Barnardos. The results
show that with a few exceptions, most brands across four
sectors are communicating a moderate level of purpose
diversity and are less focused on just one purpose dimension. United Way for instance with only a 35% concentration index score communicates three purpose dimensions,
as opposed to Barnardos with a very high concentration

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	
Table 5  Concentration and
heterogeneity of purpose
dimensions across non-profit
brands

Brands

195
HHI concentra- Heterogeneity
tion index

International
Acumen
Charity: water
Direct relief
United way

64.73
56.79
50.22
34.95

Low
Moderate
Moderate
High

Education (children)
Barnardos
Pencils of promise
Room to Read
Save the Children

82.26
42.32
64.88
63.00

Low
High
Moderate
Moderate

Community development
Ashoka
Do Something
Global Giving
Kiva

45.30
52.66
52.00
41.27

Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High

Environment
Green Peace
Nature Conservancy
Oceana
Sierra Club

58.00
29.58
51.79
52.66

Moderate
High
Moderate
Moderate

Culture
Art Institute of Chicago
Metropolitan Museum of Art (met)
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA)
New York Public Library (NYPL)

54.45
12.50
32.67
37.50

Moderate
High
High
High

and strongly communicating one purpose dimension,
SUPPORT.
Looking at the average HHI score, Education/Children with
the highest average HHI suggests that brands in this category
communicate more clearly about their brand purpose and are
focused on one or two dimensions. For instance, EMPOWER
is the dominant purpose for Room to Read, while SUPPORT
is the dominant purpose for Save the Children. In Community Development, Kiva’s low HHI core suggests that Kiva is
communicating a diverse range of purpose dimensions, from
EMPOWER to CHANGE to SUPPORT, with a high purpose
heterogeneity.

Sector mean

Sector STD

51.67

12.63

63.11

16.35

47.81

5.48

48.01

12.59

34.28

17.26

Discussion and implications
Similar to different types of interactions and relationships
we have with other people, we also develop relationships
with brands (Keller 2012). With thousands of brands to
interact with every day, it is difficult if not impossible for
people to develop deep and meaningful, or intense relationships with all brands. Thus, consumers choose those
brands that resonate with them, that they feel more in sync
with, and relate to, both at a personal and social level (Keller 2012; Schmitt 2012). To win the hearts and minds of

196

consumers, brands need to become relevant (Aaker 2012).
Consumers may develop attachments with brands if they
find brands provide two types of benefits: intensity (i.e.,
the depth of the psychological bond in the customer–self
relationship) and activity (i.e., the behavioral changes
occurring through such a deep bond) (Keller 2012). In
the non-profit sector, the ‘activity’ dimension of being
attached to target audiences is even more important, as
an element of behavioral support is expected in the form
of volunteering, donating, retail purchase, or encouraging
others to become involved in the cause or social issue.
Communicating key brand concepts and brand purposes
that target audiences can relate to is therefore crucial in
developing brand relationships.
This study not only adds to the previous literature on
brand image and personality, it also contributes to the underresearched area of brand purpose, in particular, for non-profit
brands. This is the first study to explore non-profit brand
purpose dimensions. With an increasing interest in adopting higher order purpose, going beyond functional benefits
and communicating a purpose that reflects an organization’s
role in society, it is crucial to understand different aspects of
purposefulness. This article explores different dimensions
of brand purpose communicated by NPOs across five different sectors, International, Education (Children), Community Development, Culture and Environment. Analyzing
the Facebook posts content, communicated by NPOs on their
Facebook brand page, this article identifies four non-profit
brand purpose dimensions.
Brands in each sector communicate a range of purposes
such as providing aid, making a difference, supporting,
empowering, or changing and saving lives. This research
explored four key brand purpose dimensions including
CHANGE, SUPPORT, EMPOWER, and FIGHT. The purpose CHANGE encompasses concepts like making a difference, lifesaving, impact and transforming. EMPOWERING
as another purpose contains opportunity, power, challenge,
and inspire. The purpose SUPPORT is based on concepts
such as help, fund, supply, aid, and care. FIGHT, the final
and fourth dimension explored on social media, communicates actions such as stop, fight, protect, act, and defend.
The purpose dimensions are mostly shared across the five
NPO sectors. In particular, EMPOWER is a key purpose for
Culture, Community Development, and Education/Children
sectors, while CHANGE is a common purpose among the
International NPO sector and Community Development.
However, the purpose FIGHT is a dominant purpose for
NPOs in the Environment sector, whereas SUPPORT is
the leading purpose among NPOs in the Education/Children sector. While there is overlap in the communicated
brand purpose across NPOs, each non-profit category has
at least one dominant purpose. The degree of concentration in adopting and communicating purposeful content on

A. Mirzaei et al.

social media is highest in the Environment sector. Unlike
other sectors, the Environment sector is heavily focused on
the FIGHT purpose. This is followed by the Community
Development sector, heavily concentrating on two purposes,
EMPOWER, and CHANGE. The Culture sector has the
least purpose-driven Facebook communication, scoring low
across different dimensions. Empowering, through inspiring
and educating, is the most communicated purpose in the
Culture sector; however, it still requires greater attention as it
scored low on purpose dimensions relative to other sectors.
Overall, understanding the choices of brand purpose for
NPOs in different categories provides alternative solutions
for brands seeking clear and meaningful communication
strategies. Besides brand personalities and images explored
in previous studies, NPOs can adopt a higher order purpose
dimension discovered in this study, one that resonates with
their stakeholders and appropriate to the category in which
they operate.
This research provides three implications that NPO
marketing managers communicating their purpose should
consider:
1. Purpose as an umbrella While so many brands may still
choose to adopt personality and image characteristics
such as sophisticated, innovative, humble, funny, or
compassionate, a higher purpose can be adopted as an
overarching umbrella meaning, encompassing brand personality and image. For instance, an NPO may choose
EMPOWER as its higher purpose, and then adopt innovation, or committed, or wise as its brand personality
and image. Similarly, a brand with personalities like
green, social, and sustainable can choose CHANGE or
SUPPORT as their higher purpose.
2. Diversification versus concentration of purpose The
findings of this study provide a platform for NPO managers to decide on the extent to which they are willing to pursue a multidimensional purpose or adopt a
single purpose, communicating the most relevant and
expected purpose. As this is the first study to explore
purpose diversification versus concentration, the findings of this paper can help NPOs to make a more visionary decision on the strategic choices they should make
about their organization’s purpose. The findings of this
research provide organizations with a four-dimensional
perspective toward adopting a higher purpose. Whether
an NPO decides to only focus on one dimension, or a
mix of purposes, that is a strategic decision to be made
before planning any execution. In other words, an NPO’s
execution plan to run a purpose-injected campaign will
depend on their choice of purpose, which is a strategic organization-level decision. A single-purpose (e.g.,
EMPOWER) or a multipurpose (e.g., EMPOWER, and
SUPPORT) strategy may be resulted in implementing

Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non‑profit organizations﻿	

a series of branding communications in line with the
strategic purpose, to avoid diluting brand purpose and
confusing consumers.
3. Extending purpose dimensions In order to improve the
relevance of NPOs to new target audiences and tapping
into new markets, the four NPO brand purpose dimensions explored in this study can be used as a reference
point and guide NPOs to extend their purpose dimensions communicating other purpose aspects. This will
enable NPOs to synchronize their corporate purpose
with their target audiences.
Given that purposefulness can be perceived by target audiences as authentic vs desperate and phony, it is crucial to
have a strategic view toward the choice of purpose that resonates the best with each target audience and fits the organization’s personality and positioning. Our findings can provide
managers with key categories of purpose choices, enabling
them to implement a cohesive purpose-driven approach in
the NPOs communicated messages, choosing the right purpose, and the right approach (diversification vs concentration). Overall, in this study we offered a new perspective
toward building brand positioning. While many NPOs currently employ brand personalities and images to position
their brand, and to appeal to their target audiences, we argue
that building brand positioning through adopting higher purpose has a greater potential to resonate with target audiences,
in particular younger audiences. Effectively and consistently
communicating the NPO’s brand purpose aligned with their
mission should be given priority compared to personality
and image to position the NPOs contribution to the society
and to build long-term relationships with target audiences.
Future research may consider correlating the social network posts findings with external data signaling the effectiveness of the strategies (for example, purpose diversity vs.
homogeneity). One possibility to do so is correlating data on
NPOs relative performance on social networks posts. Doing
this may increase the prescriptive value of such exploratory
research.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

References
Aaker, D. 2014. Aaker on branding: 20 principles that drive success.
New York: Morgan James Publishing.
Aaker, D.A. 2012. Win the brand relevance battle and then build competitor barriers. California Management Review 54 (2): 43–57.

197
Aaker, J.L. 1997. Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (3): 347–356.
Avis, M., S. Forbes, and S. Ferguson. 2014. The brand personality of
rocks: A critical evaluation of a brand personality scale. Marketing Theory 14 (4): 451–475.
Batra, R. 2019. Creating brand meaning: a review and research
agenda. Journal of Consumer Psychology 29 (3): 535–546.
Batra, R., A. Ahuvia, and R.P. Bagozzi. 2012. Brand love. Journal
of Marketing 76 (2): 1–16.
Bennett, R., and H. Gabriel. 2003. Image and reputational characteristics of UK charitable organizations: an empirical study.
Corporate Reputation Review 6 (3): 276–289.
Bloomberg. 2019. Unilever CEO on woke washing, mission, trade
war, and Brexit. https ​ : //www.bloom ​ b erg.com/news/video​
s/2019-06-20/unile​ver-ceo-on-woke-washi​n g-missi​o n-trade​
-war-brexi​t-video​.
Calderwood, I. (2017, December 18). Millennials are the most generous and most careful when donating to charity, study finds.
Global Citizen. Retrieved from https​://www.globa​lciti​zen.org/
en/conte​nt/mille​nnial​s-chari​ty-donat​ions-givin​g-chris​tmas/.
Carneiro, B., and A. Garbero. 2018. Supporting impact with evidence:
A content analysis of project completion reports. The Journal of
Development Studies 54 (8): 1426–1449.
Cleary, B. (2017, January 6). Millennials are entitled, narcissistic,
and lazy. Daily Mail Australia. Retried from http://www.daily​
mail.co.uk/news/artic​le-40936​70/Mille​nnial​s-entit​led-narci​ssist​
ic-lazy-s-not-fault​-Exper​t-claim​s-child​-wins-prize​-socia​l-media​
-left-Gen-Y-unabl​e-deal-real-world​.html.
Escalas, J.E., and J.R. Bettman. 2005. Self-Construal, reference
groups, and brand meaning. Journal of Consumer Research 32
(3): 378–389.
Faircloth, J.B. 2005. Factors influencing nonprofit resource provider
support decisions: Applying the brand equity concept to nonprofits. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 13 (3): 1–15.
Freling, T.H., J.L. Crosno, and D.H. Henard. 2011. Brand personality
appeal: Conceptualization and empirical validation. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 39 (3): 392–406.
Gartenberg, C., A. Prat, and G. Serafeim. 2019. Corporate purpose
and financial performance. Organization Science 30 (1): 1–18.
Geuens, M., B. Weijters, and K. De Wulf. 2009. A new measure of
brand personality. International Journal of Research in Marketing 26 (2): 97–107.
Greyser, S.A., and M. Urde. 2019. What does your corporate brand
stand for? It’s harder to create a strong identity for an entire
company than for a product. This tool kit can help you get there.
Harvard Business Review 97 (1): 80–88.
Hollensbe, E., C. Wookey, L. Hickey, G. George, and C.V. Nichols.
2014. Organizations with purpose. Academy of Management
Journal 57 (5): 1227–1234.
Hou, J., L. Du, and Z. Tian. 2009. The effects of nonprofit brand
equity on individual giving intention: mediating by the selfconcept of individual donor. International Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing 14 (3): 215–229.
Hur, J.D., M. Koo, and W. Hofmann. 2015. When temptations come
alive: How anthropomorphism undermines self-control. Journal
of Consumer Research 42 (2): 340–358.
Johnson, O., and V. Chattaraman. 2019. Conceptualization and measurement of millennial’s social signaling and self-signaling for
socially responsible consumption. Journal of Consumer Behaviour 18 (1): 32–42.
Keller, K.L. 2012. Understanding the richness of brand relationships:
Research dialogue on brands as intentional agents. Journal of
Consumer Psychology 22 (2): 186–190.
Kim, S., R.P. Chen, and K. Zhang. 2016. Anthropomorphized helpers
undermine autonomy and enjoyment in computer games. Journal
of Consumer Research 43 (2): 282–302.

198
Koczanski, P., and H.S. Rosen. 2019. Are millennials really particularly
selfish? Preliminary evidence from a cross-sectional sample in
the philanthropy panel study. American Behavioral Scientist 63
(14): 1965–1982.
Kovic, M., and N. Hänsli. 2018. Do millennials care about NPOs?
Intergenerational differences in attitudes towards nonprofit organizations. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and
Nonprofit Organizations 29 (5): 1112–1127.
Kramer, M. 2017. Brand purpose: The navigational code for growth.
Journal of Brand Strategy 6 (1): 46–54.
Landis, J., and G. Koch. 1977. The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data. Biometrics 33 (1): 159–174.
Lee, Y.J. 2020. Facebooking alone? Millennials’ use of social network
sites and volunteering. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly
49 (1): 203–217.
Malär, L., H. Krohmer, W.D. Hoyer, and B. Nyffenegger. 2011. Emotional brand attachment and brand personality: The relative importance of the actual and the ideal self. Journal of Marketing 75
(4): 35–52.
Malone, C., and S.T. Fiske. 2013. The human brand: How we relate to
people, products, and companies. New York: Wiley.
McKeever, B. 2019. The non-profit sector in brief. National Centre
for Charitable Statistics. https​://nccs.urban​.org/proje​ct/nonpr​ofitsecto​r-brief​. Accessed 10 May 2019.
Michaelidou, N., M. Micevski, and J.W. Cadogan. 2015a. An evaluation of nonprofit brand image: Towards a better conceptualization and measurement. Journal of Business Research 68 (8):
1657–1666.
Michaelidou, N., M. Micevski, and N.T. Siamagka. 2015b. Consumers’
intention to donate to two children’s charity brands: A comparison
of Barnardo’s and BBC Children in Need. Journal of Product &
Brand Management 24 (2): 134–146.
Michel, G., and S. Rieunier. 2012. Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving. Journal of Business Research
65 (5): 701–707.
Oster, E. 2018. Majority of consumers want brands to take a stand
on social and political issues. AdWeek, January 12. https​://www.
adweek​ .com/brand-​ market​ ing/majori​ ty-of-consum
​ ers-want-brand​
s-to-take-a-stand​-on-socia​l-and-polit​ical-issue​s-accor​ding-tonew-study​/.
Park, J.K., and D.R. John. 2010. Got to get you into my life: Do
brand personalities rub off on consumers? Journal of Consumer
Research 37 (4): 655–669.
Paulin, M., R.J. Ferguson, N. Jost, and J.M. Fallu. 2014. Motivating
millennials to engage in charitable causes through social media.
Journal of Service Management 25 (3): 334–348.
Quinn, R.E., and A.V. Thakor. 2018. Creating a purpose-driven organization. Harvard Business Review 2018: 78–85.
Randle, M., F. Leisch, and S. Dolnicar. 2013. Competition or collaboration? The effect of non-profit brand image on volunteer recruitment strategy. Journal of Brand Management 20 (8): 689–704.
Rauschnabel, P.A., N. Krey, B.J. Babin, and B.S. Ivens. 2016. Brand
management in higher education: the university brand personality
scale. Journal of Business Research 69 (8): 3077–3086.
Sargeant, A., J. Hudson, and D.C. West. 2008. Conceptualizing brand
values in the charity sector: the relationship between sector, cause
and organization. Service Industries Journal 28 (5): 615–632.
Scaraboto, D., and E. Fischer. 2013. Frustrated fatshionistas: An institutional theory perspective on consumer quests for greater choice
in mainstream markets. Journal of Consumer Research 39 (6):
1234–1257.
Schmitt, B. 2012. The consumer psychology of brands. Journal of
Consumer Psychology 22 (1): 7–17.
Schulte, B. 2015, June 24. Millennials are more generous than anybody realizes. Washington Post. Retried from https​://www.washi​

A. Mirzaei et al.
ngton​post.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/24/mille​nnial​s-are-actua​
lly-more-gener​ous-than-anybo​dy-reali​zes/?nored​irect​=on&utm_
term=.15efe​c40f0​f4.
Shehu, E., J.U. Becker, A.C. Langmaack, and M. Clement. 2016. The
brand personality of nonprofit organizations and the influence of
monetary incentives. Journal of Business Ethics 138 (3): 589–600.
Smith, A.E., and M.S. Humphreys. 2006. Evaluation of unsupervised
semantic mapping of natural language with Leximancer concept
mapping. Behavior Research Methods 38 (2): 262–279.
Stein, J. 2013, May 20. Millennials: The Me Me Me generation. Time
Magazine. Retrieved from http://time.com/247/mille​nnial​s-theme-me-me-gener​ation​/.
Tapp, A., G. Lindsay, and R. Sorrell. 1999. Towards a branding framework for cause-, funding-and need-oriented charities. Journal of
Marketing Communications 5 (1): 39–50.
Tirunillai, S., and G.J. Tellis. 2014. Mining marketing meaning from
online chatter: Strategic brand analysis of big data using latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Marketing Research 51 (4): 463–479.
Venable, B.T., G.M. Rose, V.D. Bush, and F.W. Gilbert. 2005. The
role of brand personality in charitable giving: an assessment and
validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 33 (3):
295–312.
Vila, O.R., and S. Bharadwaj. 2017. Competing on social purpose:
Brands that win by tying mission to growth. Harvard Business
Review 95: 94–101.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Dr. Abas Mirzaei is a Senior Lecturer in Marketing at Macquarie Business School. His area of expertise is branding, woke marketing, and
brand activism. His work has been published in academic journals such
as Journal of Brand Management, European Journal of Marketing,
Journal of Advertising Research, and Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services. His work on ‘woke’ branding has been received well,
and appeared in The Conversation, Inside Retail, Inside FMCG, SBS,
NITV, ABC News, BBC Radio, SMH, Marketing Magazine, Mumbrella, AdNews, Medium, and many others. Abas is a recipient of the
best branding paper award from Australian and New Zealand Academy
of Marketing Conference. Abas’s course “Visionary leadership, identity & motivation: Become a meaning maker” has attracted more than
15000 learners on Coursera. He has introduced a long-term oriented
marketing performance metric, Brand Health Index (BHI), and Behavioral Brand Evaluation Typology, and also Advertising Spending Diets.
A/Prof Cynthia M. Webster Cynthia M. Webster is an associate professor of marketing at the Macquarie Business School, Sydney, Australia.
Her research interests focus on consumer value and engagement, social
network analysis, branding and social marketing. She has published in
such journals as Industrial Marketing Management, Journal of Brand
Management, Journal of Business Research, Social Networks, Psychology and Marketing, and the Journal of Macromarketing. She is
an associate editor of Journal of Consumer Behaviour and is a regular
reviewer for top marketing journals.
Dr. Helen Siuki Helen Siuki is an assistant professor of marketing at
the Department of Marketing, Macquarie Business School, Sydney,
Australia. Helen’s research interests include digital and social media
marketing, e-WOM, branding, consumer engagement and motivations.
Helen’s work has been published/under review in journals such as Journal of Brand Management and Psychology & Marketing.

