This article was downloaded by: [University of New Hampshire]
On: 14 March 2013, At: 05:33
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

Development of a Market Orientation
Research Agenda for the Nonprofit
Sector
a

a

Paul Chad , Elias Kyriazis & Judy Motion

b

a

Centre for Research in Socially Responsible Marketing, School of
Management and Marketing, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
New South Wales, Australia
b

University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Version of record first published: 21 Feb 2013.

To cite this article: Paul Chad , Elias Kyriazis & Judy Motion (2013): Development of a Market
Orientation Research Agenda for the Nonprofit Sector, Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing,
25:1, 1-27
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2013.759814

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 25:1–27, 2013
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1049-5142 print/1540-6997 online
DOI: 10.1080/10495142.2013.759814

Development of a Market Orientation Research
Agenda for the Nonprofit Sector

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

PAUL CHAD and ELIAS KYRIAZIS
Centre for Research in Socially Responsible Marketing,
School of Management and Marketing, University of Wollongong,
Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia

JUDY MOTION
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

Market orientation is the overarching framework by which practitioners and academics make sense of the interplay between
customers, competition, stakeholders, and the organization within
the commercial for-profit arena and is the way the marketing concept is put into practice. Many academics have argued that market
orientation would also benefit nonprofit organizations by generating more funds in an increasingly competitive environment.
The purpose of this article is to conduct a systematic review of
market orientation, identify gaps, and develop a research agenda
for market orientation research within the underresearched nonprofit sector. This research agenda highlights the structural, human
resource, and cultural challenges nonprofit organizations face if
they decide to adopt a market orientation, and the need to develop a
praxis framework currently missing from the literature. The article
offers suggestions for researchers to extend the concept of market orientation from the commercial for-profit into the nonprofit
arena.
KEYWORDS market orientation, societal orientation, marketing,
charity, nonprofit, not-for-profit, research agenda

Address correspondence to Paul Chad, PhD, School of Management & Marketing,
University of Wollongong, Northfields Ave., Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. E-mail:
pchad@uow.edu.au
1

2

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

INTRODUCTION
Market orientation is considered to be the operationalization of the marketing concept within organizations. Whilst firms may use marketing tools such
as advertising and promotion in their daily activities, the firm may not be
seen to be market oriented. Market oriented firms focus clearly on the needs
of their customers and align organizational focus, processes, and structure to
meet customer needs (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990; Narver & Slater, 1990). With
the successful adoption of market orientation in the commercial for-profit
sector resulting in improved organizational performance (Day, 1994; Kohli &
Jaworski, 1990; Narver & Slater, 1990), it was natural that the emergent nonprofit sector would be viewed as a suitable beneficiary for the lessons already
learned. Many academics (e.g., Barrett, Balloun, & Weinstein, 2005; Kara,
Spillan, & DeShields, 2004; Kinnell & MacDougall, 1997; Wood, Bhuian, &
Kiecker, 2000) were quick to argue that a market orientation would provide
benefits for NPOs (nonprofit organizations) such as charities and nongovernment organizations that were entering a highly competitive environment for
funding and revenue generation and feeling pressure to provide improved
service delivery.
Emerging empirical evidence supports the use of market orientation by
NPOs. For example, Vázquez, Álvarez, and Santos (2002) showed that market orientation had a positive effect on the outcomes of NPOs. Gainer and
Padanyi (2002, p. 182) examined arts organizations in Canada and determined that a market-oriented culture “predicted a growth in resources and
higher levels of customer satisfaction” and in further research Gainer and
Padanyi (2005) examined the link between market orientation and culture in
Canadian NPOs (social service, community support, and arts) and concluded
that a client oriented culture and behavior was important for organizational
performance.
The dominant view amongst NPO researchers (e.g., Warnaby & Finney,
2005) is that market orientation is relevant to the nonprofit sector—in some
form or another, but cannot simply be transferred from the for-profit arena
and that the sector lags in its introduction and usage. The increasing competition within the nonprofit sector makes an introduction of market orientation
an imperative sooner rather than later. Indeed, within Australia for example,
“much of the sector is still operating in a survival framework” (Nonprofit
Australia, 2006) and is neither ready “nor able to meet the challenges of the
21st century without major transformation” (Nonprofit Australia, n.d.).
Significantly, Andreasen and Kotler (2003, p. 11) contend that “marketing and marketing skills inevitably must play a more central role” within
NPOs. Seymour, Gilbert, and Kolsaker (2006, p. 151) do however indicate
that only recently has the issue of market orientation “attracted the interest of
charities who, facing increasing competition and environmental complexity,
are seeking differentiation and competitive advantage.” Complicating matters

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

3

is that the scope and nature of marketing as a discipline is misunderstood
with the perception of many NPOs that marketing consists simply of the
occasional promotion, advertising, and selling (Brady & Johnson, 1999; Kolb
2008) rather than addressing needs and wants via the marketing concept.
The key conclusion from our systematic review of the literature is that
application of the marketing concept, operationalized by introduction of a
market orientation, is a relatively underresearched area within the nonprofit
sector. What research has been conducted in the nonprofit context, particularly in relation to frameworks of market orientation, has been somewhat
broad and has taken a “blanket” approach attempting to cover all forms of
NPOs—or has only explored basic aspects of market orientation in specific
nonprofit sub-sectors such as charities.
This article thus has three key research objectives, firstly, to review
and examine the market orientation framework and associated research.
Secondly, justify the relevance of market orientation in some form for the
nonprofit sector. Thirdly, as the majority of market orientation research has
been conducted in the commercial for-profit sector, given the transferability of market orientation in some form to the nonprofit sector whose raison
d’être is different to for-profit organizations, we develop a market orientation research agenda for the nonprofit sector—an important contribution to
the literature. Our systematic review of literature reinforces the comments of
Modi and Mishra (2010, p. 565) who recently stated that “[m]arket orientation
in the for-profit sector is one of the most researched fields in the marketing
discipline. However, non-profit marketing as a whole and market orientation
of NPOs in particular are largely under-researched areas.” To illustrate this,
based upon our systematic review of the market orientation literature, we
provide Table 1 showing the research “intensity” to which various market
orientation issues have been addressed in both for-profit and nonprofit contexts and indicate that 85% of market orientation papers reviewed related
to the for-profit sector. This suggests scope to progress research of these
issues in the nonprofit context given the strong support for the use of these
concepts within the sector (e.g., Kotler & Lee, 2009; Lovelock, Patterson, &
Walker, 2004).
We contribute to the literature in two key ways, one, we reinforce that
whilst market orientation in some form is relevant for the nonprofit sector,
we identify various key knowledge gaps within existing literature. Second,
we develop a comprehensive research agenda including highlighting a key
need to progress development of a praxis framework for NPOs that captures
the significant structural, human resource and cultural challenges that NPOs
face if they decide to adopt a market orientation.
Our article is organized into five main sections. First, we discuss the
role and reason for NPOs and identify the key differences between for-profit
and nonprofit organizations. Second, based upon our systematic review of
the market orientation literature, we overview details of market orientation

4

P. Chad et al.

TABLE 1 Intensity To Which Various Relevant Issues Have Been Addressed In Existing
Literature
Market orientation research intensitya
Issue versus organization analyzed
Commercial, for-profit:
Very high (85%)

Not-for-profit:
Very low (15%)

(62%)
(11%)

Very high (86%)
Very high (94%)

Very low (14%)
Very low (6%)

(7%)

High (64%)

Low (36%)

(12%)
(7%)
(1%)

High (72%)
Very high (92%)
Medium (50%)

Low (28%)
Very low (8%)
Medium (50%)

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Issue
Antecedents and moderators
Market orientation measurement
development and validation
Performance outcomes
(consequences)
Conceptual
Barriers to market orientation
Implementation/Introduction of
market orientation
a

Based upon count of number of relevant papers examined during our systematic Market Orientation
literature review, converted to a percentage. Very low = 0%–20%, low = 21%–40%, medium = 41%–60%,
high = 61%–80%, very high = 81%–100%.

research including definitions and frameworks. Third, we discuss the application of market orientation to the nonprofit sector. Fourth, the broadening
market orientation research is discussed within various subtopics enabling
identification of gaps in market orientation research—“where the literature
is now” (Macpherson & Jones, 2010, p. 111) enabling our identification and
development of market orientation research questions within the nonprofit
sector. We conclude with a challenge to market orientation researchers to
extend their research into the nonprofit sector based upon our proposed
research agenda—for the benefit of society.

THE ROLE AND REASON FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
The nonprofit sector, sometimes referred to as the voluntary sector or the
third sector, can be regarded as providing six types of roles within society,
namely service provision, innovation, individual expression, social capital
creation, political advocacy, and citizen engagement (Moulton & Eckerd,
2012). Similarly, the International Classification of Non Profit Organizations
(ICNPO) aims to classify NPOs based upon their primary field of activity and
provides twelve activity groups (e.g., culture and recreation, health, social
services, and environment; Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2009). A weakness
of this classification however is that various NPOs actually operate across a
range of fields, thus only the primary field of operation is captured in the
classification. Given the wide range of roles and activities, the nonprofit
sector is thus extremely diverse.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

5

There are various theories regarding why NPOs exist. Based upon
examination of the US nonprofit sector, Rosenbaum (1984) suggests NPOs
have progressed through four stages—an initial “voluntary model,” whereby
volunteers joined together to provide services not provided by government; “philanthropic patronage,” whereby wealthy people provided money
to fund various causes; a “rights and entitlements” stage, whereby government supported a range of programs as various groups considered
they were entitled to a proportion of public tax funds; and finally a
“competitive/market stage”, because NPOs cannot gain funds from the traditional sources of the past. Offering a slightly differing perspective is Salamon
(1987) who referred to “market failure/government failure” and “contract
failure.” Where products are not available from the private sector (market failure), these products can be provided by government. However, if
government chooses not to provide these products (government failure),
NPOs may step in and provide such goods and services. Contract failure can occur, often when the purchaser is not the consumer (Hansmann,
1980), when a for-profit organization may not be trusted, thus NPOs are
seen as more trustworthy to deliver the product. Salamon (1987) also considered that “voluntary failure” could occur, typically due to a struggle
for funds by the nonprofit/voluntary sector, and subsequently suggested
“third-party government,” whereby government provides funds to the voluntary sector who are in a better position than government to deliver
goods and services—thus creating a win-win situation for both the voluntary sector and government. This is supported by Luksetich (2008), who
indicated that a key reason why government may utilize NPOs to deliver
services is based upon the lower service delivery costs of well-operated
NPOs. More recently, Andreasen and Kotler (2008) have offered similar
reasons to Salamon for NPO existence—that NPOs provide services not
offered by government (public goods theory), some people consider that
for-profit organizations cannot be trusted to provide some products (contract failure theory), and government decides what NPOs provide (subsidy
theory).
A large number of NPOs exist and not only play a vital role within
society, but are also an important component of the economy in many countries. For example, the United States is home to 1.4 million NPOs (National
Center For Charitable Statistics, 2010), the largest number of any country.
Of these 1.4 million NPOs within the United States, 1 million are registered
as charities, and employment within these charities represents over 10% of
the overall U.S. workforce and is thus an important source of employment
(Salamon & Sokolowski, 2006).
Whilst NPOs can be seen as a response to some form of market failure
(Hansmann 1980), they can be regarded as having “a market for resource
acquisition and a market for resource allocation” (Sargeant, 2009, p. 57).
NPOs compete in the resource acquisition market for revenue (government

6

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

funds and private and corporate donations) and labor (both volunteer
and paid). NPOs also compete in the resource allocation market whereby
potential clients/customers may have a choice of NPO providers. The diverse
nature of NPOs can however affect the nature and level of competition within
these markets. For example, government is more likely to provide funds to
NPOs operating within the “social services” subsector than to NPOs operating
within the “business and professional associations” subsector. Also, potential
clients/customers are likely to be more selective in the culture and recreation subsector than in the social services subsector where clients/customers
are likely to be happy to receive assistance from any organizations and not
compare potential providers.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FOR-PROFIT AND NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS
Relative to for-profit organizations, NPOs “are more complex” (Anheier,
2000, p. 16). Whilst adopting a market orientation is appropriate for NPOs,
there are unique differences between for-profit organizations and NPOs that
need to be taken into consideration. Table 2 contains an overview of the
TABLE 2 Key Differences Between For-Profit and Nonprofit Organizations
Characteristics
Objectives
Focus
Organizational
culture
Constituency
Marketplace

For-profit
Profit motive
Immediate customer
satisfaction
Resource rich: Expenditure
seen as investment
Customers
Competitive

Performance
Sales revenue, ROI, dividends,
measurement
market share
Exchange
Money
Senior
management
Employees
Revenue

Business and management
degree qualified
Paid
Sales

Accountability
Governance
Product

Shareholders
Paid board of directors
Physical goods and Services

Product
demand

Typically no large fluctuations

Nonprofit
Societal benefit
Long-term society
Resource poor: Expenditure seen as cost
Multiple (Clients/customers and donors)
Competitive although collaborative for
some tendering and service provision
Clients served, client satisfaction, repeat
donors
Often free, sometimes token contribution,
sometimes fee for service
Traditionally based upon wealth of
industry experience
Paid and volunteers
Government, fee for service,
donations/fundraising
Board of directors, stakeholders
Voluntary board of directors
Physical goods. Services including
emotional and informational support,
behavioral change
Possible large fluctuations (e,g., disaster
relief)

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

7

differences. These differences need to be appreciated by academics and
practitioners when considering the transfer of market orientation knowledge
gained in the for-profit arena to the nonprofit context. A characteristic of
many NPOs is use of, and sometimes reliance upon volunteers.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

MARKET ORIENTATION
Market orientation draws its origins from the marketing concept which
suggested businesses should focus on customers, satisfy their needs, and
appreciate the relevance of competitive advantage (Drucker, 1954; Levitt,
1960). As the growth and influence of marketing departments within organizations expanded, there was a clear need for a managerial framework to
define the field and guide strategy as well as decision-making regarding the
operationalization of the marketing concept within the organization. Several
authors responded to this research need, notably Shapiro (1988) with his
seminal work, “What the Hell is Market Oriented?” where he defined it as
an organizational decision-making process consisting of information gathering, organization-wide decision making and effective execution of decisions.
Key tenets of a market orientation include: organizationwide generation of
market intelligence, dissemination of the intelligence across departments,
and organization-wide responsiveness to it, and the need for positive interdepartmental dynamics that facilitate cross-functional market intelligence
transfer and avoid the arising of conflict (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990, 1993;
Narver & Slater, 1990). Of these studies, Narver and Slater were the first
to show “a substantial positive effect of a market orientation on profitability”
(1990, p. 20) for both commodity and non-commodity businesses. This study,
alongside Kohli and Jaworski’s (1990) paper, are considered the theoretical
foundations for market orientation.
In an attempt to draw together the various views of market orientation
that had evolved from the seminal papers, Lafferty and Hult’s (2001) synthesis of these contemporary market orientation perspectives highlight four
common areas of agreement within the field. The meta-analysis of Lafferty
and Hult (2001) highlighted that whilst the various definitions of market orientation were either cultural or managerial focused, there was in
essence a degree of commonality which assisted academics to clarify the key
aspects of market orientation, namely (a) an emphasis on customers, (b) the
importance of information, (c) interfunctional coordination, and (d) taking
action.
Market orientation is considered the key organizational orientation that
contributes to performance (Grinstein, 2008). Via a longitudinal survey, the
positive affect of market orientation in both the short-term and long-term
was recently confirmed by Kumar, Jones, Venkatesan, and Leone (2011) who
also considered that a market orientation is a necessity for organizations in

8

P. Chad et al.

the dynamic business environment we have where economic slowdowns,
growth, competitive intensity, mergers and acquisitions, globalization, and
rapid fire technological innovations require managers to be able to sense
and respond to market changes quickly.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

APPLICATION OF MARKET ORIENTATION TO THE NONPROFIT
SECTOR
The previous section outlined the framework of market orientation in the forprofit sector and its promise of improved organizational outcomes. Balabanis,
Stables, and Phillips (1997, p. 583) regarded the “debate about the validity of extending the marketing concept beyond the domain of the classical
commercial organization seems to have been settled.” Similarly, based upon
meta- analysis of 11 papers examining market orientation in NPOs, market
orientation was positively overwhelmingly found to have a beneficial effect
upon performance (Shoham Rose, & Kropp, 2005). Despite the relevance of
market orientation to the NPO sector, direct transference of existing market
orientation knowledge from the for-profit sector is not straightforward due
to the differences between for-profit organizations and NPOs. For an equivalent size, NPOs can be regarded as more complex operations than a for-profit
organisation, thus “ready-made management models carried over from the
business world” (Anheier 2000, p. 8) are not appropriate for NPOs without
modification. There are also “unique challenges of managing nonprofit organizations” (Silverman & Taliento 2006, p. 37) as the “ethos that drives their
application can be radically different” (Sargeant, 2009, p. 3).
Given the perceived differences between for-profit and nonprofit organizations, various researchers have proposed societal orientation models
for the nonprofit sector that are basically modifications of the seminal forprofit models. Combining aspects of the Narver and Slater (1990) and Kohli
and Jaworski (1990) for-profit models, Sargeant, Liao, and Foreman (Liao,
Foreman, & Sargeant, 2001; Sargeant, Foreman, & Liao, 2002) added a new
component titled “collaboration” as some competitors within the nonprofit
sector may work together to develop mutually beneficial synergies, and customer was renamed “stakeholder” to reflect a broader definition of customer
in the nonprofit context. The Kohli and Jaworski (1990) for-profit model was
modified by Gonzalez, Vijande, and Casielles (2002, p. 63) who divided
customers into donors and beneficiaries. More recently, Duque-Zuluaga
and Schneider (2008) modified the Narver and Slater (1990) for-profit
model by splitting customer into three subsets: beneficiary/recipient, donor,
volunteer/employee, and a new element encompassing learning and social
entrepreneurship.

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

9

A MARKET ORIENTATION RESEARCH AGENDA FOR THE
NONPROFIT SECTOR

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

To give the reader an understanding of key market orientation issues, based
upon our systematic review of the literature we categorize and review the
important market orientation research subtopics and also identify the sparse
nonprofit research in many of these areas. For each of these subtopics we
then develop nonprofit research questions to guide future research in these
underresearched but important areas:
1. Resistance to the implementation of market orientation: establishing
legitimacy.
2. Market orientation measurement and the market orientation/performance
link.
3. Responsiveness to the external environment (customers and competition).
4. Organizational factors (size of firm, age/evolution of firm).
5. Market orientation and innovation/entrepreneurialism.
6. Controversies over definition and scope of market orientation.

For-Profit Resistance to the Implementation of Market Orientation:
Establishing Legitimacy
The actual implementation of the marketing concept is not considered
straight-forward and has been hindered in some instances due to organizations having difficulty developing customer focus due to barriers such as
an incomplete understanding of the marketing concept, conflict between
short and long-term goals, top managements’ own values and also failure to
define markets in terms of customers (Webster, 1988).
Managers who wished to introduce market orientation into their organization often faced resistance from employees as well as system-focused
barriers (Harris & Piercy, 1999). Various barriers/impediments to development of market orientation have been identified in the literature (Bisp, 1999;
Harris, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002; Harris & Watkins, 1998; Homburg & Workman,
2000; Kennedy, Goolsby, & Arnould, 2003; Kippenberger, 1998; Mason &
Harris, 2005; Wong, Saunders, & Doyle, 1989; Savitt, 2001). Typical barriers
include management beliefs, short-term focus, difficulty in changing traditional thinking, organizational structure, apathy, self-interest of staff, lack of
co-operation between functional units and lack of understanding of potential
benefits.
In a meta-analysis, Kirca, Jayachandran, and Bearden (2005, p. 36) determined “that internal processes have a greater influence than organizational
structure variables” on the introduction of market orientation. Thus, internal
marketing is important (Lings & Greenley, 2005; Naude, Desai, & Murphy,

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

10

P. Chad et al.

2003). Various barriers can be addressed by managers utilizing participative and supportive leadership styles (Börjesson & Dahlsten, 2004; Harris
& Ogbonna, 2001) with Lam, Kraus, and Ahearne (2010, p. 61) suggesting
that top managers need to act as role models to both middle managers and
“work-group expert peers” who in turn become role models to frontline
employees to enable diffusion of market orientation through organizations.
To successfully introduce a market orientation involves removing the
barriers and utilizing a staged process of organizational change. Gebhardt,
Carpenter, and Sherry (2006) suggested a four-stage model for the process
of introducing market orientation, namely, initiation, reconstitution, institutionalization, and maintenance whilst Beverland and Lindgreen (2007)
examined the successful implementation of market orientation introduction
utilizing Lewin’s (1951) three stage model of unfreezing, movement, and
freezing.
In summary, implementing a market orientation requires removal of barriers, and a staged approach to introduction. Based on a review of literature,
van Raaij and Stoelhorst (2008) regard the key antecedents of market orientation to be—structure, process design, information systems, reward systems,
leadership, behavioral norms and values, competence management.

NPO Resistance to the Implementation of Market Orientation:
Establishing Legitimacy
In the nonprofit context, the sparse research into barriers to introducing market orientation include Gainer and Padanyi (2005) who examined Canadian
nonprofit social service, community and arts organizations and determined
that employee culture was a significant determinant in improving market
orientation and hence performance. Likewise, developing an internal market
orientation amongst employees first has been identified as beneficial prior
to progressing to introducing an external market orientation within the nonprofit sector (Cano & Sams, 2009; Murray, Yong Gao, & Kotabe, 2011) and
employee resistance can be overcome via strong management communication to employees of the benefits of market orientation for their service
recipient clients (Chad, Kyriazis, & Motion, 2010).
Reviewing the barriers to market orientation adoption, it is clear that the
first thing that management have to clearly convey to the organization is a
credible reason to introduce a market orientation. Many nonprofit employees do not understand the rationale of the marketing concept, and when
they hear the word “marketing” often think of tools such as promotion and
advertising, which they regard as expenses and taking away valuable money
that could be used for service delivery.
Little is known of the processes by which use of a market orientation
can be sold to employees and resistance to its use overcome. Accordingly
we propose research addressing the following research question:

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

11

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

RQ1: How does the top management of nonprofit organizations legitimize the adoption of marketing and push for a market orientation
within their organization?

Once top management have made the decision to go ahead with progressing use of market orientation, how do they accomplish this? Lam,
Krause, and Ahearne (2010) suggested a social learning approach to the
implementation of market orientation in the commercial, for-profit sector
using middle management and envoys (influential employees) as a successful
strategy. Within the nonprofit context very little is known about this process.
Current research tends to examine aspects of market orientation in a “static”
situation. Whilst barriers to introducing market orientation have been identified (albeit in a for-profit context), there is very little, if any research that has
examined the manner in which market orientation is, or can actually be introduced successfully into a nonprofit organization. Indeed, research examining
the actual process by which NPOs have actually successfully introduced market orientation is extremely minimal. This therefore leads to our next research
question:
RQ2: How do nonprofit organizational executives successfully introduce
market orientation?

Related to this is what do NPOs actually need to become more market
oriented? This is a capabilities and resource issue. From a resources perspective, whilst many NPOs take pride from relying upon volunteer labor
and donations, this can result in inefficient operations (Lewis 1995) and
amateur instead of professional service provision (Salamon, 1987). How
do NPOs who wish to become more market oriented gain the appropriate capabilities? Does the organization with traditionally volunteer labor and
possibly little if any marketing capabilities buy in the professional skills,
utilize consultants or up-skill existing employees? Hence, the next research
question:
RQ3: What new capabilities does a nonprofit organization require to
become market oriented and how does the organization gain these
capabilities?

The above three research questions can be utilized within each subsector of the overall nonprofit sector. Extant market orientation (including
the societal orientation) literature within the nonprofit context typically
involves assessing the level of market orientation within organizations at
specific points in time, or develops conceptual models regarding appropriate
frameworks for a market orientation or a societal orientation. This literature
has been spread somewhat thinly across the gamut of NPOs. Significantly,

12

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

there is no existing marketing literature examining change within NPOs
as market orientation is introduced. Examining research questions RQ1,
RQ2, and RQ3 in real situations would enable combining this information
to assist in the development of a praxis framework to guide managerial
action to successfully introduce market orientation. This would be a significant advancement of knowledge. Given the required interplay between
all sections of an organization in enabling market orientation to succeed,
such a framework should indicate how each section of an organization can
assist and become involved in introducing a market organization. This would
be a valuable transdisciplinary contribution across the market orientation,
nonprofit and change management areas of research. Thus:
RQ4: What is an appropriate praxis framework to assist managers of
organizations within each subsector of the nonprofit sector to
introduce market orientation?

Associated with this issue of how do managers introduce market orientation successfully into the NPO, a review of the literature has not identified
any research specifically related to examination of the introduction of market orientation into an organization and its subsequent affects on employees.
This is perceived as a key issue, particularly within the charity sub-sector for
example, where employees have traditionally eschewed the business methods of for-profit organizations and would be regarded as a key resistance
to successful implementation of market orientation. This leads to a further
research opportunity, namely:
RQ5: How does top management manage the change process and what
is the effect of introduction of a market orientation upon nonprofit
organizational employees?

For-Profit Market Orientation Measurement and the Market
Orientation/Performance Link
This research area focused on providing hard evidence for the top management of organizations that adopting a market orientation was actually
a sound business strategy and worth the considerable effort in time and
resources that such a change process would entail. Inevitably, ensuring that
market orientation and its effect on business performance was accurately
measured become an important focus for many researchers. The positive
affect of market orientation upon business performance is the underlying
reason why development of a market orientation is regarded as an appropriate goal for organizations. Various scales to measure market orientation and
business performance were developed (e.g., Deshpande, Farley, & Webster,
1993; Kohli, Jaworski, & Kumar, 1993: Narver & Slater, 1990).

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

13

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

NPO Market Orientation Measurement and the Market
Orientation/Performance Link
In the nonprofit context, Vázquez, Álvarez, and Santos (2002) developed a specific market orientation measurement scale. Based upon the
Kohli and Jaworski (1990) definition of market orientation, they expanded
marketing intelligence to include beneficiaries, donors, competitive alternatives and potential collaborators. Items were selected from existing
scales developed in the for-profit arena and customized for the nonprofit
sector resulting in a 31 item scale containing 13 items for intelligence
generation, eight items for intelligence dissemination and ten items for
responsiveness.
Examples of the research regarding the linkage of market orientation
to nonprofit organizational performance includes Sehorn (1995) who found
a positive link between market orientation and business performance in
community service organizations, and Jones (2000) who examined market
orientation within U.K. opera companies. The majority of market orientation research has examined for-profit organizations that are profit driven
commercial enterprises with typical goals of profitability and shareholder
return. Whilst long-term success is the goal of most large organizations,
Blankson and Stokes (2002) found that for small organizations, profitability
was important, but long-term objectives were less important. Likewise, the
goals of NPOs can vary dramatically from those of large, for-profit organizations. Whilst goals of for-profit organizations tend to be financially related,
goals for NPOs (as well as financial goals related to donation levels) typically include levels of volunteer recruitment and level of service delivery
to service recipient clients. Gainer and Padanyi (2002) considered there
was sometimes suspicion about using business practices in NPOs as they
may divert the organization away from its traditional mission and values a clash of goals. Given the unique nature of NPOs, Padanyi and Gainer
(2004) examined the issue of multiple constituencies (client and donor)
and divided NPOs into four clusters: client oriented (high/low) and funder
oriented (high/low).
This leads to three key issues. Are all the various dimensions of market
orientation equally relevant to each of the nonprofit subsectors. Also, how
should performance be measured? Thus:
RQ6: Which key dimensions of market orientation are relevant to each
sub-sector of the nonprofit sector and to what extent?
RQ7: What is an appropriate market/societal orientation measurement
scale for each subsector of the nonprofit sector?
RQ8: How should each subsector of the nonprofit sector measure
performance?

14

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

For-Profit Responsiveness to the External Environment (Customers
and Competition)
This research area relates to the organizational capabilities that affect responsiveness to customers and competitors through information gathering and
dissemination. Organization capability was examined in the seminal article by Day (1994). Capabilities were defined by Day (1994, p. 38) to be
“complex bundles of skills and accumulated knowledge, exercised through
organizational processes, that enable firms to coordinate activities and make
use of their assets.” Day (1994) contends that organizations that are better
equipped to respond to the market and can anticipate changes in the marketplace will have superior profitability via long-run competitive advantage.
Similarly, in capturing the external environment for new products, Pelham
(2000, p. 48) considers the capability to provide “fast response to negative
customer satisfaction information, strategies based on creating value for customers, immediate response to competitive challenges, and fast detection of
changes in customer product preferences are required to achieve a high level
of market orientation. Baker and Sinkula (2005) also consider top management need to ensure appropriate organizational capabilities exist to examine
customer needs and competitor movements.
The ability to gain relevant intelligence is the crux of market orientation.
The process of actually gaining competitive intelligence has been analyzed
by Jaworski, Macinnis, and Kohli (2002) who consider there are three distinct phases to the competitive intelligence generation process—organizing
to get intelligence, searching for intelligence and then sense-making of intelligence. The importance of involving the entire organization in intelligence
generation was considered by Cravens, Piercy, and Prentice (2000, p. 374),
who cautioned that “market sensing” should involve not only management,
but those who “are close to the market,” such as sales staff.
Darroch and McNaughton (2003) took the intelligence issue a step
further, and consider knowledge-management capability as a distinctive
capability for sustainable competitive advantage and suggest market orientation to be a subset of knowledge-management orientation. Javalgi,
Martin, and Young (2006) examined the role of market research in assisting global firms improve market orientation and developed a framework
linking international services marketing research to market orientation and
CRM. They consider market research to be inextricably linked to providing
an organization with relevant information to develop a market orientation.

NPO Responsiveness to the External Environment (Customers and
Competition)
NPOs are traditionally regarded as having to struggle for resources,
and hence capability to respond to the external environment. Market

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

15

intelligence/knowledge is a key aspect of market orientation capabilities.
In the nonprofit context, Martinsons and Hosley (1993, p. 40) case-studied a
Hong Kong hospital and considered “information requirements for marketing decisions in this not-for-profit organization are quite similar to those of
profit-seeking enterprises.” Whilst many NPOs do not have formal market
intelligence generation systems, many utilise a more cheaper form and use
word-of-mouth and networking to gain valuable information (Chad, 2010).
Customers in the nonprofit context are extremely diverse and include
revenue providers (government, corporate and individual donors, fee-forservice clients, service recipients), employees (including volunteers). Thus,
NPOs have a more complex customer base and hence more diverse
information requirements than for-profit organizations.
Competition is an interesting issue within the nonprofit sector. Whilst
it may occur between NPOs in some subsectors for both resource acquisition and usage, it is perhaps not a key issue within the charity subsector
in relation to “service recipient” clients where collaboration between charities is preferred. One charity, if short of resources would refer a client to
another charity, and/or collaborate on the best way to assist a mutual client.
Competition is, however, a key issue between charities when attempting to
gain resources such as revenue (e.g., competing for government grants and
tenders) and volunteer labor. From a resource/capability perspective, organizations having tender writing capability and the best capability to deliver
services may win government funding.
The issue of competition can result in a unique situation whereby other
charities are seen as both collaborators and competitors, depending on
the situation—revenue acquisition or service delivery. Whilst collaboration
amongst NPOs can offer a win-win situation in specific situations (Osborne &
Murray, 2000), there is little research regarding why NPOs “develop certain forms of collaboration instead of others” (Guo & Acar, 2005, p. 342).
Similarly, “little is known” about how NPOs manage relationships with various stakeholders (Balser & McClusky, 2005, p. 300). This therefore leads to
another research question:
RQ9: How does inter-organizational competition and collaboration affect
the relationships between charities?

For-Profit Organizational Factors (Size of firm, Age/Evolution of Firm)
As discussed previously, capability is a key factor to enable an organization
to develop a market orientation. Factors such as organizational size and age
are also considered relevant factors in determining the level to which an
organization can develop market orientation. In regards to age of an organization, Becherer, Halstead, and Haynes (2001) suggested years of operation
are not significant in regards to level of market orientation. However, Perry

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

16

P. Chad et al.

and Shao (2002) postulated that the relative importance to firms of market
orientation may vary between existing and new firms within an industry due
to differing capabilities. Likewise, Tang, Wang, and Zhang (2005, p. 67) found
that “years in business are positively associated” with business performance.
In support of this, Engelen, Brettel, and Heinemann (2010) examined the
effect of organizational life cycles on market orientation and also determined
that older firms are more predisposed to market orientation.
In regards to size, there is conflicting research regarding the affect
of organization size on market orientation within the for-profit sector. Liu
(1995), Wijewardena and Cooray (1995) as well as Becherer, Halstead, and
Haynes (2001) suggest that market orientation increases with company size.
Contrary to these views, being small can assist speed of implementation
(Chen & Hambrick, 1995) and may enhance the ability to exploit a market oriented organizational culture (Pelham & Wilson, 1996). Also, Pelham
(2000) found a negative relationship existed between firm size and market
orientation. Opposing both these contrasting perspectives, size is considered
irrelevant by other researchers (Blankson & Cheng, 2005; Low 2005).
Whilst a market orientation is relevant for organizations of all sizes,
including smaller organizations (Carson, 1985, 1990; Carson & Gilmore,
2000), lack of sophisticated marketing is problematic for the smaller firms
(Cromie 1991) and often dependent on management capability (HogarthScott, Watson, & Wilson, 1996; Liu, 1995) and resources (Fuller 1994;
Gilmore, Carson, & Grant 2001; Smith 1997). The perceived lack of resources
within small and medium sized organizations can be overcome via collaboration (Beckett, 2005), networking (Gilmore, Carson, & Grant, 2001; Terziovski,
2003) and use of University students (Ahmadi & Helms, 1997; Brindley &
Ritchie, 2000; Sonfield, 1981) as a low-cost labor resource.

NPO Organizational Factors (Size of Firm, Age/Evolution of Firm)
A similar conflict regarding whether there is a linkage between market orientation and organizational size exists in the nonprofit context. Seymour,
Gilbert, and Kolsaker (2006) found that smaller charities have the lowest level of market orientation, whereas Balabanis, Stables, and Phillips
(1997, p. 599) measured adoption of the marketing concept in the top
200 British charities and concluded “that larger organizations were more
reluctant or able to become market oriented”. More recently, however, Brady,
Brace-Govan, Brennan, and Conduit (2011) have identified a positive relationship between size and market orientation for nonprofit organizational
performance measured in terms of fundraising success.
Existing market orientation research tends to suggest that larger organizations are more able to utilize market orientation to achieve improved
performance. This may also be relevant for some of the nonprofit subsectors, but within the charity subsector, there is a view that the ideal size of a

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

17

charity is when the organization no longer exists due to no more demand for
the services of that charity. An alternative view is that larger charities have
greater economies of scale in regards to service delivery and are therefore
more effective in utilizing scarce resources. Thus:

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

RQ10: Charity performance: Does size matter, and what is the ideal size
for a charity?

Current research regarding the relationship between organizational age
and level of market orientation within NPOs is mixed (e.g., Balabanis,
Stables, & Phillips, 1997; Brady et al., 2011; Seymour et al., 2006). This may
be due to greater awareness now amongst the top management of NPOs of
the benefits of market orientation, resulting in both young and older organizations being just as likely to adopt market orientation. This is an issue that
can be explored further:
RQ11: What is the likelihood of young organizations adopting a market orientation relative to older organizations within each of the
nonprofit subsectors?

For-Profit Market Orientation and Innovation/Entrepreneurialism
Various research suggests that innovation contributes to organizational
success (Gatignon & Xuereb, 1997; Kumar, Scheer, & Kotler, 2000; Matear,
Gray, & Garrett, 2004; Tajeddini, Trueman, & Larsen, 2006) and that an
entrepreneurial style can positively affect organizational performance
(Covin & Slevin, 1988). There are however conflicting views regarding
the linkage between market orientation and entrepreneurialism/innovation.
For example, Bhaskaran (2006) considers market orientation and
entrepreneurialism/innovation are positively linked, Mavondo, Chimhanzi,
and Stewart (2005) considered market orientation is an antecedent to
innovation, whilst Deshpande and Farley (2004) suggested innovation/
entrepreneurialism is not essential for success. Also, Matsuno, Mentzer, and
Ozsomer (2002) contended that entrepreneurialism/innovation by itself negatively affects performance, and Matear, Osborne, Garrett, and Gray (2002)
regarded innovation as separate to market orientation but necessary for
effective firm performance.
A strong market orientation was found to be positively related to new
product development and new product performance (Kyriakopoulos &
Moorman, 2004; Langerak, Hultink, & Robben, 2004a, b). Various studies
suggesting that a learning organization is perhaps a higher level than market
orientation have been conducted (Baker & Sinkula, 1999a, b, 2002) and
contend that a learning orientation resource increases ability to effectively
utilize a market orientation (Farrell, 2000; McGuinness & Morgan, 2005).

18

P. Chad et al.

In other words, a combination of market orientation, learning orientation
and organizational change capability is required to ultimately improve
business performance.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

NPO Market Orientation and Innovation/Entrepreneurialism
The relationship between market orientation and innovation/
entrepreneurialism has been extensively explored within the for-profit sector,
but has been sparsely explored within the nonprofit context. The nonprofit
sector has historically not been renowned for innovation/entrepreneurialism.
However, given the increased competition within the sector, there is scope
for innovation/entrepreneurialism to greatly assist these organizations.
It is considered “that entrepreneurship has a legitimate role in non-profits
and the work environment can be designed to enable various levels of
entrepreneurship” (Morris, Coombes, & Schindehutte. 2007, p. 12). Indeed,
Duque-Zuluaga and Schneider (2008) regarded social entrepreneurship as
a component of societal orientation. Mair and Marti (2006, p. 37) defined
social entrepreneurship as a process that involves “innovative use and
combination of resources to pursue opportunities to catalyze change and/or
address social needs”. Similarly, Sargeant (2009) regarded entrepreneurs as
innovative and persuasive in attracting extra resources to achieve their goals.
Given the use of innovation and entrepreneurialism is underresearched and
has the potential to offer NPOs new streams of revenue and service delivery
processes to benefit clients, two research questions are offered:
RQ12: How do/can nonprofit organizations better utilize innovation/
entrepreneurialism to improve service delivery?
RQ13: How do/can nonprofit organizations better utilize innovation/
entrepreneurialism to improve revenue generation?

For-Profit Controversies Over Definition and Scope of Market
Orientation
There are, at times, debates as to the actual definition and scope of market orientation. Shapiro (1988) suggested that there are numerous similar
terms mentioned in the literature such as market-oriented, customer-oriented,
market-driven, and customer-driven. Whilst some researchers may use these
terms interchangeably, others have suggested however, that there is a distinct difference between market-driven and market-driving, albeit both being
approaches to market orientation. Slater and Narver (1998) pointed out that a
customer-led philosophy is concerned with satisfying the expressed needs of
customers (and is relatively short term in focus), whereas a market orientation also includes latent needs of customers and is thus longer term in focus.
Slater and Narver (1998, p. 1003) also emphasized that “market orientation

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

19

is not a marketing orientation. Marketing is only a function of the business.
A business is market-oriented only when the entire organisation” is involved.
Whilst rigorous discussion of market orientation definitions occurred during
the 1990s, most current research regarding market orientation accepts the
seminal definitions provided by Kohli and Jaworski (1990) as well as Narver
and Slater (1990).

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

NPO Controversies Over Definition and Scope of Market Orientation
Various definitions and frameworks of market orientation have been developed in the for-profit sector. Researchers have aimed to directly transfer these
to the nonprofit sector or modified them to take into account perceived differences between the for-profit and nonprofit sectors. Frameworks offered by
Sargeant, Foreman, and Liao (2002); Gonzalez, Vijande, and Casielles (2002);
and more recently by Duque-Zuluaga and Schneider (2008) are the only
market/societal orientation frameworks found during the systematic review
of literature that specifically aim to offer a customized market/societal orientation model for the nonprofit sector (and can be regarded as adaptations
of the Narver and Slater [1990] and Kohli and Jaworski [1990] for-profit models). Whilst these nonprofit frameworks provide a useful starting point, these
frameworks could be regarded as somewhat broad as they attempt to cover
all subsectors of the nonprofit sector in a single framework. Thus it would
be valuable to develop separate frameworks for each nonprofit subsector.
This is a significant research opportunity. Thus, research into market/societal
orientation within the nonprofit sector should be conducted at a more
microlevel rather than the macrolevel. This research could be progressed to
further refine and develop appropriate definitions and frameworks of market
orientation/societal orientation within the nonprofit sector and its subsectors.
RQ14: What is the appropriate definition of market orientation (or
societal orientation) for each subsector of the nonprofit sector?
RQ15: What is the appropriate market orientation (or societal orientation) framework for each subsector of the nonprofit sector?

CONCLUSION
Our systematic review of the market orientation literature shows that many
research opportunities exist within the nonprofit sector to increase our
knowledge regarding market orientation. We thus have developed and
offer various research questions that academics, research students, and
practitioners may wish to consider as areas worth future attention with the
aim of increasing our knowledge of market orientation within the nonprofit
sector.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

20

P. Chad et al.

This article offers a systematic review and synthesis of the literature regarding market orientation. The review of literature has identified
how research of market orientation has developed into various aspects
and themes. Origins of market orientation were initially discussed, followed by the wide range of aspects of market orientation including barriers
and resistance to market orientation, organizational responsiveness to the
environment, organizational factors, and controversies.
The review has shown that market orientation has been widely
researched within the for-profit sector but is underresearched within the
nonprofit sector. Given the evidence that adopting a market orientation is
associated with increased organizational performance within the for-profit
sector and the belief that market orientation in some form is relevant to
the nonprofit sector, managers within the nonprofit sector would benefit
from increased research of market orientation within their sector, particularly given the key role the sector plays in society, and the current increased
competition for revenue sources.
We live in an ever-changing world. Given the vital role that NPOs
(particularly the charity subsector) play within the community to assist the
well-being of society, increased research of market orientation within the
nonprofit sector would be beneficial. We therefore issue a challenge to market orientation researchers to progress their research within the nonprofit
sector—for the benefit of society.

REFERENCES
Ahmadi, M., & Helms, M. M. (1997). Small firms, big opportunities: The potential of
careers for business graduates in SMEs. Education and Training, 39, 52–57.
Andreasen, A. R., & Kotler, P. (2003). Strategic marketing for nonprofit organisations
(6th ed.). Upper Saddle Creek, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Andreasen, A. R., & Kotler, P. (2008). Strategic marketing for nonprofit organisations
(7th ed.). London, England: Pearson Education.
Anheier, H. (2000, January). Managing nonprofit organisations: Towards a new
approach (Civil Society Working Paper No. 1). Retrieved from http://eprints.
lse.ac.uk/29022/1/cswp1.pdf
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2009). International classification of non-profit organisations. Retrieved July 2, 2011, from http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.
nsf/Latestproducts/5256.0Appendix12006-07?opendocument&tabname=Notes&
prodo=5256.0&issue=2006-07&num=&view=
Baker, W. E., & Sinkula, J. M. (1999a). Learning orientation, market orientation, and
innovation: Integrating and extending models of organisational performance.
Journal of Market Focused Management, 4, 295–308.
Baker, W. E., & Sinkula, J. M. (1999b). The synergistic effect of market orientation
and learning orientation on organisational performance. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 27, 411–427.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

21

Baker, W. E., & Sinkula, J. M. (2002). Market orientation, learning orientation and
product innovation: Delving into the organisation’s black box. Journal of Market
Focused Management, 5, 5–23.
Baker, W. E., & Sinkula, J. M. (2005). Market orientation and the new product
paradox. The Journal of Product Innovation Management, 22, 483–502.
Balabanis, G., Stables, R., & Phillips, H. (1997). Market orientation in the top
200 British charity organisations and its impact on their performance. European
Journal of Marketing, 31, 583–603.
Balser, D., & McClusky, J. (2005). Managing stakeholder relationships and nonprofit
organization effectiveness. Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 15, 295–315.
Barrett, H., Balloun, J., & Weinstein, A. (2005). Success factors for organisational
performance: Comparing business services, health care, and education. SAM
Advanced Management Journal, 70(4), 16–28.
Becherer, R. C., Halstead, D., & Haynes, P. (2001). Marketing orientation in
SME’s: Effects of the internal environment. Journal of Research in Marketing
& Entrepreneurship, 3(1), 1–17. Retrieved from http://webserv.ewu.edu/
groups/cbpacea/2001SpringArticles/marketingorientationinSMEsEffectsofthe
internalenvironment.pdf
Beckett, R. C. (2005). Collaboration now a strategic necessity. Handbook of Business
Strategy, 6, 327–332.
Beverland, M., & Lindgreen, A. (2007). Implementing market orientation in industrial
firms: A multiple case study. Industrial Marketing Management, 36, 430–442.
Bhaskaran, S. (2006). Incremental innovation and business performance: Small and
medium size food enterprises in a concentrated industry environment. Journal
of Small Business Management, 44, 64–80.
Bisp, S. (1999). Barriers to increased market-oriented activity: What the literature
suggests. Journal of Market Focused Management, 4, 77–92.
Blankson, C., & Cheng, J. (2005). Have small businesses adopted the market orientation concept? The case of small businesses in Michigan. Journal of Business &
Industrial Marketing, 20, 317–330.
Blankson, C., & Stokes, D. (2002). Marketing practices in the UK small business
sector. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 20, 49–61.
Börjesson, S., & Dahlsten, F. (2004). Management action in development market
orientation: A report from a customer knowledge project at Volvo Cars. Journal
of Change Management, 4(2), 141–154.
Brady, E., Brace-Govan, J., Brennan, L., & Conduit, J. (2011). Market orientation and
marketing in nonprofit organizations. Indications for fundraising from Victoria.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 16, 84–98.
Brady, E., & Johnson, L. (1999, November–December). FONGOs, BONGOs
and PONGOs: The Misapplication of Market Orientation in Not For Profit
Organisations. ANZMAC 1999 Conference, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia.
Brindley, C., & Ritchie, B. (2000). Undergraduates and small and medium-sized enterprises: opportunities for a symbiotic partnership? Education and Training, 42,
509–517.
Cano, C., & Sams, D. (2009). The importance of an internal marketing orientation in social services. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 14, 285–295.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

22

P. Chad et al.

Carson, D. J. (1985). The evolution of marketing in small firms. European Journal of
Marketing, 19(5), 7–16.
Carson, D. J. (1990). Some exploratory models for assessing small firms’ marketing
performance (A qualitative approach). European Journal of Marketing, 24(11),
5–52.
Carson, D. J., & Gilmore, A. (2000). Marketing at the interface: Not “what” but “how.”
Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 8, 1–7.
Chad, P. (2010). A marketing discourse framework for charities (PhD thesis).
School of Management and Marketing, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
Australia.
Chad, P., Kyriazis, E., & Motion, J. (2010, November–December). Introduction
of market orientation into charities, easier said than done? ANZMAC
2010 Conference. Christchurch, New Zealand: University of Canterbury.
Chen, M., & Hambrick, D. C. (1995). Speed, stealth, and selective attack: How small
firms differ from large firms in competitive behaviour. Academy of Management
Journal, 38, 453–482.
Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1988). The influence of organisational structure on
the utility of an entrepreneurial top management style. Journal of Management
Studies, 25, 217–237.
Cravens, D. W., Piercy, N. F., & Prentice, A. (2000). Developing market-driven
product strategies. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 9, 369–388.
Cromie, S. (1991). The problems experienced by young firms. International Small
Business Journal, 9(3), 43–61.
Darroch, J., & McNaughton, R. (2003). Beyond market orientation: Knowledge management and the innovativeness of New Zealand firms. European Journal of
Marketing, 37, 572–593.
Day, G. S. (1994). The capabilities of market-driven organisations. Journal of
Marketing, 58, 37–52.
Deshpande, R., & Farley, J. U. (2004). Organisational culture, innovativeness and
market orientation in Hong Kong five years after handover: What has changed?
Journal of Global Marketing, 17, 53–73.
Deshpande, R., Farley, J. U., & Webster, F. E., Jr. (1993). Corporate culture, customer
orientation and innovativeness in Japanese firms: A quadrad analysis. Journal
of Marketing, 57, 23–37.
Drucker, P. F. (1954). The practice of management. New York, NY: Perennial Library.
Duque-Zuluaga, L., & Schneider, U. (2008). Market orientation and organisational
performance in the nonprofit context: Exploring both concepts and the relationship between them. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 19(2),
25–47.
Engelen, A., Brettel, M., & Heinemann, F. (2010). The antecedents and consequences of a market orientation: The moderating role of organisational life
cycles. Journal of Marketing Management, 26, 515–547.
Farrell, M. A. (2000). Developing a market-oriented learning organisation. Australian
Journal of Management, 25, 201–208.
Fuller, P. (1994). Assessing marketing in small and medium-sized enterprises.
European Journal of Marketing, 28(12), 34–49.
Gainer, B., & Padanyi, P. (2002). Applying the marketing concept to cultural organisations: An empirical study of the relationship between market orientation

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

23

and performance. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 7, 182–193.
Gainer, B., & Padanyi, P. (2005). The relationship between market-oriented activities and market-oriented culture: Implications for the development of market
orientation in nonprofit service organisations. Journal of Business Research, 58,
854–862.
Gatignon, H., & Xuereb, J. (1997). Strategic orientation of the firm and new product
performance. Journal of Marketing Research, 34, 77–90.
Gebhardt, G., Carpenter, G., & Sherry, J., Jr. (2006). Creating a market orientation: A
longitudinal, multifirm, grounded analysis of cultural transformation. Journal of
Marketing, 70, 37–55.
Gilmore, A., Carson, D., & Grant, K. (2001). SME marketing in practice. Marketing
Intelligence & Planning, 19, 6–11.
Gonzalez, L. I. A., Vijande, M. L., & Casielles, R. V. (2002). The market orientation
concept in the private nonprofit organisational domain. International Journal
of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7, 55–67.
Grinstein, A. (2008). The relationships between market orientation and alternative
strategic orientations. European Journal of Marketing, 42(1/2), 115–134.
Guo, C., & Acar, M. (2005). Collaboration among nonprofit organizations: Combining
resource dependency theory, institutional, and network perspectives. Nonproft
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 34, 340–361.
Hansmann, H. B. (1980). The role of nonprofit enterprise. The Yale Law Journal, 89,
835–901.
Harris, L. C. (1996). Cultural obstacles to market orientation. Journal of Marketing
Practice, 2(4), 36–52.
Harris, L. C. (1998). Barriers to market orientation: The view from the shopfloor.
Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 16, 221–228.
Harris, L. C. (2000). The organisational barriers to developing market orientation.
European Journal of Marketing, 34, 598–624.
Harris, L. C. (2002). Sabotaging market-oriented culture change: An exploration
of resistance justifications and approaches. Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 10, 58–74.
Harris, L. C., & Ogbonna, E. (2001). Leadership style and market orientation: An
empirical study. European Journal of Marketing, 35, 744–764.
Harris, L. C., & Piercy, N. (1999). Management behaviour and barriers to market orientation in retailing companies. The Journal of Services Marketing, 13,
113–131.
Harris, L. C., & Watkins, P. (1998). The impediments to developing a market orientation: An exploratory study of small UK hotels. International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, 10, 221–226.
Hogarth-Scott, S., Watson, K., & Wilson, N. (1996). Do small businesses have to
practice marketing to survive or grow? Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 14,
6–18.
Homburg, C., & Workman, J., Jr. (2000). Fundamental changes in marketing organization: The movement toward a customer-focused organizational structure.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28, 459–478.
Javalgi, R. G., Martin, C. L., & Young, R. B. (2006). Marketing research, market orientation and customer relationship management: A framework and implications
for service providers. Journal of Services Marketing, 20, 12–23.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

24

P. Chad et al.

Jaworski, B. J., Macinnis, D. J., & Kohli, A. K. (2002). Generating competitive intelligence in organisations. Journal of Market Focused Management, 5,
279–307.
Jones, L. (2000). Market orientation—a case study of three UK opera companies.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 5, 348–364.
Kara, A., Spillan, J. E., & DeShields, O. W., Jr. (2004). An empirical investigation of
the link between market orientation and business performance in non-profit
service providers. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 12, 59–72.
Kennedy, K., Goolsby, J., & Arnould, E. (2003). Implementing a customer orientation:
Extension of theory and application. Journal of Marketing, 67(4), 67–81.
Kinnell, M., & MacDougall, J. (1997). Marketing in the not-for-profit sector. Oxford,
England: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Kippenberger, T. (1998). Barriers to market orientation—the myths and realities. The
Antidote, 3(5), 12–15.
Kirca, A., Jayachandran, S., & Bearden, W. (2005, April). Market orientation: A metaanalytic review and assessment of its antecedents and impact on performance.
Journal of Marketing, 69, 24–41.
Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. J. (1990). Market orientation: The construct, research
propositions, and managerial constructs. Journal of Marketing, 54(2), 1–18.
Kohli, A. K., Jaworski, B. J., & Kumar, A. (1993). MARKOR: A measure of market
orientation. Journal of Marketing Research, 30, 467–477.
Kolb, B. (2008). Marketing research for non-profit community and creative organizations. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Kotler, P., & Lee, N. R. (2009). Up and out of poverty: The social marketing solution.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L., & Kotler, P. (2000). From market to market driving. European
Journal of Marketing, 18(2), 129–141.
Kyriakopoulos, K., & Moorman, C. (2004). Tradeoffs in marketing exploitation and
exploration strategies: The overlooked role of market orientation. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 21, 219–240.
Lafferty, B. A., & Hult, G. T. M. (2001). A synthesis of contemporary market
orientation perspectives. European Journal of Marketing, 35(1/2), 92–109.
Lam, S. S. K., Kraus, F., & Ahearne, M. (2010, September). The diffusion of market
orientation throughout the organization: A social learning theory perspective.
Journal of Marketing, 74, 61–79.
Langerak, F., Hultink, E. J., & Robben, H. S. J. (2004a). The impact of market
orientation, product advantage and launch proficiency of new product performance and organisational performance. The Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 21, 79–94.
Langerak, F., Hultink, E. J., & Robben, H. S. J. (2004b). The role of predevelopment
activities in the relationship between market orientation and performance. R &
D Management, 34, 295–309.
Levitt, T. (1960). Marketing myopia. Harvard Business Review, 38(4), 45–56.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Lewis, J. (1995). The voluntary sector, the state and social work in Britain: The charity organisation society/family welfare association since 1869. Brookfield, VT:
Edward Elgar.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

25

Liao, M.-N., Foreman, S., & Sargeant, A. (2001). Market versus societal orientation in
the nonprofit context. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 6, 254–268.
Lings, I. N., & Greenley, G. E. (2005). Measuring internal market orientation. Journal
of Service Research, 7, 290–305.
Liu, H. (1995). Market orientation and firm size: An empirical examination in UK
firms. European Journal of Marketing, 29, 57–71.
Lovelock, C., Patterson, P., & Walker, R. (2004). Services marketing—an Asia-Pacific
and Australian perspective (3rd ed.). Frenchs Forest, Australia: Pearson.
Low, D. R. (2005). Market orientation, performance and the market environment; A
study of Australian manufacturing SMEs. Retrieved March 23, 2006, from http://
anzmac2005.conf.edu.au/Programs&Papers/pdfs/17-Strategic/17-Low.pdf
Luksetich, W. (2008). Government funding and nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit &
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 37, 434–442.
Macpherson, A., & Jones, O. (2010). Editorial: Strategies for the development
of International Journal of Management Reviews. International Journal of
Management Reviews, 12, 107–113.
Mair, J., & Marti, I. (2006). Social entrepreneurship research: A source of explanation,
prediction and delight. Journal of World Business, 21, 36–44.
Martinsons, M., & Hosley, S. (1993). Planning a strategic information system for a
market-oriented non-profit organisation. Journal of Systems Management, 44(2),
14–41.
Mason, K., & Harris, L. C. (2005). Pitfalls in evaluating market orientation: An
exploration of executives’ interpretations. Long Range Planning, 38, 373–391.
Matear, S., Gray, B. J., & Garrett, T. (2004). Market orientation, brand investment, new service development, market position and performance for service
organisations. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 15,
284–301.
Matear, S., Osborne, P., Garrett, T., & Gray, B. J. (2002). How does market orientation contribute to service firm performance? An examination of alternative
mechanisms. European Journal of Marketing, 36, 1058–1075.
Matsuno, K., Mentzer, J. T., & Ozsomer, A. (2002). The effects of entrepreneurial proclivity and market orientation on business performance. Journal of Marketing,
66(3), 18–32.
Mavondo, F. T., Chimhanzi, J., & Stewart, J. (2005). Learning orientation and market
orientation. European Journal of Marketing, 39, 1235–1263.
McGuinness, T., & Morgan, R. E. (2005). The effect of market and learning orientation
on strategy dynamics. European Journal of Marketing, 39, 1306–1326.
Modi, P., & Mishra, D. (2010). Conceptualising market orientation in non-profit
organisations: Definition, performance, and preliminary construction of a scale.
Journal of Marketing Management, 5, 548–569.
Morris, M., Coombes, S., & Schindehutte, M. (2007). Antecedents and outcomes
of entreprenuerial and market orientations in a non-profit context: Theoretical
and empirical insights. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 13(4),
12–38.
Moulton, S., & Eckerd, A. (2012). Preserving the publicness of the nonprofit sector:
Resources, roles, and public values. Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 41,
656–685.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

26

P. Chad et al.

Murray, J., Yong Gao, G., & Kotabe, M. (2011). Market orientation and performance
of export ventures: the process through marketing capabilities, and competitive
advantages. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39, 252–269.
Narver, J. C., & Slater, S. F. (1990). The effect of a market orientation on business
profitability. Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 20–35.
National Center For Charitable Statistics. (2010). Number of nonprofit organizations in the United States, 1999–2009. Retrieved October 28, 2012, from http://
nccsdataweb.urban.org/PubApps/profile1.php
Naude, P., Desai, J., & Murphy, J. (2003). Identifying the determinants of internal
marketing orientation. European Journal of Marketing, 37, 1205–1220.
Nonprofit Australia. (n.d.). Context and rationale for establishment of Nonprofit
Australia. Retrieved October 12, 2007, from http://www.nonprofitaustralia.org.
au/pdf/Context.pdf
Nonprofit Australia. (2006). Nonprofit Australia Overview 2006. Retrieved
October 12, 2007, from http://www.nonprofitaustralia.org.au/pdf/Nonprofit%
20Australia%20%20Overview%202006%20LH.pdf
Osborne, S. P., & Murray, V. (2000). Collaboration between non-profit organizations
in the provision of social services in Canada: Working together or falling apart?
International Journal of Public Sector Management, 13, 9–19.
Padanyi, P. S., & Gainer, B. (2004). Market orientation in the nonprofit sector: Taking
multiple constituencies into consideration. Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 12, 43–58.
Pelham, A. M. (2000). Market orientation and other potential influences on performance in small and medium-sized manufacturing firms. Journal of Small
Business Management, 38, 48–67.
Pelham, A. M., & Wilson, D. T. (1996). A longitudinal study of the impact of market
structure, firm structure, strategy, and market orientation culture on dimensions
of small-firm performance. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 24,
27–44.
Perry, M., & Shao, A. (2002). Market orientation and incumbent performance in
dynamic market. European Journal of Marketing, 36, 1140–1153.
Rosenbaum, N. (1984, July). The competitive market model: Emerging strategy for
non-profits. The Nonprofit Executive, 4–5.
Salamon, L. M. (1987). Of market failure, voluntary failure, and third-party government: Toward a theory of government-nonprofit relations in the modern welfare
state. Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 16, 29–49.
Salamon, L. M., & Sokolowski, S. W. (2006). Employment in America’s charities: A profile. Retrieved October 24, 2012, from http://adm-cf.com/jhu/pdfs/
NED_Bulletins/National/NEW_Bulletin26_EmplyinAmericasCharities_2006.pdf
Sargeant, A. (2009). Marketing management for nonprofit organisations (3rd ed.).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Sargeant, A., Foreman, S., & Liao, M.-N. (2002). Operationalizing the marketing concept in the nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing,
10(2), 41–65.
Savitt, R. (2001). Understanding marketing development in the Czech Republic.
European Journal of Marketing, 35, 1386–1397.
Sehorn, A. (1995). Market orientation, strategic orientation and performance in
not-for-profit organisations (PhD thesis). Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.

Downloaded by [University of New Hampshire] at 05:33 14 March 2013

Market Orientation Research Agenda for NPOs

27

Seymour, T., Gilbert, D., & Kolsaker, A. (2006). Aspects of market orientation of
English and Welsh charities. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 16,
151–169.
Shapiro, B. (1988). What the hell is ‘market oriented’? Harvard Business Review,
66(6), 119–125.
Shoham, A., Rose, G. M., & Kropp, F. (2005). Market orientation and performance:
A meta analysis. Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 23, 435–454.
Silverman, L., & Taliento, L. (2006, summer). What business execs don’t know—but
should—about nonprofits. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 37–43. Retrieved
April 11, 2007, from http://www.ssireview.org
Slater, S. F., & Narver, J. C. (1998). Research notes and communications—customerled and market-oriented: Let’s not confuse the two. Strategic Management
Journal, 19, 1001–1006.
Smith, D. (1997). Small is beautiful but difficult: Towards cost-effective research for
small business. Journal of the Market Research Society, 39, 273–291.
Sonfield, M. C. (1981). Can student consultants really help a small business? Journal
of Small Business Management, 19(4), 3–9.
Tajeddini, K., Trueman, M., & Larsen, G. (2006). Examining the effect of market
orientation on innovativeness. Journal of Marketing Management, 22, 529–551.
Tang, Y., Wang, P., & Zhang, Y. (2005). Market strategy and business performance: The case of small firms In China. Retrieved March
23, 2006, from http://anzmac2005.conf.uwa/edu.au/Programs&Papers/pdfs/21Mktg-Asia/21-Tang.pdf
Terziovski, M. (2003). The relationship between networking practices and business
excellence: A study of small to medium enterprises (SMEs). Measuring Business
Excellence, 7(2), 78–92.
van Raaij, E., & Stoelhorst, J. (2008), The implementation of a market orientation:
A review and integration of the contributions to date. European Journal of
Marketing, 42, 1265–1293.
Vázquez, R., Álvarez, L., & Santos, M. (2002). Market orientation and social services in
private non-profit organisations. European Journal of Marketing, 36, 1022–1046.
Warnaby, G., & Finney, J. (2005). Creating customer value in the not-for-profit sector: A case study of the British Library. International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, 10, 183–195.
Webster, F. E., Jr. (1988). The rediscovery of the marketing concept. Business
Horizons, 31(3), 29–40.
Wijewardena, H., & Cooray, S. (1995). Determinants of growth in small Japanese
manufacturing firms: Survey evidence from Kobe. Journal of Small Business
Management, 33, 87–92.
Wong, V., Saunders, J., & Doyle, P. (1989, July). The barriers to achieving stronger
market orientation in British companies: An exploratory study. 22nd Annual
Conference Proceedings, Marketing Education Group, Glasgow Business
School, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
Wood, V., Bhuian, S., & Kiecker, P. (2000). Market orientation and organisational performance in not-for-profit hospitals. Journal of Business Research, 48,
213–226.

