Journal of Brand Management (2024) 31:193–211
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41262-023-00319-8

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism
on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy and brand equity
Zoe Lee1

· Amanda Spry2 · Yuksel Ekinci3 · Jessica Vredenburg4

Revised: 7 December 2022 / Accepted: 27 February 2023 / Published online: 20 March 2023
© Crown 2023

Abstract
Empirical evidence concerning the effects of brand activism on brand equity is growing but remains mixed at best. Although
non-profit brands increasingly implement activism initiatives, there are not yet any studies that look outside the commercial
sector. Non-profit brands are well placed to step up and engage in political dialogue—social change is at their core. Yet, the
risks of neglecting a warm charitable image are considerable in terms of alienating current supporters and losing donations.
Our research contributes to this debate by employing signalling theory to examine the effects of non-profit brand activism on
brand equity in the ‘third sector’. The mediating roles of brand bravery and brand hypocrisy in this central relationship are
also explored. Survey data were obtained from 518 British respondents and analysed using structural equation modelling.
Our results show evidence of partial serial mediation, where the direct negative effect of non-profit brand activism on brand
equity is eliminated in the presence of brand bravery and brand hypocrisy. Interestingly, in studying the mediated-moderation
links, we also find the strengthening effects of a donor’s moral foundations at play. Our study suggests that there are equity
gains for non-profit brands that shed traditional ‘warmth’ positioning and embrace activism and bravery.
Keywords Brand activism · Brand equity · Non-profit branding · Brand bravery · Brand hypocrisy · Virtue signalling

Introduction
‘Charities too often maintain the structures of power
and privilege in our society rather than striving to dismantle them’—Charity So White
* Zoe Lee
LeeSH4@cardiff.ac.uk
Amanda Spry
amanda.spry@rmit.edu.au
Yuksel Ekinci
yuksel.ekinci@port.ac.uk
Jessica Vredenburg
jessica.vredenburg@aut.ac.nz
1

Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Colum Drive,
Cardiff CF10 3EU, Wales, UK

2

School of Economics, Finance, and Marketing, RMIT
University, 445 Swanston Street, Melbourne, VIC 3000,
Australia

3

Faculty of Business and Law, University of Portsmouth,
Richmond Building, Portsmouth PO1 3DE, UK

4

Marketing, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland,
New Zealand

More and more brands are stepping into the domain of activism to achieve business and social goals. Accordingly, academic research on ‘brands doing good’ has proliferated (e.g.
Iglesias and Ind 2020; Kapitan et al. 2022; Mirzaei et al.
2021; Moorman 2020; Vredenburg et al. 2020). Yet, the literature remains relatively silent on brand activism in the
non-profit sector. Brand activism is defined as taking a public stance on a divisive sociopolitical issue (Moorman 2020;
Vredenburg et al. 2020). While this strategy emerged in the
commercial sector, examples amongst non-profit organisations (NPOs) also abound. Consider Charity So White, a
campaign group that originated to tackle institutional racism
among charities positioning themselves as ‘white saviours’
and relying on ‘poverty porn’ to meet fundraising goals.
More recently, Shelter, a homelessness charity launched an
activist-driven campaign called ‘Fight for Home’, in which
they took a public stand in support of the human right to
Vol.:(0123456789)

194

safe housing (Farndon-Taylor 2021). But do donors respond
positively to activism campaigns from non-profit brands?
In the brand activism context, NPOs present an interesting
paradox, which makes this an important avenue of inquiry.
On one hand, NPOs exert a strong cultural and moral authority (Moorman 2020) as a result of being ‘higher purpose
natives’ (Mirzaei et al. 2021, p. 186) with civic and political
engagement as fundamental responsibilities (LeRoux 2007;
Suárez 2009). Thus, unlike their commercial counterparts,
NPOs do not need to employ brand activism to signal a ‘virtuous’ position in the marketplace. Yet, NPOs face a crisis
relating to their identity and role (Lee and Bourne 2017).
While once regarded as providers of public services considered critical to community well-being (Charity Commission
2020), their legitimacy is now being questioned as a result
of declining transparency and trust (Becker et al. 2020;
Edelman 2022). Moreover, their marketplace relevance is
dubious—meaningful differentiation was already difficult to
sustain, given the exponential growth in competition in the
last four decades (Mirzaei et al. 2021). This is now intensified by commercial brands encroaching on their prosocial
positioning by adopting activism. Meanwhile, sector-wide
funding cuts (du Bois and Langley-Cook 2022; Michaelidou
et al. 2015a) make it all the more important to achieve differentiation and relevance and, in turn, attract donations. To
survive this downturn, NPOs have a history of borrowing
branding strategies from the commercial sector—for example, by crafting a desirable brand image (Wymer et al. 2016),
adopting a strong brand orientation (Da Silva et al. 2020;
Lee 2013; Napoli 2006) and communicating a credible brand
purpose (Mirzaei et al. 2021). Most recently, this has been
attempted with the rise of brand activism in the non-profit
sector, as a strategic avenue to adapt and survive.
Looking to the brand activism literature, empirical evidence of the success of this strategy is mixed. Brand activism holds potential to create positive social change (Moorman 2020) and build brand equity when authenticity is
carefully maintained (Korschun et al. 2020; Schmidt et al.
2022; Vredenburg et al. 2020). But this strategy is polarising and its outcomes, unpredictable (Bhagwat et al. 2020;
Hydock et al. 2020). This drastically departs from the ‘warm
and fuzzy’ brand images historically used by NPOs to draw
in donations (Michel and Rieunier 2012; Mirzaei et al. 2021;
Venable et al. 2005). Together, the non-profit branding and
brand activism literatures do not provide a clear picture of
the relationship between non-profit brand activism and brand
equity, a key question to be answered for NPOs considering
an activism strategy.
The current paper proposes that non-profit brand activism can shape brand equity (1) positively via brand bravery and (2) negatively via brand hypocrisy. In contrast to
the traditional warmth appeals employed in the charitable
sector, which can at times be interpreted as incompetent

Z. Lee et al.

(Kim and Ball 2021), brand bravery depicts a distinct and
strategic brand identity of boldness, determination and
resilience in upholding core beliefs and values (Jain et al.
2021). Thus, we argue that when non-profit brand activism is perceived by donors as brave, there will be positive
flow-on effects to brand equity. On the other hand, the
risk of judgements of brand hypocrisy is also elevated
when ‘virtue signalling’ tactics are employed (Berthon
et al. 2021), due to the departure this represents from the
known and understood warmth appeals, characteristic of
NPOs. We argue that when brand activism is instead perceived as hypocritical, there will be negative brand equity
effects. Therefore, the present work empirically examines
the mediating effects of both bravery and hypocrisy as
two mechanisms to explain the potential for positive and
negative effects, respectively, of non-profit brand activism
on brand equity. Last, given that activism and morality are
interlinked, the moderating effect of the individual donor’s
moral foundations—namely, their concern for justice—is
also investigated.
Our results reveal a significant negative effect of nonprofit brand activism on brand equity. However, this effect
was eliminated in the presence of brand bravery and brand
hypocrisy, showing support for partial serial mediation.
Brand bravery plays a key role—non-profit brand activism
has potential to indirectly and positively affect brand equity
when mediated by bravery, and brand bravery effectively
mitigates the negative effect of hypocrisy on brand equity. In
addition, the relationship between non-profit brand activism
and bravery is intensified when a donor’s concern for justice
is high. Our research thus makes three important theoretical
contributions. First, we contribute to the evolving debate in
the non-profit brand activism literature about the direction
of its effects on brand equity, empirically demonstrating that
it has the potential to be positive in the presence of bravery.
Second, we speak to the ongoing conversation in the nonprofit branding literature about how contemporary branding approaches can be successfully transplanted to the third
sector to provide strategic solutions to problems caused by
funding cuts, increased competition and decreased differentiation. Last, we offer brand activism to the NPO sector as
an avenue to disrupt problematic discourses that underlie
inequitable institutions and structures.
The paper is organised as follows. First, we map the literature on brand activism, non-profit branding and signalling theory, all of which inform our conceptual framework
and hypotheses development. The empirical aspects of the
paper are then presented, including research methods and
results. The paper concludes with a discussion of theoretical and practical implications, as well as a note about future
research on the evolution of brand activism within the nonprofit sector.

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

Theoretical background
Brand activism
Brand activism is defined as a ‘purpose- and values-driven
strategy in which a brand adopts a nonneutral stance on
institutionally contested sociopolitical issues, to create
social change and marketing success’ (Vredenburg et al.
2020, p. 446). Unlike corporate firms that were the first
to adopt brand activism, NPOs have inherently always
attended to their societal duties—as Mirzaei and colleagues (2021) note, NPOs are ‘higher purpose natives’
(p. 186). What makes brand activism different from the
existing environmental, political and social change efforts
of NPOs and therefore worthy of study in this context?
First, the domain of non-profit brands has historically
been more closely aligned to corporate social responsibility (CSR)—indeed one of the most common CSR practices
is to strategically partner with a non-profit (Lafferty and
Goldsmith 2005). Yet, there are clear differences between
brand activism, CSR and other strategies of brands ‘doing
good’ (Iglesias and Ind 2020). CSR entails company policies and practices that reflect their responsibilities to the
wider society (Matten and Moon 2008). Moreover, CSR
programs tend to be tightly linked to organisational
value and perceived to benefit the majority of the society (Wettstein and Baur 2016). While brand activism has
evolved from CSR (Sarkar and Kotler 2018) as a result of
increasing consumer pressure for brands to take a stand
on important political and social issues, it is a distinctly
different strategy. Because brand activism expresses support for or opposition to controversial sociopolitical issues
(Moorman 2020), whether or not these issues should be
resolved and what constitutes a viable solution tends to
be highly debated, garnering polarised audience reactions
(Bhagwat et al. 2020; Vredenburg et al. 2020). Thus,
unlike CSR, brand activism is inherently divisive as there
is no ‘correct’ solution as to how brands should address
social and political issues, nor guidance as to which issues
to address (Korschun et al 2019; Vredenburg et al 2020).
Due to brand activism’s engagement with partisan issues
(Moorman 2020), it would not necessarily be as well
received as related strategies such as brand purpose have
been in the non-profit sector (Mirzaei et al. 2021). Consider Barnardo’s, a leading UK children’s charity—while
its mission to protect vulnerable children has never been
contested by the public, Barnardo’s recent spotlight on
racial injustice and white privilege attracted major backlash and complaints (Blackall 2020). The charity published guides for parents to discuss white privilege with
their children, which was a relatively ‘brave’ approach,
involving issues of equity, class and race, and represented

195

a departure from the conventional warm and fuzzy messaging used by NPOs.
Second, brand activism has been linked to both positive
and negative outcomes. Authentic brand activism, which
entails alignment of marketing messaging with corporate
practice, purpose and values, can strengthen brand equity
whereas woke washing, where brands pay lip service to
a sociopolitical issue without taking action, diminishes
brand equity (Korschun et al. 2019; Schmidt et al. 2022;
Vredenburg et al. 2020). Corporate sociopolitical activism
and political advocacy work documents adverse reactions
from investors (Bhagwat et al. 2020) and the likelihood of
repelling existing customers for reasons of identity-based
consumption and negative bias (Hydock et al. 2020). One
can expect even greater unpredictability when brand activism is used by NPOs due to multiple stakeholders espousing
diverse values (Bennett and Sargeant 2005; Boenigk and
Becker 2016; Chad 2015) and the risk of it being interpreted
as over-commercialised (Sepulcri et al. 2020). For example, such a business-like strategy (Maier et al. 2016) can be
perceived as hypocritical and deceitful when employed by
NPOs (see Table 1 for key differences between brand activism when used by corporations versus NPOs). Yet, understanding the impact of branding strategies is important given
the pivotal role that strong brands serve for NPOs (Chapleo
2015). We now turn to the non-profit branding literature to
better understand brand activism in this new context.

Non‑profit branding and the dualities of non‑profit
brands
Unlike commercial brands, non-profit brands must navigate
complex identity issues (Lee and Bourne 2017; Lee and
Davies 2021). Central to our conceptualisation is the duality of advocacy and service provision logics embedded in
NPOs (Beaton et al. 2021). While this duality demonstrates
that the notion of non-profits participating in advocacy is
not new, many organisations have historically been forced
to prioritise service provision over advocacy (Schmid et al.
2008). This is echoed across non-profit brand image and personality studies, which indicate that NPOs have traditionally
crafted their identities around being caring and compassionate (Sargeant et al. 2008). Non-profit brands also emphasise
generous and friendly images (Michel and Rieunier 2012)
and nurturing personalities (Venable et al. 2005). Political
orientation is scarcely considered in the non-profit branding
literature (with the exception of Bennett and Gabriel 2003),
despite civic engagement being a fundamental responsibility of NPOs (Beaton et al. 2021; LeRoux 2007). With this
background, advocacy and service provision are now conceived as competing institutional logics (Beaton et al. 2021).
Thus, non-profit brands that adopt activism—connoting a
tilt towards advocacy rather than service provision—would

Traditionally caring and compassionate; higher-purpose native
To differentiate and stand out
To better align with the mission
Sources of income
Government funding, donations or funding from corporate partners, fees for
services provided, donations/fundraising
Stakeholders
Trustees, employees, donors, volunteers, supporters, service users
Key strategic issues related to
Difficult to shift from a ‘warm’ compassionate communication style to a
engaging in brand activism
‘warrior’ activist one
The ‘stickiness’ of the traditional caring and compassionate brand image of
NPOs that drives donations
Concern around stakeholder perceptions of over-commercialisation and
adopting business-like strategies
Likely to garner polarised reactions—due to contested nature of focal sociopolitical issues and a departure from the traditional caring and nurturing
service-provision role of NPOs
Intended brand activism outcomes Increased brand equity, with the aim of increasing donations and support for
charitable service provision, in turn
Change and impact related to focal sociopolitical issue
Examples
Greenpeace (campaigning for environmental protection and peace), Shelter’s
Fight for Home campaign (e.g. equality and justice in safe housing); Charity So White (tackling racism in the sector)
Indicative literature
Beaton et al (2021), Lee and Davies (2021), Michel and Rieunier, (2012),
Mirzaei et al (2021)

Contextual foundations
Activism drivers

Non-profit (NPO) brand activism

Table 1  Comparison of non-profit and for-profit brand activism

Korschun et al (2019), Moorman (2020), Schmidt et al (2022), Vredenburg
et al (2020)

Increased brand equity, with the aim of increasing market leadership and
financial performance, in turn
Change and impact related to focal sociopolitical issue
Nike’s support of the Black Lives Matter social movement, Oreo’s support of
the LGBTQIA + community via the Pride campaign

Customers, suppliers, board members, employees, shareholders
Difficult to create a credible and authentic identity
Risks of woke washing
Risks of alienating some customers
Likely to garner polarised reactions—due to contested nature of focal
sociopolitical issues and appropriateness of holding up businesses as moral
leaders

Profit-driven business
Consumer expectations
Maintaining relevance through taking part in sociocultural movements
Sales revenue

For-profit (FPO) brand activism

196
Z. Lee et al.

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

likely be viewed by donors as a significant departure from
the norm in this sector. Next, as brands play a crucial ‘signalling’ role in communicating such significant changes in
strategic functions and objectives (Ertimur and CoskunerBalli 2015) and managing stakeholders’ reactions (Stuart
2018), we draw on signalling theory to understand this
further.

Signalling theory
Signalling theory (Spence 1973) is useful for explaining how
people will respond to new brand information where there
are information asymmetries between sender and receiver
(Erdem and Swait 1998). A brand is situated as a signal in
the marketplace. Recent theory iterations speak to the notion
of ‘virtue signalling’ (Berthon et al. 2021), defined as ‘the
action or practice of publicly expressing opinions or sentiments intended to demonstrate one’s good character or the
moral correctness of one’s position on a particular issue’.
Indeed, these authors point to the trend of brand virtue signalling, which has the specific goal of defining or enhancing
brand image. We suggest brand activism can act as a virtue
signal assisting the brand in establishing a ‘virtuous’ position and, in turn, brand equity.
In the non-profit context, however, we argue that brands
do not need to adopt activist positioning for the purpose
of signalling a ‘virtuous’ position in the marketplace, as
they have mission and purpose encoded into their brand
DNA (Mirzaei et al. 2021). Instead, brand activism could
be employed by NPOs to signal strategic intent to achieve
differentiation, relevance and growth within the sector, particularly in response to the commercial companies that are
increasingly leveraging social and political issues as part
of their marketing communications to establish a prosocial
positioning. Indeed, brand virtue signalling carves out differentiation and demonstrates the brand’s sentiment on an issue
of importance to its donors (Berthon et al. 2021). Consistent
with the brand activism literature, brand virtue signalling
Fig. 1  Conceptual framework of
the effects of non-profit brand
activism on non-profit brand
equity

197

also has potential to attract negative reactions (Berthon et al.
2021). Namely, it can be perceived as moral grandstanding
in a climate which calls into question the appropriateness of
businesses and CEOs as moral leaders (e.g. Branicki et al.
2021).
Synthesising the brand activism and non-profit branding
literatures with signalling theory, it becomes clear that what
is needed is to identify and unpack possible mechanisms
that could explain the opposing outcomes of non-profit
brand activism. We therefore propose (1) brand bravery
and (2) brand hypocrisy as missing links that mediate the
brand activism-brand equity relationship and explain the
positive and negative effects, respectively, that have been
documented in the literature. Figure 1 depicts our conceptual
framework. Next, we define the constructs and hypothesise
their relationships in more detail.

Effects of non‑profit brand activism on brand
bravery
We define non-profit brand activism from the donor’s perspective, namely the extent to which donors perceive (1) a
brand’s identity to encompass activism and (2) a brand’s
commitment to activism (Corning and Myers 2002; Klar
and Kasser 2009). Brand bravery is a differentiated and strategic aspect of brand identity that reflects a sense of being
‘altruistic, bold, courageous, determined, enduring, fearless
or gritty’ (Jain et al. 2021, p. 1222). Perceptions of bravery,
in particular, are established by demonstrating a determination to uphold and communicate beliefs and values, even
when this requires courage and risk to ‘intercept the future
and not just flow with it’ (Jain et al. 2021, p. 1215). Practitioners suggest that being brave requires moving away from
what is considered the norm or traditional in marketing communications (Adams 2018). We reason that the very actions
and values discussed above as essential to building brand
bravery are inherent to a strategy of brand activism. Activist
brands use a ‘controversial pathway’ towards challenging the

198

Z. Lee et al.

status quo and are regarded as ‘moral subjects’ (Sibai et al.
2021), which are purpose and values driven (Wettstein and
Baur 2016; Vredenburg et al. 2020). Thus, brand activism
has potential to contribute to the formation of a courageous
and emancipatory—a brave—brand identity. In the marketing literature, more generally, ‘wokeness’ is associated with
courage (Sobande 2020). In sum, we propose a positive relationship between brand activism and brand bravery.

to do good rather than to make money, it is also likely to lead
to perceptions of hypocrisy if viewed as a drastic departure
from traditional charitable service provision (Beaton et al.
2021). Such hypocritical perceptions are likely for charities because activist messaging deviates from the expected
compassionate and caring tone (Becker-Olsen et al. 2006).
Overall, we predict that higher perceived non-profit brand
activism leads to greater brand hypocrisy.

H1 Perceived non-profit brand activism has a positive
impact on brand bravery.

H2 Perceived non-profit brand activism has a positive
impact on brand hypocrisy.

Effects of non‑profit brand activism on brand
hypocrisy

Effects of brand bravery on brand hypocrisy

Acts of virtue signalling are often viewed as questionable
and therefore, can garner positive or negative reactions (Berthon et al. 2021); the interpretation and in turn, the decisionmaking process depends on the receiver (Bergh et al. 2014;
Connelly et al. 2011). Thus, we hypothesise that perceived
non-profit brand activism can also have negative effects,
namely breeding judgements of brand hypocrisy. Brand
hypocrisy is based on the concept of corporate hypocrisy
(Wagner et al. 2009) and refers to the perception that a brand
is claiming to be something that it is not, arising from ‘distance between assertions and performance’ (Shklar 1984,
p. 62). Korschun et al (2019) further suggest that hypocrisy
can emerge in the activism context when a company remains
silent on an issue.
We reason that this negative effect could occur because
brand virtue signalling—which is exhibited through brand
activism—invites a high degree of scrutiny from the marketplace (Berthon et al. 2021) in terms of brand activism
authenticity (Mirzaei et al. 2022; Vredenburg et al. 2020)
and brand signal credibility (e.g. Erdem and Swait 1998,
2004). Authenticity is concerned with the alignment of message and practice (Vredenburg et al. 2020), while credibility
refers to the extent to which the information about a brand’s
position (in this case, the stance on a sociopolitical issue
expressed in the brand activism campaign) is truthful and
dependable (Erdem and Swait 1998). Thus, there are clear
parallels between authenticity, credibility and hypocrisy
as these concepts all emphasise a brand delivering on its
promises.
Hypocrisy is a major risk of brand virtue signalling (Berthon et al. 2021) as it can be interpreted as a display of
‘conspicuous compassion’ rather than actual political commitment or responsibility (West 2004). Extant studies further caution the risks of virtue signalling—being perceived
as moral grandstanding (Grubbs et al. 2019) or presenting themselves as ‘woke’ to enhance their status (Tosi and
Warmke 2016). Hence, whilst brand activism can be interpreted positively for non-profits because their raison d'être is

Next, we propose a negative relationship between brand
bravery and brand hypocrisy. Hypocrisy judgements are
a reaction to information exposure that indicates a difference between a brand’s assertions and actions (Wagner
et al. 2009). While non-profit brand activism was argued to
directly and positively relate to brand hypocrisy (H2), brand
bravery plays an important mediating role with the potential
to mitigate negative reactions to non-profit brand activism. It
does this by conveying a brand’s actions and values thereby
minimising the distance that donors perceive between these
and a brand’s claims (which gives rise to hypocrisy) and by
buffering the effect of negative information on donors and
the brand evaluations formed.
First, brand bravery goes beyond caring for the cause—it
resonates with the brand’s core identity as well as actions
and values (Jain et al. 2021). Brands that fit the ‘brave’ (Jain
et al. 2021) and ‘hero’ (Pearson and Mark 2001; Smith 2016)
personality archetypes take courageous and difficult actions
and privilege purpose above profit (Smith and Milligan
2011). Specifically, brand bravery as an identity reflected
in brand’s core values, culture, positioning and personality
(de Chernatony 2002; Harris and de Chernatony 2001; Kapferer 2012), communicates to donors that a brand is altruistic
and courageous in its actions and values. Hence, bravery
works to minimise the distance between perceived prosocial
actions and assertions that breeds hypocrisy. By contrast,
when brands engage with sociopolitical issues for opportunistic reasons or as a response under pressure, perceptions of
woke washing can result (Vredenburg et al. 2020), which,
like hypocrisy, signals a mismatch between what a brand
says and what it does. Second, brand bravery can create a
buffering effect on the consumers, making them resistant
to negative information against the brand (Jain et al. 2021).
Hence, holding beliefs about a brand as brave can reduce the
risk of hypocrisy perceptions forming from certain information exposure, thus protecting the brand.
H3 Brand bravery has a negative impact on brand hypocrisy.

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

Effects of brand bravery on brand equity
Brand equity has become an outcome of interest in the NPO
sector as branding is used to achieve competitive differentiation (Baghi and Gabrielli 2013; Khan and Ede 2009; Randle
et al. 2013; Wymer and Akbar 2017). We follow BeckerOlsen and Hill (2006) and define non-profit brand equity
according to four stepwise components: (1) brand identity,
(2) brand meaning, (3) brand response and (4) brand relationship. We choose this definition because it is derived from
the widely adopted Consumer Based Brand Equity (CBBE)
model (Keller and Swaminathan 2020).
We hypothesise a positive relationship between brand
bravery and brand equity. Initially, brand bravery can
strengthen brand identity by setting a brand apart from competitors, and favourably shaping brand associations related
to being altruistic, bold and courageous. Brand bravery can
further establish positive brand meanings via performance
attributes (such as empathy and ability to satisfy donor
needs) and abstract imagery (Keller 1993). How people
think about brands abstractly is particularly important for
NPOs because of the intangibility and social context of their
offerings (Venable et al. 2005). Brand bravery conveys a
brand’s identity, which includes upholding its core values
and beliefs by engaging in altruistic and empathetic actions
and, in turn, defines and differentiates brand meanings.
Next, as brand bravery is associated with altruistic and
courageous acts, it can further elicit favourable affective brand responses (Jain et al. 2021), such as feelings of
inspiration and goodwill that become associated with the
non-profit brand (Amos 1982; Dawson 1988; Wunderink
2002). Brand bravery can effectively contribute to credibility
perceptions by communicating the brand’s actions, beliefs
and values and how those support a brand’s promises made
in its activism campaign. Finally, the brand relationship is
the ultimate link in the chain of responses that builds brand
equity. Perceived bravery is likely to reinforce favourable
brand associations and brand images, increase credibility
and trust and generate positive feelings of inspiration and
goodwill, which result in more benevolent attitudes and
behavioural intentions, which characterise relationships with
NPOs (Becker-Olsen and Hill 2006).
H4 Brand bravery has a positive impact on brand equity.

Effects of brand hypocrisy on brand equity
We hypothesise a negative relationship between brand
hypocrisy and brand equity. While brand hypocrisy may
not compromise brand awareness, it will create negative
brand image and sales relating to perceived deviation
between a brand’s sociopolitical messaging and business practice (Wagner et al. 2009). Related research on

199

greenwashing and woke washing clearly demonstrates that
consumers feel misled by these practices and view them
as unethical (Delmas and Burbano 2011; Vredenburg et al.
2020). This will tarnish and create inconsistencies across
images and beliefs, which negatively shapes brand meanings (Becker-Olsen and Hill 2006).
Brand hypocrisy further negatively impacts credibility
and trust, which form the brand response (Keller and Swaminathan 2020). Credibility is driven by confidence in the
brand to deliver on its promises (Erdem and Swait 1998;
Hoeffler and Keller 2002). Having confidence in the brand
to act dependably and truthfully (in this case, in relation to
the brand’s position on the sociopolitical issue) improves
its utility and thereby adds value or ‘equity’ to the brand
(Erdem and Swait 1998). Where brand hypocrisy exists,
therefore, credibility and, in turn, brand equity, will be
compromised. Last, to brand relationships, research shows
that negative perceptions and lack of trust in a non-profit
means individuals do not want to donate to or volunteer
with a charity (Haski-Leventhal and Foot 2016), which
are key elements of brand relationships and in turn, brand
equity.
H5 Brand hypocrisy has a negative impact on brand equity.

Non‑profit brand activism, brand bravery, brand
hypocrisy and brand equity
Perceived brand bravery plays a pivotal role in the formation
of donors’ emotional and evaluative reactions (Jain et al.
2021). In the domain of non-profit brand activism where
donors may react positively or negatively, we propose that
brand bravery is an important link that mitigates negative
judgements (i.e. brand hypocrisy) and reinforces positive
outcomes (i.e. brand equity) of non-profit brand activism.
The literature suggests that brand bravery has the
power to bolster positive brand attitudes and behaviours
and buffer against negative brand information (Jain et al.
2021). Being driven by a higher purpose—a notion related
to brand bravery—is a crucial aspect of a brand’s identity
(Kapferer 2012), which, in turn, helps to build brand equity
(Madhavaram et al. 2005). Moreover, a brave brand identity, which embodies the upholding of altruistic values and
taking courageous actions, mitigates judgements of brand
hypocrisy that can hamper brand equity. Combining these
research streams, the current study proposes the influence
of perceived non-profit brand activism on brand equity via
brand bravery and brand hypocrisy.
H6 The relationship between perceived non-profit brand
activism and brand equity is sequentially mediated by brand
bravery and brand hypocrisy, respectively.

200

Z. Lee et al.

Moderating effects of donors’ moral foundations

Research instrument, data collection and sampling

Research suggests that the strategy of activism warrants
questions about motivations and effects of morality (Branicki et al. 2021). Thus, we consider the moderating effect
of a donor’s moral foundations on the non-profit brand
activism-brand bravery relationship. Specifically, we
examine the extent of concern for justice that individual
donors display (herein concern for justice), which alludes
to a donor’s individualising moral foundation and their
interest in the fair protection and treatment of individuals
(Haidt and Joseph 2004). Reactions to virtue signalling
depend on the audience’s point of view (Berthon et al.
2021), and moral foundations account for the broad psychological system that an individual possesses and guides
their cognitions (Haidt and Joseph 2004).
We argue that a donor’s concern for justice strengthens the positive relationship between perceived non-profit
brand activism and brand bravery. The literature shows
that those who prioritise individualising moral foundations
tend to evaluate matters of justice to be of greater moral
importance (Haidt 2012) and respond to these in ways
that are congruent with their identity (Reed et al. 2007;
Winterich et al. 2012). Moreover, the bravery literature
suggests that moral foundations shape impressions of what
constitutes heroic behaviour. Individuals with stronger
individualising moral foundations view those involved in
defending rights and bucking oppressive social norms as
heroic and value them as such (Jayawickreme and Di Stefano 2012). Along the lines of these arguments, donors
with a higher concern for justice will be more likely to
perceive non-profit brand activism positively as a means to
disrupt problematic discourses as this is compatible with
their moral foundations that emphasise justice. Specifically, these donors are more likely to perceive non-profit
brand activism as heroic, which strengthens its positive
relationship to brand bravery.

The data for this study were collected using an online questionnaire composed of closed-ended questions/statements
accompanied by a 7-point Likert-type scale ranging from
strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). The constructs
in our study were measured using pre-developed scales from
the marketing literature. There are five main constructs in
this study: (1) Perceived non-profit brand activism, (2)
Brand bravery, (3) Non-profit brand equity, (4) Brand hypocrisy and (5) Donor’s concern for justice. Where necessary,
these scales were adapted to the non-profit context. Table 2
provides the list of items for each construct, including appropriate dimensions and sources.
Perceived non-profit brand activism was measured using
an eight-item scale from the political psychology literature,
which provides a good grounding for orientation towards
engagement in social and political action (Corning and
Myers 2002; Klar and Kasser 2009). Using this scale, brand
activism was operationalised as a second-order construct
with identity and commitment dimensions. The brand bravery measure was adopted from Jain et al (2021) and consisted of 13 items as a second-order construct. Non-profit
brand equity was measured using 13 items with four dimensions: brand identity, brand meaning, brand response and
brand relationships (Becker-Olsen and Hill 2006; Washburn
and Plank 2002). Brand hypocrisy was measured using three
items (Wagner et al. 2009), and donor’s concern for justice used a single universal item adapted from Graham et al
(2011). The content and face validity of the constructs was
examined by a panel of six marketing academics. Several
attention checks or “trap questions” (Jones et al. 2015) were
included throughout to ensure quality data capturing.
Greenpeace was selected as the focal non-profit brand for
this study. The decision to study a single NPO follows previous research that studies a single, purposely selected brand/
firm because it serves as benchmark for the phenomenon
of interest (Batt et al. 2021; Ladhari et al. 2022; Sultan and
Wong 2019). The Greenpeace brand was selected by the
first and second authors by referring to the Charity Index
Ranking 2020—Top 50 charities (YouGov 2020) and subsequently identifying eight charities that had high reported
levels of familiarity amongst the UK public and were known
to have recently engaged in activism campaigns. We then
consulted with two external marketing experts (an academic
and a practitioner, both with a high level of exposure to and
knowledge of the UK charitable sector). Based on this process, we selected Greenpeace, which has 94% familiarity
(YouGov 2022). Furthermore, Greenpeace is a globally recognised environmental activist organisation (Becker et al.
2020; She 2022; Villo et al. 2020), and Moorman (2020)
suggests brand activism studies should focus on companies
with self-evident political missions that drive decisions and

H7 The effect of non-profit brand activism on brand bravery
is moderated by a donor’s concern for justice.

Methodology
Research context
The empirical context for this study was the UK non-profit
sector. This sector is highly competitive with 169,000 charities (Statista 2021), generating charitable value of £11.3
billion in 2020 (CAF 2021). The UK is also ranked as the
second most generous country in the world in terms of charitable giving (Statista 2019).

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

201

Table 2  Measurements
Latent variables and scale items
Brand Activism (Cronbach Alpha = 0.94); Klar and Kasser (2009), Corning and Myers (2002)
Brand activism identity
1. Being an activist is central to who the charity[brand] is
2. I identify the [brand] charity as an activist
3. People who know the [brand] well would call the charity an activist
4. Being an activist is an important reflection of who the charity is
Brand activism commitment
1. The charity is truly committed to engaging in activism
2. The charity make time for activism amongst all their other activities
3. The charity goes out of their way to engage in activism
4. The charity takes time to engage in activism
Brand Bravery(Cronbach Alpha = 0.95); Jain et al. (2021)
Bold
1. The brand has a path distinct from its competitors
2. The brand is true to itself
Determined
1. The brand remains relentless and refuses to succumb to external power
2. The brand challenges the status quo
3. The brand is resolute and holds on to its values
4. The spirit of the Brand remains unshaken despite failures
Enduring
1. The brand stands up to its competitors
2. The brand has a never-say-die vision
Fearless
1. The brand is fearless in venturing into new territories
2. The brand defines new frontiers in business
3. The brand is courageous in taking changes/risks
Gritty
1. The brand is revolutionary and questions the existing stereotypes
2. The brand is innovative and defies the industry norms
Brand Equity (Cronbach Alpha = 0.96); Becker-Olsen and Hill (2006), Washburn and Plank (2002)
Brand identity
1. This brand is all about protecting the planet
2. This brand helps make the planet greener, healthier, and more peaceful
Brand meaning
1. This brand delivers the desired benefits to the brand
2. This brand is a vital part of the community
3. This brand is a positive force in the community
Brand response
1. This brand is one you can trust
2. This brand can be donated to with confidence
3. I like this brand
4. This is a good brand
5. This is a helpful brand
Brand relationship
1. If I were to donate money to charity, I would likely donate to [charity brand]
2. If I were to volunteer personal time with charity, I would likely volunteer with [charity brand]
3. I am likely to recommend this brand
Brand Hypocrisy (Cronbach Alpha = 0.86); Wagner et al. (2009)
1. This brand acts hypocritically

Loadings

0.86
0.75
0.79
0.84
0.85
0.70
0.82
0.83

0.71
0.80
0.85
0.78
0.85
0.81
0.77
0.74
0.86
0.70
0.81
0.81
0.85

0.73
0.93
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.92
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.89
0.86
0.82
0.96
0.78

202

Z. Lee et al.

Table 2  (continued)
Latent variables and scale items

Loadings

2. What this brand says and does are two different things
3. This brand pretends to be something that it is not
Donor’s Concern for Justice, Graham et al. (2011)—one universal item
1. Justice is the most important requirement for a society

0.80
0.86

Table 3  Demographic characteristics of the sample (N = 518)
Demographic
factors

Items

Count

Percentage

Gender

Female
Male
Other
Total
18–29
30–39
40–49
50–59
60 and more
Total

321
196
1
518
71
142
132
106
67
518

62.0
37.8
0.2
100
13.7
27.4
25.5
20.5
12.9
100

Age

actions. Finally, Greenpeace was chosen to establish ecological validity (Van Heerde et al. 2021)—it represents a known
exemplar of environmental activism and is highly polarising,
garnering both supporters and sceptics (BBC News 2022).
Its polarising nature furthermore aimed to maximise variance in brand equity dimensions. All respondents were provided with a brief description of the Greenpeace brand’s
mission, history and activities and instructed to answer all
survey questions with reference to Greenpeace.
Using Prolific Academic, which is common in marketing and branding research (Palan and Schitter 2018), we
obtained a sample of 518 UK residents. Consistent with
prior research (Michaelidou et al. 2015b), participants were
invited to the study if they reported donating to charity in
the past six months. Initially, 553 participants completed the
questionnaire. However, we removed those who indicated
that they are not aware of the Greenpeace brand (stating
‘strongly disagree’, ‘disagree’ and ‘somewhat disagree’ for
this item) as well as those who failed the attention checks,
resulting in a final sample size of 518. See Table 3 for demographic data.

Data analysis and results
This study utilised a four-step procedure to examine
the hypotheses. Firstly, the demographic profile and the

n.a

distribution of the data were investigated to ensure reliable sampling. Next, the measurement model reliability
was tested using Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA). This
was followed by a covariance-based structural equation
modelling (CB-SEM) using AMOS 27 software to examine
hypotheses 1–5 (Hair et al. 2017). Path coefficients were
used to test the direct effects of factors (H1 to H5), and the
sizes of indirect effects were explored to reveal the mediation effect of brand bravery on brand equity. The moderation
and serial mediation (H6 and H7) effects were investigated
using the PROCESS macro model.

Reliability and validity of measurement
Before analysing the conceptual model, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and model reliability were tested
for all endogenous and exogenous variables (Hair et al.
2017). Normality of the data was assessed by using the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin measure of sampling adequacy (Hair et al.
2017). A value of 0.72 (p < 0.001) was obtained indicating
adequate sampling. In addition, all items had skewness and
kurtosis values less than 2, indicating a fairly normally distributed data pattern (Hair et al. 2017). The multicollinearity test showed that VIF ranged from 1.04 to 1.56, which is
well below 10, suggesting that multicollinearity was not a
concern (Hair et al. 2017).
CFA was used to verify the convergent and discriminant
validity. All standardised regression weights were above
0.50 and significant at 0.001. All items had factor loadings
greater than 0.70, indicating item-level convergent validity.
All Average Variance Extracted values (AVEs) were higher
than 0.50, suggesting convergent validity at the factor level.
Further, we tested the condition for discriminant validity among constructs as suggested by Fornell and Larcker
(1981), and all AVEs were larger than the squared correlation between the construct and any others (Table 4). All the
measures exhibited strong reliability, with composite reliabilities ranging from 0.85 to 0.95 (Bagozzi and Yi 1988)
and all Cronbach’s Alphas exceeding 0.80.

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…
Table 4  Descriptive statistics,
reliability, discriminant validity

Constructs
Brand bravery (BRA)
Brand hypocrisy (BH)
Brand activism (BA)
Brand equity (BE)

Mean
6.12
2.99
6.12
4.74

S.D

CR

0.74
1.25
0.74
1.12

0.95
0.85
0.89
0.95

AVE
0.79
0.66
0.80
0.83

203

CA
0.93
0.86
0.90
0.96

BRA

BH

BA

BE

1(0.81)
− 0.15**
− 0.75***

1 (0.89)
0.09

1 (0.91)

a

1 (0.89 )
− 0.66***
0.34***
0.63***

BRA Brand Bravery, BH Brand Hypocrisy, BA Brand Activism, BE Brand Equity, CR Composite reliability, CA Cronbach alpha

a

square root of average variance extracted (AVE) (bold diagonal)

Significant of correlations:
**p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001

The CFA fit statistics indicated that the measurement
model fit well with the data (χ2 [518] = 1352.53, p < 0.00; χ2/
df = 2, GFI = 0.87; TLI = 0.95; CFI = 0.96; RMSEA = 0.05;
Bryne 2013; Hair et al. 2017). Therefore, the measurement model was deemed appropriate for measuring latent
constructs.
Common method variance (CMV) was also examined to
check if a single latent variable accounts for the majority of
manifest variable variance (Podsakoff et al. 2012). These
authors offer procedural and statistical remedies, which we
followed. In the questionnaire design and sampling procedures, we randomised the presentation order of items for
respondents, separated the measurement of the predictor
and outcome variables and protected respondent anonymity
using Prolific Academic’s ID system. We also introduced
an additional latent common method factor (LCMF), which
every item in the baseline model was allowed to load on (in
addition to loading on its respective construct). The LCMF
accounted for 39.9% of the total variance, which was less
than 50% following Harman’s one-factor method (Podsakoff
et al. 2012). The results indicated that CMV was not an issue
in this study.

Structural model assessment and hypothesis testing
The hypotheses were tested with a structural model based on
p-value (H1 to H5) and a series of analyses using bootstrapping with the SPSS macro PROCESS (Preacher and Hayes
2008) (H6 and H7). We used 95% confidence intervals to
check the indirect, direct and total estimates of path coefficients, with 5000 samples.
To examine hypotheses 1 to 5, a CB-SEM analysis
was conducted. The results revealed an overall good fit
of this model (χ 2 [518] = 1331.57, p < 0.00; χ 2/df = 2,
GFI = 0.87; TLI = 0.95; CFI = 0.95; RMSEA = 0.05; ­R2
Brand bravery = 0.12; ­R2 Brand hypocrisy = 0.45; R
­ 2 Brand
equity = 0.60). The second-order factor loadings were all

Table 5  Model fit and structural coefficients
Constructs

2nd-order factor
loading

Critical ratio

p-value

BA→AI
BA→AC
BRA→BB
BRA→BD
BRA→BEN
BRA→BF
BRA→BG
BE→BI
BE→BM
BE→BR
BE→BRL

0.89
0.89
0.95
0.92
0.92
0.85
0.82
0.80
0.94
0.95
0.86

9.56
–
–
17.14
15.92
15.88
15.72
17.39
–
19.18
15.92

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

significant (see Table 5). More specifically, we found nonprofit brand activism positively influenced brand bravery
(β = 0.42, p < 0.001), supporting H1. However, non-profit
brand activism had a positive but non-significant relationship with brand hypocrisy (β = 0.01, n.s.). As such, H2 was
rejected. Brand bravery was negatively related to brand
hypocrisy (β = − 0.99, p < 0.001). In addition, brand bravery
had a positive effect on brand equity (β = 0.29, p < 0.001),
supporting H3 and H4, respectively. Brand hypocrisy was
found to have a negative effect on brand equity (β = − 0.45,
p < 0.001), supporting H5. Alternative analysis using SPSS
macro PROCESS reconfirmed similar results—see Model
1, 2 and 3 in Table 6 in the next section.

The mediating roles of brand bravery and brand
hypocrisy
To examine the serial mediating effects of brand bravery and
brand hypocrisy in the relationship between non-profit brand
activism as a predictor and brand equity as an outcome, we

204

Z. Lee et al.

conducted a series of analyses using the bootstrapping procedure with the SPSS macro PROCESS (Preacher and Hayes
2008). The total, direct and indirect effects in a model with
two serial mediators were tested (Hayes 2018). In a PROCESS model 6, the direct effect of non-profit brand activism was not significant (effect = − 0.09, p = 0.07). However, there was a positive and significant total indirect effect
(effect = 0.25, p < 0.001, LLCI = 0.16 and ULCI = 0.36) of
Table 6  Indirect effects
for mediation models: The
PROCESS Macro Models

non-profit brand activism on brand equity. The indirect effect
of brand activism → brand bravery → brand equity was positive and significant (effect = 0.15, p < 0.001, LLCI = 0.10
and ULCI = 0.20) as was the indirect effect of brand activism → brand bravery → brand hypocrisy → brand equity
(effect = 0.12, p < 0.001, LLCI = 0.08 and ULCI = 0.16).
Thus, there is a partial serial mediation, supporting H6. See
Fig. 2 for the process model effect.

Independent variables

Model
1 Brand
Bravery

Model 2 Brand Hypocrisy

Model 3 Brand Equity

Hypothesis

Brand activism

0.35 (9.79)

0.01 (n.s.)

− 0.09 (n.s)

Brand bravery
Brand hypocrisy

–
–

− 0.77 (− 14.44)
–

0.42 (8.71)
− 0.43 (− 12.88)

R2
Indirect effects
BA→BRA→BH→BE
Indirect effects
BA→BRA→BE

0.08
Effect
0.12
Effect
0.15

0.30
LLCI
0.08
LLCI
0.10

0.50
UCLI
0.16
UCLI
0.20

H1 supported
H2 rejected
H3 supported
H4 supported
H5 supported

H6 supported

N = 518; t values in bracket
LLCI lower level of the 95% confidence interval, UCLI upper level of the 95% confidence interval
*Significant at the 0.01 (2-tailed t test)
Fig. 2  Process model results for
the effect of non-profit brand
activism

Table 7  Test of conditional
indirect effect of donor’s
concern for justice on the brand
activism and brand equity

Moderators

Donor’s concern for justice

Index of moderated mediation

Level

(− 1 SD)
(Mean)
(+ 1 SD)

Conditional indirect effects
of brand activism on brand
equity via brand bravery
BA→BRA→BE

Conditional indirect effects
of brand activism on brand
equity via brand bravery and
brand hypocrisy
BA→BRA→BH→BE

b

CI95%low

CI95%high

b

CI95%low

CI95%high

0.08
0.14
0.19
0.05

0.02
0.09
0.12
0.01

0.15
0.20
0.28
0.10

0.07
0.11
0.15
0.04

0.01
0.07
0.93
0.01

0.12
0.16
0.23
0.08

CI confidence interval; b unstandardized coefficient

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

Finally, we used Model 83 in PROCESS to test for moderated mediation (H7)—namely, that a donor’s concern
for justice moderates the indirect relationship between
non-profit brand activism and brand equity, through
brand bravery and brand hypocrisy. In Table 7, we found
the interaction effect was positive and significant, and
H7 was supported (β = 0.01; p < 0.001, LLCI = 0.07 and
ULCI = 0.19).

Discussion
Theoretical contributions
This study extends prior research on brand activism in the
B2C and B2B contexts (Kapitan et al. 2022; Moorman
2020; Schmidt et al. 2022; Vredenburg et al. 2020) by
providing an initial inquiry into brand activism in the third
sector, presenting some of the first empirical evidence on
the relationship between non-profit brand activism and
brand equity. First, this study found that the relationship
between non-profit brand activism and brand equity is
positive but only in the presence of brand bravery. This
implies that, in the non-profit sector, relevant mediators
for translating the strategic value of non-profit brand activism into positive brand equity are required. This finding
is interesting because previous research has highlighted
the importance of authenticity, finding significant risks
to brands taking a stand (Mukherjee and Althuizen 2020)
as they may lack perceived authenticity (Ahmad et al.
2022; Vredenburg et al. 2020). This risk is heightened
in the non-profit context, as mentioned—a sharp shift to
an activist-driven ‘warrior’ image contradicts traditional
donor expectations of NPOs to possess a caring, nurturing ‘warmth’ image. Accordingly, this research has shown
that developing a sense of bravery, such that the brand is
perceived as bold, determined, enduring, and fearless is
indispensable if brands want to harness brand activism
for improved brand equity in the non-profit sector. This
means that NPOs need to implement what is necessary
to disrupt the status quo, by achieving an authentic alignment between ‘bold’ communications and action regarding
focal sociopolitical issue (Vredenburg et al. 2020). In addition, NPOs should be ‘brave enough’ to make sacrifices
(e.g. alienating stakeholders), another important driver for
authenticity that eventually leads to brand equity (Mirzaei et al. 2022). We extend this thinking about authenticity by identifying brand bravery—a unique and strategic
facet of brand identity (Jain et al. 2021)—as critical for

205

a non-profit brand activism strategy to realise brandequity gains. This theorising and testing for brand bravery’s mediating role helps to ‘open the black box’ of the
relationship between non-profit brand activism and brand
equity by identifying one missing link that connects the
strategy with the outcome.
In addition, this study reveals that brand bravery mitigates the formation of brand hypocrisy judgements that
can arise from non-profit brand activism and, in turn,
diminish brand equity. This is a significant finding that
builds on Korschun et al (2019) by showing when and
how a sense of hypocrisy can be reduced. Relatedly,
brand activism has been documented to lead to higher
perceptions of hypocrisy in value-driven firms as compared to market-driven ones when they fail to take a stand
(Korschun et al. 2019). In the non-profit setting, however,
we did not find a direct correlation between non-profit
activism and hypocrisy. Despite non-profits being seen as
business-like (Maier et al. 2016) and suffering declining
trust (Becker et al. 2020), donors apparently maintain faith
in NPOs while they leverage a new activist positioning, in
a bid to not only disrupt problematic discourses in their
sector but also to maintain marketplace relevance. This is
consistent with Korschun et al (2019), which shows consumers respond positively towards firms taking a stand
when the issue aligns with their values. It is further relevant to mention that the serial mediation of brand bravery
and brand hypocrisy is strengthened when donors have a
greater concern for justice, echoing extant research argues
that individuals view organisations defending their rights
as heroic (Jayawickreme and Di Stefano 2012). Thus, our
findings indicate that increasing an individual’s perceptions of justice increases positive outcomes of non-profit
brand activism.
Second, this study contributes to the non-profit branding literature by examining non-profit brand activism as an
emerging strategy and unpacking the unique tension that
NPOs face in shifting away from the traditional image as
a charitable service provider towards one as a powerful
political advocate. The literature highlights a number of
dualities that non-profit brands must navigate and reconcile
to successfully achieve their aims—for example, pursuing
both income and mission goals (Lee and Bourne 2017).
Our study points to a new strategic tension that arises when
NPOs participate in non-profit brand activism. Past studies show that consumers respond positively to marketing
communications that utilise warmth and empathy appeals
to drive donations (Bennett and Gabriel 2003; Michaelidou
et al. 2015a; Michel and Rieunier 2012; Venable et al. 2005).

206

This is diametrically misaligned with an activist positioning.
We show that brand bravery is essential as a bridge between
these two market positions and enables brands to craft a
balanced identity as a compassionate warrior that not only
empathises with consumers’ concerns but also courageously
challenges the status quo.
Finally, we contribute to the evolving conversation in
the marketing literature about the societal responsibilities
and roles of brands as agents of change. Alongside brand
activism, the literature reveals an array of branding concepts
with a social edge. While these studies consider how brands
and branding can drive transformation at different levels,
from micro (within consumers) to meso (within organisations) to macro (within market and societal systems; Spry
et al. 2021), they predominantly speak to the commercial
sector (with the exception of Mirzaei et al. 2021). Some
may consider the non-profit sector as one that does not
require this type of change or transformation—after all, the
primary function of this sector is to provide services that
strengthen community accessibility and safety. However,
there are growing discussions about the inequalities that
persist in the sector due to problematic institutions, systems
and structures. For example, the humanitarian sector and aid
organisations (e.g. Oxfam) are understood to operate with
a white saviour mentality grounded in colonialist and racist
histories (Hirsch 2018), and initiatives, such as Charity So
White, are now operating to bring such organisations into
alignment with their espoused values. Therefore, our study
builds on this burgeoning stream of research by highlighting
non-profit brand activism as a catalyst for change within the
third sector, specifically where the unquestioned ‘goodness’
of NPOs may be actively obstructing the broader pursuit of
social justice.

Managerial implications
The findings of this study have three significant implications
for NPO marketing managers navigating brand activism.
The overarching take away is that non-profit brand activism is an effective tool for building brand equity indirectly
through building brand bravery and suggests guidelines
for managing both non-profit brand activism as a strategy
and brand bravery as an identity. First, implementing a
strategy of non-profit brand activism has the potential to
deliver positive effects on brand equity, but these are not
guaranteed or immediate. NPOs perceived to have a salient identity as an activist and a steadfast commitment to
the cause have the most to gain but also the most to lose in
terms of brand equity. Specifically, stronger perceptions that
a brand is implementing activism lead to brand bravery but

Z. Lee et al.

also elevates the risk of donors forming judgements of brand
hypocrisy. Marketing managers should focus on brand bravery as an essential ingredient and strategic roadmap for maximising positive outcomes of non-profit brand activism and
minimising the risk of negative outcomes. This may include
organisation-initiated assessments of non-profit brand activism strategies prior to launch to gather preliminary insights
into how these would be perceived by donors—brave or
hypocritical?
More broadly, our study corroborates the positive outcomes of brand bravery and calls for marketing managers to
consider more courageous means to enhancing donor intentions and behaviours (Jain et al. 2021). In times of deep
mistrust of societal institutions (Edelman 2022), rather than
avoid political messaging (Robson and Hart 2020), our findings encourage NPO marketing managers to bravely embrace
activism that allows for both achievement of brand equity
and the advancement of social goals.
Second, our findings provide insights into how nonprofits can effectively communicate activism initiatives to
potential donors. Given that non-profit brand activism can be
perceived by audiences as brave or hypocritical, it is crucial
to have a strategic view of the creative execution. Practitioners can consider adopting a more charged and determined
tone of voice and visuals elements. For example, Shelter—
which works to end homelessness and inadequate housing
in the UK—rebranded and launched a new campaign called
Fight For Home, in which they take a public stand in support of the human right to safe housing. Where Shelter had
previously used the ‘polite’ promotional trope (Wong 2021)
common to the charity sector, the new direction motivated
the activist edge evident in the new campaign. Continuing
with a gentle rather than brave approach impedes the ability
of NPOs to affect true social change.
Third, by providing the first examination of non-profit
brand activism, this study offers the strategy as a novel avenue for effectively engaging a younger donor cohort, which
remains a common challenge in the sector. When a NPOs
core supporters are mainly elderly, it is imperative to safeguard against future losses in donations. In the UK, many
household non-profit brands have strong equity amongst
older supporters and are reluctant to make dramatic changes
to take part in social movements (Dufour 2019). However,
non-profit brand activism presents an opportunity to communicate a change in the NPOs strategic direction towards
advocacy and refresh the brand image. Generation Z has
been termed the ‘activist generation’ (Callaghan 2019)—
they take the view that ‘my dollar is my vote’ and as such,
they deliberately patronise brands that make a social impact
(Admirand 2020). Millennials similarly display a preference

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…

for supportive and caring brands (Jain et al. 2021). Nonprofits can take steps towards appealing to and even collaborating with grassroots youth activists and speaking out
to these young potential donors.

Limitations and future research
This research has several limitations, which point to important avenues for future research. First, our study is based on
Greenpeace as an exemplar of NPO brand activism. Given
the activist history of the Greenpeace brand (Becker et al.
2020), such strongly held consumer associations and perceptions may not be apparent when considering other nonprofit brands that are newly engaged in activism. This could
hinder the generalisability of our results to other non-profit
contexts. Hence, it would be fruitful for future research to
explore fictitious non-profit brands or a wider variety of real
brands that are newly embracing a strategy of activism and
attempting to address other issues, such as gender inequality
and systemic racism. It would be particularly interesting to
compare activism efforts relating to causes that are popular
and unpopular with the public (Body and Breeze 2022).
A related limitation is the cross-sectional design utilised herein. This was appropriate for the chosen brand
given the enduring stability of its positioning as an environmental activist and correlation with brand equity
(Becker-Olsen and Hill 2006). However, it does not allow
inferences of causality, which were beyond the scope of
this research. Future research could consider an experimental design that manipulates and captures the dynamics of a brand shifting to this strategy. Future research
could also consider employing a longitudinal design to
map the navigation of non-profit brand activism over time.
The findings would build on those here within to test the
causality between variables, providing additional support
or a different perspective on the influence of brand bravery
and brand hypocrisy on non-profit brand activism, thus
providing further useful managerial implications.
Second, our study is based on a UK sample and, on
balance, primarily reflects a developed economy and
Western culture. It remains for future research to examine the international applicability of the observed effects
by replicating our results with samples from other countries. Our focal variables may take on different meanings
in different cultures. There is clear merit in examining
consumers’ reactions to non-profit brand activism beyond
those that occur in European and North American countries. For example, how differently would non-profit brand

207

activism be received in countries with stricter censorship
rules or citizen rights to free speech? How would it be
interpreted in communities that tend to be culturally marginalised? Moreover, what is considered brave and heroic
in one culture may be different as compared to another. In
a highly individualistic culture, those who defend rights
and buck oppressive social norms have historically been
highly valued whereas those who protect in-group interest
and integrity may be heralded as heroes in collectivistic
cultures (Jayawickreme and Di Stefano 2012).
Third, our study is the first to investigate brand activism
in the non-profit sector, so to provide a clearer and fuller
picture of brand equity implications, it would be useful for
future research to examine additional boundary conditions.
As for brand-level factors, there is scope to consider the
historical positioning of the non-profit brand as an activist
versus philanthropist as well as the image and personality (e.g. nurturing, rugged, sincere). Moral foundations of
non-profit brands could also be examined. Prior research
(Winterich et al. 2012) suggests that donors may infer a
charity brand’s moral foundations based on its management and mission, and this, in turn, can significantly affect
giving. In this vein, it would be similarly illuminating to
more fully understand how donors’ moral foundations
(beyond concern for justice) and political identity shape
their receptivity to non-profit brand activism and their
donation behaviour, especially when these are perceived
to be aligned/misaligned with those of the NPO.
To conclude, difficulties abound in the non-profit sector:
cuts to corporate and government funding, increases in competition for donors and volunteers, risks to being perceived
as overly commercial in the branding tactics used to differentiate, and widespread public mistrust. While non-profits
as purpose natives have always had an advocacy role to play,
a growing number are once again embracing this role and
positioning themselves as activists by engaging with controversial and divisive issues within the third sector. Overall,
this study aims to contribute to the burgeoning body of work
addressing brand activism and provide a first step towards
examining what happens when a non-profit brand makes a
strategic shift away from being warm to being a warrior, a
shift from doing ‘good’ to doing what’s ‘right’.

Appendix A
Information about Greenpeace and activism.

208

Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

References
Adams, P. 2018. What true brand bravery looks like, according to marketers who took the leap, available at: https://​www.​marke​tingd​
ive.​com/​news/​what-​true-​brand-​brave​r y-​looks-​like-​accor​ding-​
to-​marke​ters-​who-​took-​the-​lea/​539093/. Accessed 11 Jan 2022.
Admirand, L. 2020. Thinking beyond an empty black box: Meeting
Gen Z’s expectations for genuine brand activism, available at:
https://​www.​resea​rchwo​rld.​com/​t hink​ing-​beyond-​an-​empty-​
black-​box-​meeti​ng-​gen-​zs-​expec​tatio​ns-​for-​genui​ne-​brand-​activ​
ism/. Accessed 25 June 2021.
Ahmad, F., F. Guzmán, and B. Kidwell. 2022. Effective messaging
strategies to increase brand love for sociopolitical activist brands.
Journal of Business Research 151: 609–622.
Amos, O.M. 1982. Empirical analysis of motives underlying individual contributions to charity. Atlantic Economic Journal 10
(4): 45–52.
Baghi, I., and V. Gabrielli. 2013. Co-branded cause-related marketing campaigns: The importance of linking two strong brands.
International Review on Public and Non-Profit Marketing 10
(1): 13–29.
Bagozzi, R.P., and Y. Yi. 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16
(1): 74–94.
Batt, V., M. Holzer, M. Bruhn, and S. Tuzovic. 2021. Effects of sponsorship quality and quantity on employee brand behavior. Journal of Brand Management 28 (5): 495–509.
BBC News. 2022. Greenpeace activists in Essex arrested blocking oil
tanker, 16th May.

Z. Lee et al.

Beaton, E., H. MacIndoe, and T. Wang. 2021. Combining non-profit
service and advocacy: Organizational structures and hybridity.
Non-Profit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 50 (2): 372–396.
Becker, A., S. Boenigk, and J. Willems. 2020. In non-profits we trust?
A large-scale study on the public’s trust in non-profit organizations. Journal of Non-Profit and Public Sector Marketing 32 (2):
189–216.
Becker-Olsen, K.L., and R.P. Hill. 2006. The impact of sponsor fit on
brand equity: The case of non-profit service providers. Journal
of Service Research 9 (1): 73–83.
Bennett, R., and H. Gabriel. 2003. Image and reputational characteristics of UK charitable organizations: An empirical study. Corporate Reputation Review 6 (3): 276–289.
Bennett, R., and A. Sargeant. 2005. The non-profit marketing landscape: Guest editors’ introduction to a special section. Journal
of Business Research 58 (6): 797–805.
Bergh, D.D., B.L. Connelly, D.J. Ketchen Jr., and L.M. Shannon.
2014. Signalling theory and equilibrium in strategic management research: An assessment and a research agenda. Journal of
Management Studies 51 (8): 1334–1360.
Berthon, P.R., Ferguson, S.T.L., Pitt, L.F. and Wang, E. 2021. The virtuous brand: The perils and promises of brand virtue signaling.
Business Horizons (in press).
Bhagwat, Y., N.L. Warren, J.T. Beck, and G.F. Watson IV. 2020. Corporate sociopolitical activism and firm value. Journal of Marketing 84 (5): 1–21.
Blackall, M. 2020. Barnardo's hits back at Tory MPs upset by talk
of ‘white privilege’, available at: https://​www.​thegu​ardian.​com/​
world/​2020/​dec/​05/​barna​rdos-​hits-​back-​at-​tory-​mps-​upset-​by-​
talk-​of-​white-​privi​lege. Accessed 22 Nov 2021.
Body, A., and B. Breeze. 2022. Fundraising across different causes. In
Charity Marketing: Contemporary issues, research and practice,
ed. F. Hyde and S. Mitchell, 113–127. Oxon: Routledge.
Boenigk, S., and A. Becker. 2016. Toward the importance of nonprofit brand equity: Results from a study of German non-profit
organizations. Non-Profit Management and Leadership 27 (2):
181–198.

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…
Branicki, L., S. Brammer, A. Pullen, and C. Rhodes. 2021. The morality of “new” CEO activism. Journal of Business Ethics 170 (2):
269–285.
Byrne, B.M. 2013. Structural equation modelling with Mplus: Basic
concepts, applications, and programming. London: Routledge.
CAF (2021) Charities Aid Foundation: UK giving report. 2021. https://​
www.​cafon​line.​org/​docs/​defau​lt-​source/​about-​us-​resea​rch/​uk_​
giving_​report_​2021.​pdf. Accessed 4 Jan 2022.
Callaghan, G. 2019. Is the ‘activist generation’ too anxious about the
future?, available at: https://w
​ ww.s​ mh.c​ om.a​ u/e​ nviro​ nment/s​ usta​
inabil​ ity/i​ s-t​ he-a​ ctivi​ st-g​ enera​ tion-t​ oo-a​ nxiou​ s-a​ bout-t​ he-f​ uture-​
20190​716-​p527rw.​html. Accessed 25 June 2021.
Chad, P. 2015. Utilising a change management perspective to examine
the implementation of corporate rebranding in a non-profit SME.
Journal of Brand Management 22 (7): 569–587.
Chapleo, C. 2015. Brand ‘infrastructure’in non-profit organizations:
Challenges to successful brand building? Journal of Marketing
Communications 21 (3): 199–209.
Charity Commision. 2020. Greenpeace Environmental Trust, https://​
regis​ter-​of-​chari​ties.​chari​tycom​missi​on.​gov.​uk/​chari​ty-​searc​h/-/​
chari​ty-​detai​ls/​284934. Accessed 10 Jan 2022.
Connelly, B.L., S.T. Certo, R.D. Ireland, and C.R. Reutzel. 2011. Signaling theory: A review and assessment. Journal of Management
37 (1): 39–67.
Corning, A.F., and D.J. Myers. 2002. Individual orientation toward
engagement in social action. Political Psychology 23 (4):
703–729.
da Silva, L.C., E.W. Mainardes, A.M.C. Teixeira, and L.C. Júnior.
2020. Brand orientation of non-profit organizations and its relationship with the attitude toward charity and donation intention.
International Review on Public and Non-Profit Marketing 17
(3): 353–373.
Dawson, S. 1988. Four motivations for charitable giving: Implications
for marketing strategy to attract monetary donations for medical
research. Journal of Health Care Marketing 8 (2): 31–37.
De Chernatony, L. 2002. Would a brand smell any sweeter by a corporate name? Corporate Reputation Review 5 (2): 114–132.
Delmas, M.A., and V.C. Burbano. 2011. The drivers of greenwashing.
California Management Review 54 (1): 64–87.
du Bois, M., and R. Langley-Cook. 2022. Building powerful charity
brands: An inside perspective. In Charity Marketing: Contemporary issues, research and practice, ed. F. Hyde and S. Mitchell,
14–26. Oxon: Routledge.
Dufour, D. 2019. Battle of the brands: charity or movement? https://​
thete​am.​co.​uk/​blog/​battle-​of-​the-​brands-​chari​ty-​or-​movem​ent/.
Accessed 3 Sept 2022.
Edelman. 2022. https://w
​ ww.e​ delma​ n.c​ om/s​ ites/g/fi
​ les/a​ atuss​ 191/fi
​ les/​
2022-​01/​Trust​22_​Top10.​pdf. Accessed 10 Jan 2022.
Erdem, T., and J. Swait. 1998. Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of Consumer Psychology 7 (2): 131–157.
Erdem, T., and J. Swait. 2004. Brand credibility, brand consideration,
and choice. Journal of Consumer Research 31 (1): 191–198.
Ertimur, B., and G. Coskuner-Balli. 2015. Navigating the institutional
logics of markets: Implications for strategic brand management.
Journal of Marketing 79 (2): 40–61.
Farndon-Taylor, C. 2021. Rebranding Shelter: A UX Designer’s Perspective, available at: https://​blog.​shelt​er.​org.​uk/​2021/​06/​rebra​
nding-​shelt​er-a-​ux-​desig​ners-​persp​ective/. Accessed 22 Nov
2021.
Fornell, C., and D.F. Larcker. 1981. Evaluating structural equation
models with unobservable variables and measurement error.
Journal of Marketing Research 18 (1): 39–50.
Graham, J., B.A. Nosek, J. Haidt, R. Iyer, S. Koleva, and P.H. Ditto.
2011. Mapping the moral domain. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 101 (2): 366.

209

Grubbs, J.B., B. Warmke, J. Tosi, A.S. James, and W.K. Campbell.
2019. Moral grandstanding in public discourse: Status-seeking
motives as a potential explanatory mechanism in predicting conflict. PLoS ONE 14 (10): e0223749. https://d​ oi.o​ rg/1​ 0.1​ 371/j​ ourn​
al.​pone.​02237​49.
Haidt, J. 2012. The righteous mind: Why good people are divided by
politics and religion. New York: Pantheon.
Haidt, J., and C. Joseph. 2004. Intuitive ethics: How innately prepared
intuitions generate culturally variable virtues. Daedalus 133 (4):
55–66.
Hair, J.F., L.M. Matthews, R.L. Matthews, and M. Sarstedt. 2017.
PLS-SEM or CB-SEM: Updated guidelines on which method
use. International Journal of Multivariate Data Analysis 1 (2):
107–123.
Harris, F., and L. De Chernatony. 2001. Corporate branding and corporate brand performance. European Journal of Marketing 35
(3/4): 441–456.
Haski-Leventhal, D., and C. Foot. 2016. The relationship between
disclosure and household donations to nonprofit organizations
in Australia. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 45 (5):
992–1012.
Hirsch, A. 2018. Oxfam abuse scandal is built on the aid industry’s
white saviour mentality, available at: https://​www.​thegu​ardian.​
com/​comme​ntisf​ree/​2018/​feb/​20/​oxfam-​abuse-​scand​al-​haiti-​
colon​ialism. Accessed 22 Nov 2021.
Hoeffler, S., and K.L. Keller. 2002. Building brand equity through corporate societal marketing. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing
21 (1): 78–89.
Hydock, C., N. Paharia, and S. Blair. 2020. Should your brand pick a
side? How market share determines the impact of corporate political advocacy. Journal of Marketing Research 57 (6): 1135–1151.
Iglesias, O., and N. Ind. 2020. Towards a theory of conscientious
corporate brand co-creation: The next key challenge in brand
management. Journal of Brand Management 27 (6): 710–720.
Jain, K., I. Jajodia, P. Sharma, and G. Singh. 2021. Brand bravery:
Conceptualization, scale development and validation. Journal of
Product and Brand Management 30 (8): 1212–1218.
Jayawickreme, E., and P. Di Stefano. 2012. How can we study heroism? Integrating persons, situations and communities. Political
Psychology 33 (1): 165–178.
Jones, M.S., L.A. House, and Z. Gao. 2015. Respondent screening
and revealed preference axioms: Testing quarantining methods
for enhanced data quality in web panel surveys. Public Opinion
Quarterly 79 (3): 687–709.
Kapferer, J.N. 2012. The new strategic brand management: Advanced
insights and strategic thinking. London: Kogan Page publishers.
Kapitan, S., J.A. Kemper, J. Vredenburg, and A. Spry. 2022. Strategic
B2B Brand Activism: Building Conscientious Purpose for Social
Impact. Industrial Marketing Management 107: 14–28.
Keller, K.L. 1993. Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of Marketing 57 (1): 1–22.
Keller, K.L., and V. Swaminathan. 2020. Strategic brand management: Building, measuring, and managing brand equity. Pearson: Harlow.
Khan, H., and D. Ede. 2009. How do not-for-profit SMEs attempt
to develop a strong brand in an increasingly saturated market?
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 16 (2):
335–354.
Kim, T., and J.G. Ball. 2021. Unintended consequences of warmth
appeals: An extension of the compensation effect between
warmth and competence to advertising. Journal of Advertising
50 (5): 622–638.
Klar, M., and T. Kasser. 2009. Some benefits of being an activist:
Measuring activism and its role in psychological well-being.
Political Psychology 30 (5): 755–777.

210
Korschun, D., K.D. Martin, and G. Vadakkepatt. 2020. Marketing’s
role in understanding political activity. Journal of Public Policy
& Marketing 39 (4): 378–387.
Korschun, D., Rafieian, H., Aggarwal, A. and Swain, S.D. 2019. Taking
a stand: Consumer responses when companies get (or don’t get)
political. Available at SSRN 2806476.
Ladhari, R., S. Cheikhrouhou, M. Morales, and E. Zaaboub. 2022.
Antecedents and consequences of emotional attachment to sport
teams brands. Journal of Brand Management 29: 454–469.
Lafferty, B.A., and R.E. Goldsmith. 2005. Cause–brand alliances: Does
the cause help the brand or does the brand help the cause? Journal of Business Research 58 (4): 423–429.
Lee, Z. 2013. Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations: Exploring
tensions in the non-profit sector. Journal of Marketing Management 29 (9–10): 1124–1142.
Lee, Z., and H. Bourne. 2017. Managing dual identities in non-profit
rebranding: An exploratory study. Non-Profit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 46 (4): 794–816.
Lee, Z., and I. Davies. 2021. Nonprofit brand and managing nonprofit
rebranding strategy. In Charity Marketing: Contemporary Issues,
Research and Practice, ed. H. Fran and S. Mitchell, 46–58. London: Routledge.
LeRoux, K. 2007. Non-profits as civic intermediaries: The role of community-based organizations in promoting political participation.
Urban Affairs Review 42 (3): 410–422.
Madhavaram, S., V. Badrinarayanan, and R.E. McDonald. 2005.
Integrated marketing communication (IMC) and brand identity
as critical components of brand equity strategy: A conceptual
framework and research propositions. Journal of Advertising 34
(4): 69–80.
Maier, F., M. Meyer, and M. Steinbereithner. 2016. Nonprofit organizations becoming business-like: A systematic review. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly 45 (1): 64–86.
Matten, D., and J. Moon. 2008. “Implicit” and “explicit” CSR: A conceptual framework for a comparative understanding of corporate
social responsibility. Academy of Management Review 33 (2):
404–424.
Michaelidou, N., M. Micevski, and J.W. Cadogan. 2015a. An evaluation of non-profit brand image: Towards a better conceptualization and measurement. Journal of Business Research 68 (8):
1657–1666.
Michaelidou, N., M. Micevski, and N.T. Siamagka. 2015b. Consumers’
intention to donate to two children’s charity brands: A comparison of Barnardo’s and BBC Children in Need. Journal of Product
and Brand Management 24 (2): 134–146.
Michel, G., and S. Rieunier. 2012. Non-profit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving. Journal of Business Research
65 (5): 701–707.
Mirzaei, A., C.M. Webster, and H. Siuki. 2021. Exploring brand purpose dimensions for non-profit organizations. Journal of Brand
Management 28 (2): 186–198.
Mirzaei, A., D.C. Wilkie, and H. Siuki. 2022. Woke brand activism
authenticity or the lack of it. Journal of Business Research 139
(February): 1–12.
Moorman, C. 2020. Commentary: Brand activism in a political world.
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 39 (4): 388–392.
Mukherjee, S., and N. Althuizen. 2020. Brand activism: Does courting controversy help or hurt a brand? International Journal of
Research in Marketing 37 (4): 772–788.
Napoli, J. 2006. The impact of non-profit brand orientation on organisational performance. Journal of Marketing Management 22
(7–8): 673–694.
Palan, S., and C. Schitter. 2018. Prolific.ac: A subject pool for online
experiments. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance
17: 22–27.

Z. Lee et al.
Pearson, C., and M. Mark. 2001. The Hero and the Outlaw: Building
Extraordinary Brands through the Power of Archetypes. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Podsakoff, P.M., S.B. MacKenzie, and N.P. Podsakoff. 2012. Sources
of method bias in social science research and recommendations
on how to control it. Annual Review of Psychology 63: 539–569.
Preacher, K.J., and A.F. Hayes. 2008. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple
mediator models. Behavior Research Methods 40 (3): 879–891.
Randle, M., F. Leisch, and S. Dolnicar. 2013. Competition or collaboration? The effect of non-profit brand image on volunteer recruitment strategy. Journal of Brand Management 20 (8): 689–704.
Reed, A., K. Aquino, and E. Levy. 2007. Moral identity and judgments
of charitable behaviors. Journal of Marketing 71 (1): 178–193.
Robson, A., and D.J. Hart. 2020. Feed the world or help the heroes?
Exploring how political attitudes influence charitable choice.
Journal of Marketing Management 36 (17–18): 1680–1706.
Sargeant, A., J.B. Ford, and J. Hudson. 2008. Charity brand personality: The relationship with giving behavior. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 37 (3): 468–491.
Sarkar, C., and P. Kotler. 2018. Brand activism: From purpose to
action. Idea Bite Press.
Schmid, H., M. Bar, and R. Nirel. 2008. Advocacy activities in nonprofit human service organizations: Implications for policy. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 37 (4): 581–602.
Schmidt, H.J., N. Ind, F. Guzmán, and E. Kennedy. 2022. Sociopolitical activist brands. Journal of Product and Brand Management
31 (1): 40–55.
Sepulcri, L.M.C.B., E.W. Mainardes, and C.C. Belchior. 2020. Nonprofit branding: A bibliometric analysis. Journal of Product and
Brand Management 29 (5): 655–673.
She, C. 2022. January. Social media dissemination of counter accounts
and stakeholder support–evidence from greenpeace’s “Save the
Arctic” campaign on Facebook. In Accounting Forum (pp.
1–26). Routledge.
Shklar, J.N. 1984. Ordinary vices. Harvard University Press.
Sibai, O., Mimoun, L. and Boukis, A. 2021. Authenticating brand
activism: Negotiating the boundaries of free speech to make a
change. Psychology and Marketing (forthcoming).
Smith, N. 2016. Brand archetypes – meet the hero. Nvision Designs,
available at: www.n​ visio​ n-t​ hat.c​ om/d​ esign-f​ rom-a​ llang​ les/b​ rand-​
arche​type-​the-​hero.
Smith, S., and A. Milligan. 2011. Bold: How to be brave in business
and win. London: Kogan Page Publishers.
Sobande, F. 2020. Woke-washing: “intersectional” femvertising and
branding “woke” bravery. European Journal of Marketing 54
(11): 2723–2745.
Spence, M. 1973. Job market signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (3): 355–374.
Spry, A., B. Figueiredo, L. Gurrieri, J.A. Kemper, and J. Vredenburg.
2021. Transformative branding: A dynamic capability to challenge the dominant social paradigm. Journal of Macromarketing
41 (4): 531–546.
Statista. 2019. The most generous countries in the world. https://​www.​
stati​sta.​com/​chart/​12315/​the-​most-​gener​ous-​count​r ies-​in-​the-​
world/. Accessed 5 Jan 2022.
Statista. 2021. Charities in the UK. https://​www.​stati​sta.​com/​topics/​
3781/​chari​ties-​in-​the-​uk/#​dossi​erKey​figur​es. Accessed 14 Jan
2022.
Stuart, H. 2018. Corporate branding and rebranding: An institutional
logics perspective. Journal of Product and Brand Management
27 (1): 96–100.
Suárez, D.F. 2009. Non-profit advocacy and civic engagement on the
Internet. Administration and Society 41 (3): 267–289.
Sultan, P., and H.Y. Wong. 2019. How service quality affects university brand performance, university brand image and behavioural

From warmth to warrior: impacts of non‑profit brand activism on brand bravery, brand hypocrisy…
intention: The mediating effects of satisfaction and trust and
moderating roles of gender and study mode. Journal of Brand
Management 26 (3): 332–347.
Tosi, J., and B. Warmke. 2016. Moral grandstanding. Philosophy and
Public Affairs 44 (3): 197–217.
Van Heerde, H.J., C. Moorman, C.P. Moreau, and R.W. Palmatier.
2021. Reality check: Infusing ecological value into academic
marketing research. Journal of Marketing 85 (2): 1–13.
Venable, B.T., G.M. Rose, V.D. Bush, and F.W. Gilbert. 2005. The
role of brand personality in charitable giving: An assessment
and validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
33 (3): 295–312.
Villo, S., M. Halme, and T. Ritvala. 2020. Theorizing MNE-NGO conflicts in state-capitalist contexts: Insights from the Greenpeace,
Gazprom and the Russian state dispute in the Arctic. Journal of
World Business 55 (3): 101068.
Vredenburg, J., S. Kapitan, A. Spry, and J.A. Kemper. 2020. Brands
taking a stand: Authentic brand activism or woke washing? Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 39 (4): 444–460.
Wagner, T., R.J. Lutz, and B.A. Weitz. 2009. Corporate hypocrisy:
Overcoming the threat of inconsistent corporate social responsibility perceptions. Journal of Marketing 73 (6): 77–91.
Washburn, J.H., and R.E. Plank. 2002. Measuring brand equity: An
evaluation of a consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice 10 (1): 46–62.
West, P. 2004. Conspicuous compassion: Why sometimes it really is
cruel to be kind. The Institute for the Study of Civil Society
(Civitas). London: UK.
Wettstein, F., and D. Baur. 2016. Why should we care about marriage
equality? Political advocacy as a part of corporate responsibility.
Journal of Business Ethics 138 (2): 199–213.
Winterich, K.P., Y. Zhang, and V. Mittal. 2012. How political identity
and charity positioning increase donations: Insights from moral
foundations theory. International Journal of Research in Marketing 29 (4): 346–354.
Wong, H. 2021. Shelter reveals activism-inspired rebrand from Superunion, available at: https://w
​ ww.d​ esign​ week.c​ o.u​ k/i​ ssues/2​ 4-3​ 0-​
may-​2021/​shelt​er-​revea​ls-​activ​ism-​inspi​red-​rebra​nd-​from-​super​
union/. Accessed 22 Nov 2021.
Wunderink, S.R. 2002. Individual financial donations to charities in
The Netherlands: Why, how and how much? Journal of NonProfit and Public Sector Marketing 10 (2): 21–39.
Wymer, W., and M.M. Akbar. 2017. Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance to non-profit marketing. International
Review on Public and Non-Profit Marketing 14 (3): 359–374.
Wymer, W., H.P. Gross, and B. Helmig. 2016. Nonprofit brand strength:
What is it? How is it measured? What are its outcomes? Voluntas
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations
27 (3): 1448–1471.
YouGov. 2020. Charity index ranking 2020. https://​yougov.​co.​uk/​topics/​resou​rces/​artic​les-​repor​ts/​2020/​10/​20/​yougov-​chari​tyind​ex-​
ranki​ngs-​2020. Accessed 5 Jan 2022.

211

YouGov. 2022. The most popular charities and organisations. https://​
yougov.​co.​uk/​ratin​gs/​polit​ics/​popul​arity/​chari​ties-o​ rgan​isati​ons/​
all. Accessed 1 Oct 2022.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Dr Zoe Lee is a Senior Lecturer in Marketing at Cardiff Business School,
Cardiff University, UK. She is an Associate Editor of Journal of Strategic
Marketing and member of the Editorial Review Board for the Journal
of Philanthropy and Marketing. Her research interest focuses on corporate branding & heritage, sustainability and brand activism. Her latest
research explores the internal perspective of corporate (re)branding and
corporate identity change, in particular nonprofit employees’ emotional
resilience. Dr Zoe Lee is currently conducting research in understanding
brand activism in nonprofit rebranding. Her research has been published
in Journal of Business Research, Journal of Business Ethics, European
Journal of Marketing and Journal of Marketing Management, and she
reviews for a number of leading journals.
Dr Amanda Spry is a Lecturer of Marketing at RMIT University, Australia. Amanda investigates the critical role that brands play for consumers, companies, markets, and society, from driving performance to
engaging in activism and societal transformation. She has published in
such journals as the European Journal of Marketing, Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, and Journal of Macromarketing. She is an
editorial review board member for the European Journal of Marketing. Amanda has contributed to The Conversation and AdNews media
outlets, amongst others, as a branding expert.
Professor Yuksel Ekinci (Ph.D.) is a Professor of Marketing at the Faculty of Business and Law, University of Portsmouth. His research interest includes Consumer-Based Brand Equity and SME marketing. His
articles are published in the Journal of Business Research, European
Journal of Marketing, Annals of Tourism Research, Journal of Travel
Research and others. Yuksel is an associate editor of the International
Journal of Market Research and editorial board member of several marketing and tourism journals (e.g. Journal of Business Research, Journal
of Travel Research and Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services).
Dr Jessica Vredenburg (Ph.D., University of Melbourne) is Senior
Lecturer of Marketing at Auckland University of Technology. She is
a member of the Editorial Review Board for the Journal of Public
Policy & Marketing and has published in top ranked peer-reviewed
academic journals including the Journal of Public Policy & Marketing,
the European Journal of Marketing, and the Journal of Macromarketing. Her research focuses on contemporary branding issues (including
brand activism and cancel culture), service and relationship marketing
(including service automation and retail theatre), and strategic sport
marketing and sponsorship.

