Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Institutional Approaches
Author(s): Mark C. Suchman
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 571-610
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/258788 .
Accessed: 12/11/2013 13:57

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

C Academy  of  Management  Review 
1995, Vol.  20,  No.  3,  571-610. 

MANAGING LEGITIMACY: STRATEGIC AND 
INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES 

MARK C.  SUCHMAN 
University  of  Wisconsin-Madison 

the  large  but  diverse  literature  on  organiza- 
This  article  synthesizes 
tional  legitimacy,  highlighting  similarities  and  disparities  among  the 
identi- 
leading  strategic  and  institutional  approaches.  The  analysis 
fies  three  primary  forms  of legitimacy:  pragmatic,  based  on  audience 
self-interest;  moral,  based  on  normative  approval:  and  cognitive, 
and  taken-for-grantedness.  The  article 
based  on  comprehensibility 
for gaining,  maintaining,  and  repairing  le- 
then  examines  strategies 
gitimacy  of each  type,  suggesting  both the  promises  and  the  pitfalls  of 
such  instrumental  manipulations. 

Early  management 

social  machines  designed 

theorists  viewed  organizations  as  "rational  sys- 
for the  efficient  transformation  of  ma- 
tems" 
terial  inputs  into  material  outputs  (Scott,  1987: 31-50).  In  addition,  theo- 
rists  of the  period  often  depicted  organizations  as  tightly  bounded  entities 
from  the  surrounding  environment.  Resources  mate- 
clearly  demarcated 
rialized  at  factory  gates,  production  technologies  "revealed"  themselves 
to engineers,  and  products  evaporated  off loading  docks,  all  ex  hypothesi. 
this  imagery  has  undergone  a  dramatic 
Since  the  late  1960s,  however, 
change.  "Open  system"  theories  (Scott,  1987: 78-92)  have  reconceptual- 
ized  organizational  boundaries  as  porous  and  problematic,  and  institu- 
that  many  dy- 
tional  theories  (Powell  & DiMaggio,  1991) have  stressed 
namics  in  the  organizational  environment  stem  not  from technological  or 
material 
and  rituals.  At the  core  of this  intellectual 
of organizational 
ber  (1978) and  Parsons  (1960), researchers  have  made  legitimacy 
anchor-point  of  a  vastly  expanded 
normative  and  cognitive 
organizational  actors. 

imperatives,  but  rather  from  cultural  norms,  symbols,  beliefs, 
transformation  lies  the  concept 
legitimacy.  Drawing  from the  foundational  work  of We- 
into  an 
the 
forces  that  constrain,  construct,  and  empower 

theoretical  apparatus  addressing 

Despite 

its  centrality,  however, 

the  literature  on  organizational 

The  author  would  like  to  thank  W.  Richard  Scott,  Christine  Oliver,  Teresa  Scheid,  Mia 
Cahill,  David  Yamane,  and  two  anonymous  reviewers  for their  comments  on earlier  drafts  of 
this  manuscript.  This  article  benefited  from the  insights  of Mayer  Zald,  Todd  LaPorte,  Barry 
Staw,  Carol  Heimer,  Frank Dobbin,  Craig  Thomas,  and  other  participants  in a conference  on 
legitimacy  and  credibility,  sponsored  by  the  National  Research  Council  and 
organizational 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy. 

571 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

572 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

legitimacy  provides  surprisingly 
fragile  conceptual  moorings.  Many  re- 
searchers  employ  the  term  legitimacy,  but  few  define 
it.  Further,  most 
treatments  cover  only  a  limited  aspect  of the  phenomenon  as  a  whole  and 
devote  little  attention  to  systematizing  alternative  perspectives  or to  de- 
veloping  a vocabulary  for describing  divergent  approaches  (witness,  e.g., 
the  "debate"  between  Hannan  & Freeman,  1989, and  Zucker,  1989). Without 
such  integrative  efforts,  research  on  organizational 
threatens 
to  degenerate 
fragmenting  scholarly 
discourse  and  disrupting  the  flow  of  information  from  theorists  to  practi- 
tioners. 

into  a  chorus  of  dissonant  voices, 

legitimacy 

For  example,  many  recent  studies  of  legitimacy 

seem  increasingly 

stance  and  emphasizes 

strategic  and  the  institutional-that 

instrumentally  manipulate  and  deploy  evocative 

divided  into  two  distinct  groups-the 
often  operate  at  cross-purposes.  Work in the  strategic  tradition  (e.g.,  Ash- 
forth & Gibbs,  1990; Dowling  & Pfeffer,  1975; Pfeffer,  1981; Pfeffer  & Salan- 
cik,  1978) adopts  a  managerial  perspective  and  emphasizes 
the  ways  in 
which  organizations 
in  order  to  garner  societal  support.  In  contrast,  work  in  the  in- 
symbols 
stitutional  tradition  (e.g.,  DiMaggio  & Powell,  1983; Meyer  & Rowan,  1991; 
Meyer  & Scott,  1983a;  Powell  & DiMaggio,  1991; Zucker,  1987) adopts  a 
in  which  sector-wide 
more  detached 
structuration  dynamics  generate  cultural  pressures 
that  transcend  any 
single  organization's  purposive  control.  Although  both  bodies  of literature 
of  legitimacy,  divergent  assumptions  about 
offer  extensive  discussions 
agency  and  cultural  embeddedness 
often  lead  them  to  "talk  past  one 
another."  Moreover,  each  tradition  is  further subdivided  among  research- 
ers  who  focus  on  (a)  legitimacy  grounded 
of 
stakeholder  relations, 
of moral  propriety,  and  (c) legitimacy  grounded  in cognitive  definitions  of 
(cf.  Aldrich  &  Fiol,  1994).  Once 
appropriateness 
again,  divergent  metatheoretical  orientations  subtly  but  profoundly  bal- 
kanize  the  debate. 

(b) legitimacy  grounded  in  normative  evaluations 

in  pragmatic  assessments 

interpretability 

the  ways 

and 

synthesis 

legitimacy, 

is  becoming 

As  organizational 

legitimacy  research  moves  into  its  third  decade, 
the  need  for  a  careful  and  evenhanded 
increas- 
ingly  apparent.  This  article  attempts  to  provide  such  a  synthesis.  The 
discussion  divides  broadly  into  three  parts:  Part I lays  a  theoretical  foun- 
(b) highlighting  a  number  of  ambigu- 
dation  by  (a)  defining 
ities  in  conventional  usages  of  the  concept,  and  (c) exploring  the  distinc- 
tion  between  strategic  and  institutional  outlooks,  introduced  above.  Part 
three  main  types  of  legiti- 
II  builds  on  this  foundation  by  identifying 
moral,  and  cognitive-and 
the  work- 
macy-pragmatic, 
ings  of  each.  In  Part  III, I turn  from  reconceptualizing 
to  ad- 
inherent  in legitimacy  management.  Because  the 
dressing  the  challenges 
problems  of  gaining,  maintaining,  and  repairing 
legitimacy  are  some- 
them  separately  and  outline  a 
what  distinct, 
number  of  possible  responses,  drawing  on  both  prior  research  and  the 
typology  introduced  in  Part  II. To counterbalance 
this  advice,  however,  I 

in  this  section  I  examine 

by  explaining 

legitimacy 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

573 

conclude  the  discussion  by  sketching  several  types  of  unintended  conse- 
quences  and  unexpected 
loops  that  may  plague  attempts  to 
manipulate 

in  a  narrowly  instrumental  way. 

legitimacy 

feedback 

PART I: THEORETICAL INTRODUCTION 

legitimacy. 

theory,  legitimacy 

Within  contemporary  organizations 

is  more  often 
invoked  than  described,  and  it  is  more  often  described  than  defined  (cf. 
Terreberry,  1968). This  section  addresses 
these  issues  in the  reverse  order. 
The  discussion  begins  by  defining 
It then  describes  several 
ways  in  which  ambiguities  about  the  purpose  of  legitimation  may  cloud 
discussions  about  the  mechanics  of  legitimacy.  The  premise  here  is  that 
the  question  "what  is  legitimacy?"  often  overlaps  with  the  question  "le- 
gitimacy  for what?"  The  multifaceted  character  of legitimacy 
implies  that 
in  different  contexts,  and  how  it  works  may 
it  will  operate  differently 
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  problems  for which  it  is  the  purported  solu- 
tion.  After  identifying 
the  section 
closes  with  an  examination  of  two  distinct  rhetorics  through  which  theo- 
rists  have  invoked  the  concept  of legitimacy-one 
strategic  and  the  other 
institutional. 

several  contextual 

considerations, 

Defining  Legitimacy 

cultural 

conformity 

Over  the  years,  social  scientists  have  offered  a  number  of definitions 
of  legitimacy,  with  varying  degrees  of  specificity.  In  one  of  the  earliest 
genuinely  organizational 
treatments,  Maurer (1971: 361) gave  legitimacy  a 
hierarchical,  explicitly  evaluative  cast,  asserting  that  "legitimation 
is  the 
process  whereby  an  organization  justifies  to a  peer  or superordinate  sys- 
tem  its  right  to exist."  Pfeffer  and  his  colleagues 
(Dowling  & Pfeffer,  1975; 
Pfeffer,  1981; Pfeffer  & Salancik,  1978) retained  this  emphasis  on  evalua- 
tion,  but  highlighted 
than  overt  self- 
In this  view,  legitimacy  connotes  "congruence  between  the 
justification. 
social  values  associated  with  or implied  by [organizational]  activities  and 
the  norms  of acceptable  behavior  in the  larger  social  system"  (Dowling  & 
Pfeffer,  1975:  122; see  also  Parsons,  1960:  175).  Meyer  and  Scott  (1983a; 
Scott,  1991) also  depicted 
from  congruence  be- 
tween  the  organization  and  its  cultural  environment;  however,  these  au- 
thors  focused  more  on  the  cognitive 
side-organ- 
izations  are  legitimate  when  they  are  understandable, 
rather  than  when 
they  are  desirable.  "Organizational 
legitimacy  refers  to  .  ..  the  extent  to 
which  the  array  of established  cultural  accounts  provide  explanations 
for 
[an  organization's]  existence"  (Meyer & Scott,  1983b: 201, emphasis  added; 
see  also  DiMaggio  & Powell,  1991). 

legitimacy  as  stemming 

than  the  evaluative 

rather 

In this  article,  I adopt  an  inclusive,  broad-based  definition  of  legiti- 
macy  that  incorporates  both  the  evaluative  and  the  cognitive  dimensions 
and  that  explicitly  acknowledges 

the  role  of  the  social  audience 

in 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

574 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

legitimation  dynamics  (cf.  Ginzel,  Kramer,  & Sutton,  1992; Nielsen  & Rao, 
1987; Perrow,  1970): 

is  a  generalized  perception  or  assumption 
Legitimacy 
that  the  actions  of  an  entity  are  desirable,  proper,  or 
appropriate  within  some  socially  constructed  system  of 
norms,  values,  beliefs,  and  definitions. 

Legitimacy 

is  possessed 

is  generalized 

in  that  it  represents  an  umbrella  evalua- 
tion  that,  to some  extent,  transcends  specific  adverse  acts  or occurrences; 
thus,  legitimacy 
is  resilient  to  particular  events,  yet  it  is  dependent  on  a 
history  of  events.  An  organization  may  occasionally  depart  from  societal 
norms  yet  retain  legitimacy  because 
the  departures  are  dismissed  as 
unique  (cf.  Perrow,  1981). Legitimacy  is  a perception  or assumption  in that 
it  represents  a  reaction  of  observers  to  the  organization  as  they  see  it; 
thus,  legitimacy 
objectively,  yet  created  subjectively.  An 
organization  may  diverge  dramatically 
from  societal  norms  yet  retain 
legitimacy  because  the  divergence  goes  unnoticed.  Legitimacy  is  socially 
constructed  in  that  it  reflects  a  congruence  between  the  behaviors  of  the 
legitimated  entity  and  the  shared  (or assumedly 
shared)  beliefs  of  some 
social  group;  thus,  legitimacy 
is  dependent  on  a  collective  audience,  yet 
independent  of  particular  observers.  An  organization  may  deviate  from 
individuals'  values  yet  retain  legitimacy  because  the  deviation  draws  no 
In  short,  when  one  says  that  a  certain  pattern  of 
public  disapproval. 
behavior  possesses 
legitimacy,  one  asserts  that  some  group  of observers, 
as  a  whole,  accepts  or  supports  what  those  observers  perceive  to  be  the 
behavioral  pattern,  as  a  whole-despite 
that  any  single  ob- 
server  might  have  about  any  single  behavior,  and  despite  reservations 
that  any  or all  observers  might  have,  were  they  to  observe  more. 

reservations 

Legitimacy  for What? 

seek 

legitimacy 

Organizations 

important  dimensions 

for  many  reasons,  and  conclusions 
about  the  importance,  difficulty,  and  effectiveness  of  legitimation  efforts 
may  depend  on  the  objectives  against  which  these  efforts  are  measured. 
Two  particularly 
in  this  regard  are  (a) the  distinc- 
tion  between  pursuing  continuity  and  pursuing  credibility  and  (b)  the 
distinction  between  seeking  passive  support  and  seeking  active  support. 
Continuity  versus  credibility.  Legitimacy  enhances  both  the  stability 
and  the  comprehensibility 
of  organizational  activities,  and  stability  and 
comprehensibility  often  enhance  each  other.  However,  organizational  be- 
haviors  rarely  foster  continuity  and  credibility,  persistence  and  meaning, 
in  equal  degrees. 

Legitimacy  leads  to persistence  because  audiences  are  most  likely  to 
supply  resources  to  organizations 
that  appear  desirable,  proper,  or  ap- 
propriate  (Parsons,  1960).  Indeed,  to  the  extent  that  legitimacy  reflects 
in  a  system  of  institutionalized  beliefs  and  action  scripts 
embeddedness 
(see  Part  II), legitimate  organizations  become  almost  self-replicating, 
re- 
quiring  little  ongoing 

in  collective  mobilization. 

investment 

In  essence, 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

575 

legitimacy 
Collaboration 
structure  of  everyday 
(Jepperson,  1991; cf.  Zucker,  1988). 

flips  the  valence  of the  collective  action  problem  (Olson,  1965): 
is  built  into  the 
life;  only  opposition  poses  a  prisoner's  dilemma 

in  support  of  institutionalized 

activities 

At the  same  time,  legitimacy  affects  not  only  how  people  act  toward 
organizations,  but  also  how  they  understand  them.  Thus,  audiences  per- 
ceive  the  legitimate  organization  not  only  as  more  worthy,  but  also  as 
more  meaningful,  more  predictable,  and  more  trustworthy.  Part  of  the 
cultural  congruence  captured  by  the  term  legitimacy 
the  exis- 
tence  of  a  credible  collective  account  or  rationale  explaining  what  the 
is  doing  and  why  (Jepperson,  1991). As  Meyer  and  Rowan 
organization 
lack  acceptable 
legitimated  ac- 
(1991: 50) put  it,  "Organizations 
.  ..  are  more  vulnerable  to  claims  that  they  are 
counts  of  their  activities 
negligent, 

irrational  or  unnecessary." 

involves 

that  ... 

Because  the  actions  that  enhance  persistence  are  not  always 

identi- 
it  is  important  to  keep  these  two 
conceptually  distinct.  One  can,  for  example, 

cal  to  those  that  enhance  meaning, 
dimensions  of  legitimacy 
seek  to understand  an  institution  in  order  to dismantle 
it (cf.  Marx,  1978). 
continuity  and  credibility  are  usually  mutually  reinforcing: 
Nonetheless, 
are  likely  to 
In  most  organizational 
the  patterns  of  behavior  that  develop,  and  in  the 
emerge  to  rationalize 
absence  of such  rationalization  and  meaning  creation,  the  structured  pat- 
terns  of behavior  are  likely  to be  less  stable  and  persistent"  (Pfeffer,  1981: 
14). 

settings,  "shared  understandings 

Passive  versus  active  support.  A second  underacknowledged  distinc- 
tion  in  studies  of  legitimacy  centers  on  whether  the  organization  seeks 
If an  organization  simply 
active  support  or merely  passive  acquiescence. 
to  leave  it  alone,  the  threshold  of  legitima- 
wants  a  particular  audience 
tion  may  be  quite  low.  Usually,  the  organization  need  only  comport  with 
some  unproblematic  category  of social  activity  (e.g.,  "doing  business").  If, 
in  contrast,  an  organization  seeks  protracted  audience 
intervention  (par- 
ticularly  against  other  entities  with  competing  cadres),  the  legitimacy 
demands  may  be  stringent  indeed  (cf.  DiMaggio,  1988). 

This  contrast  reveals  one  ramification  of  the  aforementioned  defini- 

legitimacy  as  cognitive  taken-for-grantedness 

tional  distinction  between 
further  in 
and  legitimacy  as  evaluative  approval  (a distinction  developed 
Part II): To avoid  questioning,  an  organization  need  only  "make  sense."  To 
mobilize  affirmative  commitments,  however, 
either  substantively, 
impending  non- 
sense.  Significantly,  much  of the  existing  literature  subtly  fuses  these  two 
situations,  despite  their  potentially  divergent 
for  the  focal 
organization 

implications 
(see,  e.g.,  Meyer  & Rowan,  1991 [1977]: 50-51). 

or  as  a  crucial  safeguard  against 

it  must  also  "have  value"- 

Strategic  and  Institutional  Approaches  to  Legitimacy 

As  was  noted  previously, 

legitimacy 
falls  fairly  neatly  into  two  camps-one 
strategic,  the  other  institutional 
(cf.  Elsbach,  1994; Oliver,  1991). The  strategic  approach,  associated  most 

the  literature  on  organizational 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

576 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

extract-often 

(Suchman,  1988)  that  organizations 

notably  with  the  work  of  Jeffrey  Pfeffer  and  his  collaborators 
(Dowling  & 
Pfeffer,  1975; Pfeffer,  1981; Pfeffer  & Salancik,  1978; see  also  Ashforth  & 
Gibbs,  1990),  begins  with  the  proposition  that  "one  of  the  elements  of 
competition  and  conflict  among  social  organizations 
involves  the  conflict 
.  .  .  systems  of  belief  or points  of  view"  (Pfeffer,  1981: 9).  Strate- 
between 
studies  consequently  depict  legitimacy  as  an  operational 
gic-legitimacy 
competi- 
resource 
their  cultural  environments  and  that  they  employ  in  pursuit 
tively-from 
of their  goals  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990; Dowling  & Pfeffer,  1975). In keeping 
with  this  instrumental  view,  strategic-legitimacy 
researchers  generally 
assume  a  high  level  of  managerial  control  over  the  legitimation  process, 
limitless  malleability  of  symbols  and 
explicitly  contrasting 
constrained  recalcitrance  of  "tangible, 
rituals  against 
real  outcomes,"  such  as  sales,  profits,  and  budgets  (Pfeffer,  1981: 5). Thus, 
theorists  predict  recurrent  conflicts  between  manag- 
strategic-legitimacy 
ers  and  constituents  over  the  form of legitimation  activities,  with  manag- 
ers  favoring  the  flexibility  and  economy  of  symbolism,  whereas  constit- 
(e.g.,  Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990). 
uents  prefer  more  substantive  responses 
is  purposive,  calculated,  and  fre- 
Legitimation,  according 
quently  oppositional. 
In  contrast 

to  this  strategic 

the  exogenously 

to  this  view, 

institutional 

researchers 

the  almost 

tradition, 

from  the  environment 

institutions  construct  and  interpenetrate 

(DiMaggio  &  Powell,  1983,  1991; Meyer  & Rowan,  1991; Meyer  & Scott, 
1983a; Zucker,  1987) depict  legitimacy  not  as  an  operational  resource,  but 
as  a  set  of constitutive  beliefs  (Suchman,  1988). Organizations  do  not  sim- 
in  a  feat  of  cultural  strip 
ply  extract  legitimacy 
mining;  rather,  external 
the  or- 
in  every  respect.  Cultural  definitions  determine  how  the  orga- 
ganization 
nization  is  built,  how  it is  run,  and,  simultaneously,  how  it is  understood 
and  evaluated.  Within  this  tradition,  legitimacy  and  institutionalization 
are  virtually  synonymous.  Both  phenomena  empower  organizations  pri- 
marily  by making  them  seem  natural  and  meaningful;  access  to resources 
explaining  a  legitimation 
is  largely  a  by-product.  To the  institutionalist, 
strategy  by  showing  how  it  allows  organizations 
constituents 
allows  couples  to  obtain  tax  breaks  from the  Internal  Revenue  Service- 
the  instrumental  reward  is,  at  most,  a  peripheral  component  of the  larger 
cultural  construct. 

to  obtain  support  from 
the  nuclear  family  by  showing  how  it 

is  akin  to  explaining 

that  determine  audience  reactions.  Consequently, 

Thus,  institutionalists  downplay  both  managerial  agency  and  man- 
conflict.  In a  strong  and  constraining  symbolic  environ- 
ager-stakeholder 
ment,  a  manager's  decisions  often  are  constructed  by  the  same  belief 
rather  than 
systems 
focal  organiza- 
examining 
tend  to  emphasize 
structuration 
tions, 
(DiMaggio  & Powell,  1983) of  entire  fields  or sectors  of  organizational 
life 
(i.e.,  health  care,  education,  publishing,  nuclear  power).  The  distinction 
into  insignificance 
between 

symbolic  and  substantive  outcomes 

efforts  of  specific 

institutionalists 

the  collective 

the  strategic 

legitimation 

fades 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

577 

when  one  considers  organizations,  managers,  performance  measures, 
and  audience  demands  as  being  both  products  and  producers  of  larger, 
institutionalized 

cultural  frameworks. 

institutional 

the  viewpoint  of  organizational  managers 

To  a  large  extent,  of  course,  the  distinction  between  strategic  and 
is  a  matter  of  perspective,  with  strategic  theo- 
looking  "out," 
theorists  adopt  the  viewpoint  of society  looking  "in" 

institutional  approaches 
rists  adopting 
whereas 
in  perspective  have  real  conse- 
(cf.  Elsbach,  1994).  These  differences 
quences,  however,  often  determining  which  legitimation  dynamics  re- 
searchers  see  and  which  they  overlook.  Because  real-world  organizations 
face  both  strategic  operational  challenges  and  institutional  constitutive 
it  is  important  to  incorporate  this  duality  into  a  larger  picture 
pressures, 
that  highlights  both  the  ways  in which  legitimacy  acts  like  a  manipulable 
in  which  it  acts  like  a  taken-for-granted  belief 
resource  and  the  ways 
system  (cf.  Swidler,  1986). 

Consequently, 

their  symbolic  relationships  with  demanding  constituents. 

in  this  article  I take  a  middle  course  between  the  stra- 
tegic  and  the  institutional  orientations.  On  the  one  hand,  like  the  strate- 
gic  literature,  I address  the  dilemmas  that  focal  organizations  may  face  in 
In 
managing 
that  organizations  can  and  do  for- 
particular,  Part  III explicitly  assumes 
legitimating  perceptions  of  desirability, 
mulate  strategies 
propriety,  and  appropriateness.  On  the  other  hand,  like  the  institutional 
literature,  I consider  cultural  environments  to be  fundamentally  constitu- 
skeptical  attitude 
tive  of  organizational 
toward  the  autonomy,  objectivity,  and  potency  of managers.  Managers  do 
supportive  myths  and  prescribe  culturally  congruent  rituals; 
enunciate 
however,  managers  rarely  convince  others  to believe  much  that  the  man- 
agers  do  not  believe  themselves. 

life,  and  I  adopt  a  somewhat 

for  fostering 

PART II: THREE TYPES OF  ORGANIZATIONAL LEGITIMACY 

Within  the  existing 

literature,  one  can  discern  three  broad  types  of 
legitimacy,  moral  legiti- 
legitimacy,  which  might  be  termed  pragmatic 
legitimacy.'  All  three  types  involve  a  generalized 
macy,  and  cognitive 
that  organizational  activities  are  desirable, 
perception  or  assumption 
proper,  or appropriate  within  some  socially  constructed  system  of norms, 
values,  beliefs,  and  definitions.  However,  each  type  of legitimacy  rests  on 
a  somewhat  different  behavioral  dynamic.  This  section  will  outline  these 
three  dynamics  and  will  identify  a  number  of subtypes  within  each  major 

1 The  institutional 

literature  occasionally  refers  to moral  legitimacy  as  normative  legit- 
the  contrast  between  normative  and  cognitive  behavioral  mechanisms 
imacy,  highlighting 
(see,  e.g.,  Powell  & DiMaggio,  1991). In other  literatures,  however,  the  term normative  refers 
to all  cultural  regulatory  processes,  not just  those  involving  a  conscious  assessment  of right 
and  wrong.  The  term  moral  legitimacy  avoids  this  ambiguity. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

578 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

category.  At the  end  of the  section,  I will  briefly  examine  the  contrasts  and 
interrelations  among  these  disparate  processes. 

Pragmatic  Legitimacy 

Pragmatic 

calculations  of  an 
in- 
it 

legitimacy  rests  on  the  self-interested 
organization's  most  immediate  audiences.  Often,  this  immediacy 
volves  direct  exchanges  between  organization  and  audience;  however, 
also  can  involve  broader  political,  economic,  or social  interdependencies, 
in  which  organizational  action  nonetheless  visibly  affects  the  audience's 
In either  case,  audiences  are  likely  to become  constituencies, 
well-being. 
scrutinizing  organizational  behavior 
the  practical  conse- 
for them,  of  any  given  line  of activity  (Wood,  1991). Thus,  at  the 
quences, 
legitimacy  boils  down  to  a  sort  of  exchange 
simplest 
level,  pragmatic 
for  an  organizational  policy  based  on  that  policy's 
legitimacy-support 
expected  value  to a  particular  set  of constituents  (e.g.,  Dowling  & Pfeffer, 
1975).  Although  cultural  notions  of  appropriateness  may  color  whether 
are  considered  perquisites  or  bribes,  at  the  limit  ex- 
these  exchanges 
into  a  somewhat  generalized  and  culturalized 
change 
variant  of  more  conventional,  materialistic  power-dependence 
relations 
(Emerson,  1961; Pfeffer  & Salancik,  1978). 

legitimacy  shades 

to  determine 

legitimacy. 

to  their  larger  interests.  Most  often,  influence 

A  related,  but  slightly  more  socially  constructed  type  of  pragmatic 
legitimacy  might  be  termed  influence 
In this  case,  constitu- 
ents  support  the  organization  not  necessarily  because  they  believe  that  it 
provides  specific  favorable  exchanges,  but  rather  because  they  see  it  as 
being  responsive 
legiti- 
macy  arises  when  the  organization 
into  its  pol- 
icy-making  structures  or adopts  constituents'  standards  of performance  as 
its  own.  In a world  of ambiguous  causality,  the  surest  indicator  of ongoing 
commitment  to constituent  well-being 
to 
relinquish  some  measure  of  authority  to  the  affected  audience 
(to be  co- 
opted,  so  to  speak)  (e.g.,  Selznick,  1949). Displaying  such  responsiveness 
is  often  more  important  (and  easier)  than  producing  immediate  results  (cf. 
Meyer  & Rowan,  1991). 

is  the  organization's  willingness 

incorporates  constituents 

legitimacy, 

Although  past  studies  of  pragmatic 

legitimacy  have  focused  almost 
exclusively  on  exchange  and  influence  effects,  a  third  variant,  disposi- 
also  merits  explicit  consideration.  As  Zucker  (1983, 
tional 
1987) noted,  the  modern  institutional  order  increasingly  personifies  orga- 
nizations  and  treats  them  as  autonomous,  coherent,  and  morally  respon- 
sible  actors  (see  also  Coleman,  1974; Horowitz,  1986). Given  this  percep- 
often  react  as  though 
tion, 
of  goals,  tastes,  styles,  and 
organizations  were  individuals-possessed 
(cf.  Pfeffer,  1981; Tuzzolino  & Armandi,  1981). Thus,  constit- 
personalities 
uents  are  likely  to  accord  legitimacy 
that  "have 
our  best  interests  at  heart,"  that  "share  our  values,"  or  that  are  "hon- 
est,"  "trustworthy,"  "decent,"  and  "wise."  These  kinds  of  dispositional 
attributions,  although  sociologically  naive  (Cyert  & March,  1963; Scott, 

to  those  organizations 

that  audiences 

it  is  hardly 

surprising 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

579 

in  extrapolating  positive  evalua- 
1992), may  nonetheless  prove  essential 
tions  of  specific  organizational  acts  into  generalized  perceptions  of  orga- 
legitimacy.  Also,  in times  of adversity,  widespread  belief  in an 
nizational 
effects  of 
organization's  good  character  may  dampen  the  delegitimating 
(cf.  Wartick  & Cochran,  1984). 
isolated 
Further,  beyond  these  pragmatic  concerns,  dispositional 
can  enter  into  assessments 
(see  the  following  paragraphs). 

considerations 
of an  organization's  moral  legitimacy  as  well 

failures,  miscues,  and  reversals 

Moral  Legitimacy 

value 

socially 

constructed 

is  "sociotropic"-it 

system.  Of  course, 

legitimacy,  moral  legitimacy 

Moral  legitimacy  reflects  a  positive  normative  evaluation  of  the  or- 
(e.g.,  Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994; Parsons,  1960). 
ganization  and  its  activities 
rests 
Unlike  pragmatic 
not  on  judgments  about  whether  a  given  activity  benefits  the  evaluator, 
but  rather  on  judgments  about  whether  the  activity  is  "the  right  thing  to 
in  turn,  usually  reflect  beliefs  about  whether  the 
do."  These  judgments, 
activity  effectively  promotes  societal  welfare,  as  defined  by  the  audi- 
this  altruistic 
ence's 
render  moral  legitimacy  entirely  "inter- 
grounding  does  not  necessarily 
est-free."  As  Part  III of  this  article  makes  clear,  organizations  often  put 
forth  cynically  self-serving  claims  of  moral  propriety  and  buttress  these 
claims  with  hollow  symbolic  gestures;  further,  audience  perceptions  of 
fuse  the  good  of  the  evaluator  with  the 
"rightness"  often  unconsciously 
good  of  society  as  a  whole  (cf.  Festinger,  1957; Nauta,  1988). Nonetheless, 
at  its  core,  moral  legitimacy  reflects  a  prosocial  logic  that  differs  funda- 
mentally  from  narrow  self-interest.  For this  reason,  moral  claims  can  be 
undercut  by  even  an  appearance  of  cynicism,  and  managers  charged 
such  claims  frequently  find  it  difficult  to  avoid  buying 
with  enunciating 
(cf.  Weick,  1969). Con- 
into  their  own  initially  strategic  pronouncements 
to  self- 
sequently,  moral  concerns  generally 
interested  manipulation 

than  do  purely  pragmatic  considerations. 

prove  more  resistant 

In general,  moral  legitimacy 

takes  one  of  three  forms:  evaluations  of 
evaluations  of  techniques  and  procedures, 

outputs  and  consequences, 
and  evaluations 
Meyer,  1991). A fourth  form,  evaluations  of leaders  and  representatives, 
rarer  but  nonetheless 

(cf.  Scott,  1977;  Scott  & 
is 

of  categories  and  structures 

conceptually 

important.2 

legitimacy  and  procedural 

2 These  four  types  of  moral  legitimacy  roughly  parallel  Weber's  (1978) discussion  of 
legitimacy  both  reflect  le- 
legitimate  authority.  Consequential 
gal-rational  authority,  although  the  former  is  instrumentally  rational  (based  on  the  pursuit 
(based  on  the  fulfillment  of rules  of 
of  particular  goals),  whereas  the  latter  is  value-rational 
proper  behavior)  (Weber,  1978). Structural  legitimacy  reflects  traditional  authority,  based  on 
the  longstanding  designation  of certain  types  of actors  as  worthy  of exercising  certain  types 
of power.  Finally,  the  personal  legitimacy  of leaders  and  representatives  corresponds  to the 
Weberian 

ideal-type  of  charismatic  authority. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

580 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

Consequential 

sell  their  products 

legitimacy.  According  to  the  rationalist  mythology  of 
the  modern  order  (Meyer  & Rowan,  1991), organizations  should  be  judged 
by  what  they  accomplish.  And,  indeed,  this  is  sometimes  the  case.  Many 
industries 
in  impersonal  markets,  where  consumer 
judgments  of  quality  and  value-two 
obvious  but  important  outcomes  of 
production  activity-determine 
the  level  of  rewards  to  each  producer. 
Further,  even  in  sectors  lacking  market  competition,  superordinate  regu- 
latory  audiences  may  apply  essentially  consequential  measures  of  orga- 
nizational  effectiveness, 
focusingn]  attention  on  specific  characteristics 
of  materials  or  objects  on  which  the  organization  has  performed  some 
operation"  (Scott,  1977: 75).  Under  this  heading,  Scott  and  Meyer  (1991) 
included  automobile  emission 
standards,  hospital  mortality  rates,  and 
academic 
test  scores. 

When  thinking  about  consequential 

legitimacy,  however,  one  must 
bear  in  mind  that  "the technical  properties  of outputs  are  socially  defined 
and  do not exist  in some  concrete  sense  that  allows  them  to be  empirically 
discovered"  (Meyer  & Rowan,  1991: 55). Further,  the  charter  of  some  orga- 
nizations  may  center  on  outputs  that  are  inherently  difficult  to measure- 
in  their  definition  or  because  of  extreme 
either  because  of  ambiguities 
in  their  distribution  over  time.  Thus,  for  example,  nuclear 
"lumpiness" 
aircraft  carriers  face  competing  demands  for instantaneous  response  and 
error-free  operation,  and  their  actual  proficiency 
is  measurable 
only 
in  the  rare  event  of  war  (cf.  Roberts,  1990). In  such  high-ambiguity 
set- 
tings,  consequential  claims  may  serve  primarily  as  signals  of disposition, 
and  certain  measures  of  performance  may  become  morally  proscribed, 
"such  as  attempts  to  apply  economic  criteria  to  a  public  social  welfare 
agency"  (Hinings  & Greenwood,  1988: 56). 

identifying 

effectiveness, 

some  methodologies 

Procedural  legitimacy.  Although  prevailing  rational  myths  celebrate 
consequential 
they  also  often  specify  extensive  webs  of 
causality, 
as  "science"  and  others  as 
"quackery,"  regardless  of  isolated  outcomes.  Thus,  in  addition  to produc- 
ing  socially  valued  consequences, 
organizations  also  can  garner  moral 
legitimacy  by  embracing  socially  accepted 
techniques  and  procedures 
(e.g.,  Scott,  1977). Such  procedural  legitimacy  becomes  most  significant 
in 
the  absence  of  clear  outcome  measures 
(Scott,  1992), when  "sound  prac- 
tices"  may  serve  to  demonstrate 
is  making  a  good- 
faith  effort  to  achieve  valued,  albeit  invisible,  ends.  Even  when  conse- 
quences  are  easily  monitored,  however, 
it is  still  quite  common  that  "the 
proper  means  and  procedures  are  given  a  positive  moral  value"  (Berger, 
Berger,  & Kellner,  1973: 53). This  is  particularly  true  in  professional  activ- 
ities,  where  cultural  beliefs 
(a)  define  certain  outcomes  as  largely  sto- 
chastic  and  (b) exalt  certain  methodologies  as  ritual  enactments  of central 
societal  organizing  principles,  such  as  science,  citizenship,  and  free  will 
(cf.  Abbott,  1981). A hospital  is  unlikely  to lose  legitimacy  simply  because 
some  patients  die;  however, 
if  it  per- 
forms  involuntary  exorcisms-even 

it  is  quite  likely  to  lose  legitimacy 

if  all  patients  get  well. 

that  the  organization 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

581 

Structural 

legitimacy.  A  third  type  of  moral  legitimacy  might  be 
termed  structural  (Scott,  1977) or  categorical 
(Zucker,  1986). In  this  case, 
see  the  organization  as  valuable  and  worthy  of  support  be- 
audiences 
locate  it within  a  morally  favored  tax- 
cause  its  structural  characteristics 
onomic  category.  Thus,  Scott  (1977,  1992) described  structures  as  indica- 
tors  of  an  organization's  socially  constructed  capacity  to perform  specific 
types  of  work,  and  Meyer  and  Rowan  (1991: 50) asserted  that  institution- 
ally  prescribed  structures  convey  the  message 
that  an  organization  "is 
in  a  proper  and  adequate  man- 
acting  on  collectively  valued  purposes 
ner." Admittedly,  because  organizational  structure  largely  consists  of sta- 
bly  replicated  procedures  (March & Simon,  1958; Weick,  1969), procedural 
and  structural 
together  at  the  margins;  however, 
whereas  procedural 
in 
isolation  (e.g.,  "Does  the  organization 
inspect  its  products  for defects?"), 
structural 
features 
that  arise  when  entire  systems  of  activity  recur  consistently  over  time 
(e.g.,  "Does  the  organization  have  a  quality  control  department?"). 

focuses  on  the  general  organizational 

focuses  on  discrete  routines  viewed 

legitimation 

legitimation 

legitimacy 

blend 

structures, 

As  Meyer  and  Rowan  (1991) suggested, 

like  procedures, 
often  serve  as  easily  monitored  proxies  for  less  visible  targets  of  evalu- 
ation,  such  as  strategies,  goals,  and  outcomes  (cf.  DiMaggio  & Powell, 
1983; Scott  & Meyer,  1991). In addition,  however,  structural  characteristics 
also  become  markers  of  organizational 
form,  locating  the  organization 
within  a  larger  institutional  ecology  and  thereby  determining  with  whom 
it  will  compete  and  from  whom  it  will  draw  support  (cf.  Hannan  & Free- 
man,  1989; Suchman,  1988). As  Dowling  and  Pfeffer  put  it,  "competition 
over  organizational  domains  can  be  resolved 
.  .  .  through  recourse  to 
social  norms  and  values 
spheres  of 
organizational  activity"  (1975: 125-126).  The  structurally  legitimate  orga- 
nization  becomes  a  repository  of public  confidence  because 
it is  "the right 
for the  job"; however,  this  sense  of rightness  has  more  to do 
organization 
with  emblems  of  organizational 
identity  than  with  demonstrations  of  or- 
ganizational  competence.  Educational  organizations, 
for  example,  dem- 
onstrate  that  they  are  "right for the  job" by  displaying 
the  structural  traits 
of  a  "modern  school"-classrooms, 
and  so 
on-rather 
than  by  adopting  specific  pedagogical  procedures  or produc- 
ing  specific  student  outcomes  (cf.  Meyer,  1977). 

grade-level  progressions, 

that  define  and  delimit 

legitimate 

Personal 

legitimacy 

tends  to  be  relatively 

legitimacy.  The  fourth  and  final  type  of  moral  legitimacy 
leaders.  As  a  general 
transitory  and 
In  Zucker's  words  (1991: 86),  "acts  performed  by  actors  ex- 
influence  are  low  in  objectification  and  exteriority,  and 

rests  on  the  charisma  of  individual  organizational 
matter,  such  personal 
idiosyncratic. 
ercising  personal 
hence  low  in  institutionalization."  Perhaps  because  of these  instabilities, 
the  sociological 
limited,  at  best. 
that  individual 
Nonetheless, 
"moral  entrepreneurs"  play  a  substantial  role  in  disrupting  old  institu- 
tions  (Weber,  1978:  245)  and  in  initiating  new  ones  (DiMaggio,  1988). 

the  literature  offers  numerous  assertions 

of  charisma  remains 

understanding 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

582 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

Whether  valid  or  not,  the  perception 
individuals  can 
transcend  and  reorder  established  routines  often  allows  organizations 
to 
dodge  potentially  stigmatizing  events  through  such  strategies  as  blaming 
a  scapegoat  or replacing  an  executive 

that  charismatic 

(see  Part  III). 

Cognitive  Legitimacy 

As  noted  in  the  previous  discussion  of active  versus  passive  support, 
legitimacy  may  involve  either  affirmative  backing  for an  organization  or 
mere  acceptance  of  the  organization  as  necessary  or inevitable  based  on 
some  taken-for-granted  cultural  account.  As  Jepperson  (1991: 147) noted, 
such  taken-for-grantedness 
"is distinct  from evaluation:  one  may  subject 
a  pattern  to  positive,  negative,  or  no  evaluation,  and  in  each  case  (dif- 
ferently)  take  it for granted."  This  observation  suggests  a third general  set 
of  legitimacy  dynamics  based  on  cognition  rather  than  on  interest  or 
(Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994). Two  variants  are  particularly  signifi- 
evaluation 
cant:  legitimacy  based  on  comprehensibility 
and  legitimacy  based  on 
taken-f or-grantedness. 

Theorists  who  focus  on  the  role  of  comprehensibility 

in  legitimation 

generally  portray  the  social  world  as  a  chaotic  cognitive  environment, 
in 
which  participants  must  struggle  to arrange  their  experiences 
into  coher- 
ent,  understandable  accounts  (cf.  Mills,  1940; Scott  & Lyman,  1968). Legit- 
imacy,  according  to  this  view,  stems  mainly  from  the  availability  of  cul- 
tural  models  that  furnish  plausible  explanations 
for the  organization  and 
its  endeavors 
(Scott,  1991; Wuthnow,  Hunter,  Bergesen,  & Kurzweil,  1984). 
In the  presence  of such  models,  organizational  activity  will  prove  predict- 
able,  meaningful,  and  inviting;  in  their  absence,  activity  will  collapse- 
not  necessarily  because  of  overt  hostility  (although  this  is  certainly  pos- 
sible,  given  the  threatening  nature  of  the  inexplicable),  but  more  often 
because  of  repeated  miscues,  oversights,  and  distractions. 

Significantly, 

studies  of comprehensibility 

suggest  that  not  all  expla- 
nations  are  equally  viable:  To provide  legitimacy,  an  account  must  mesh 
both  with  larger  belief  systems  and  with  the  experienced  reality  of  the 
audience's  daily  life  (DiMaggio  & Powell,  1991; cf.  Geertz,  1973). A prosaic 
example  of this  dynamic  can  be  seen  in the  initial  efforts  of semiconductor 
for early  microprocessor  technologies: 
manufacturers 

to  gain  legitimacy 

At a conference  in the late  1960s, when  [Intel founder Robert] 
Noyce  predicted the  coming  of a  computer-on-a-chip, one  of 
his  critics  in  the  audience  remarked,  "Gee,  I  certainly 
wouldn't want to lose  my whole  computer through a  crack in 
the  floor."  Noyce  responded:  "You have  it all  wrong  ...  you'll 
have  100 more  sitting  on  your  desk,  so  it  won't  matter  if  you 
lose  one."  (Rogers  & Larsen,  1984: 105) 

In  1969, daily  life  offered  few  experiences 
to support  the  analogy  between 
silicon  chips  and  computers  (which,  at  the  time,  cost  millions  of  dollars 
and  filled  entire  rooms);  only  by  likening  microprocessors 
to  paper  clips 
could  Noyce  make  the  benefits  of  miniaturization  seem  plausible. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

583 

In contrast  to  the  image  of  a  social  landscape 

teetering  on  the  brink 
of  cognitive  chaos,  partisans  of  taken-for-granted 
legitimacy  depict  a 
more  sedate  scene  of cognitive  coherence  and  glacial, 
integrative  change 
insti- 
(compare  Powell,  1991,  with  Zucker,  1983). According  to  this  view, 
they  actually  transform  it 
tutions  not  only  render  disorder  manageable, 
the  possibility  of 
into  a  set  of  intersubjective  "givens"  that  submerge 
dissent.  In an  archetypical  statement  of this  perspective,  Zucker (1983: 25) 
in other 
legitimacy  with  cognitive  "exteriority  and  objectivity"- 
identified 
words,  with  the  removal  of  an  aspect  of  social  structure  from  the  pre- 
sumed  control  of the  very  actors  who  initially  created  it,  so  that  "for things 
to  be  otherwise 

is  literally  unthinkable." 

To the  extent  that  it  is  attainable, 

this  kind  of  taken-for-grantedness 

this  type  of  legitimation  generally 

represents  both  the  most  subtle  and  the  most  powerful  source  of  legiti- 
macy  identified  to  date.  If alternatives  become  unthinkable,  challenges 
become  impossible,  and  the  legitimated  entity  becomes  unassailable  by 
construction.  Unfortunately, 
lies  be- 
yond  the  reach  of all  but  the  most  fortunate  managers:  Although  technol- 
ogies  and  policies  occasionally 
status,  market 
economies  and  pluralist  political  cultures  rarely  go  so  far  as  to  assume 
that  only  one  organization  can  wield  a given  technology  or pursue  a given 
in  highly  objectified  and 
program.  Thus,  even  organizations 
exterior  practices  may  still  fail  to  achieve 
status  for 
themselves  as  practitioners:  Nonmedical  treatment  of  acute  appendicitis 
in our society,  but patients  and  malpractice  attorneys 
may  be  unthinkable 
the  legitimacy  and  competence  of particular  surgeons 
routinely  challenge 
and  hospitals. 

attain  taken-for-granted 

taken-for-granted 

engaging 

Figure  1 summarizes 

the  organization's  operating 

the  various  types  of  legitimacy 
that  have  been 
in  the  preceding  pages.  In addition  to  the  primary  pragmatic/ 
described 
trichotomy,  the  figure  arrays  legitimation  dynamics  along 
moral/cognitive 
two  cross-cutting  dimensions,  as  well.  The  first  of these  reflects  the  focus 
of  legitimation,  dividing  dynamics 
that  focus  on  the  organization's  ac- 
that  focus  on  the  organization's  essence.  This  con- 
tions  from  dynamics 
trast  distinguishes  between 
in  a  desirable, 
proper,  and  appropriate  manner  and  the  organization's  being  desirable, 
in  itself.  The  second  dimension  captures  the 
proper,  and  appropriate, 
temporal  texture  of  legitimation, 
separating  dynamics  that  operate  on  an 
episodic  or transitory  basis  from  those  that  are  continual  or long  lasting. 
This  contrast  turns  on  the  cross-temporal  generalizability 
of  the  various 
In order  to  fill  out  the  resulting  3  x  2  x  2 matrix,  the 
forms  of  legitimacy. 
typology  requires  some  minor  elaboration:  Figure  1 
initial  nine-category 
subdivides  dispositional 
issue  of 
whether  the  organization  and  its  constituents  share  common  interests  and 
the  more  lasting  question  of  whether  the  organization  "has  good  charac- 
ter." Figure  1 also  subdivides  both  comprehensibility 
(an  episodic  cogni- 
tive  dynamic)  and  taken-for-grantedness 
(a more  lasting  form of cognitive 
support):  The  comprehensibility  of  actions  could  be  labeled  predictability, 

into  two  halves:  the  episodic 

legitimacy 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

584 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

FIGURE 1 
A Typology  of  Legitimacy 

Actions 

Essences 

Exchange 

Influence 

?-----------J 

r  -  Disposition 

Interest 

Character 

I | 

Pragmatic 
Legitimacy 

Consequential 

Personal 

Procedural 

Structural 

Moral 
Legitimatcy 

Episodic 

Continual 

Episodic 

Continual 

Episodic 

Predictability 

Plausibility 

r------ 

Comprehensibility-- 

L-- 

r-- 

-  Taken-for-Grantedness  ------- 

Continual 

,.-L-j_______ 

Inevitability 

Permanence 

-___ 

-_________-__ 

J 

J 

Cognitive 
Legitimacy 

and  the  comprehensibility 
parallel 
fashion, 
inevitability; 

the  taken-for-grantedness 

of  essences  could  be  called  plausibility. 

In  a 
of  actions  could  be  termed 

the  taken-for-grantedness 

of  essences,  permanence. 

they  are  not  trivial.  The  fully  elaborated 

Although  the  literature  to  date  has  rarely  invoked  such  fine-grained 
legitimacy  matrix 
distinctions, 
suggests  a  number  of  interesting  parallels  and  contrasts.  If  one  reads 
across  the  "panels"  of  Figure  1, for example,  one  can  identify  four  "con- 
sistent"  archetypes:  permanent,  structurally  legitimate  organizations  of 
good  character  (churches,  banks,  nation  states);  predictable,  consequen- 
tially  legitimate  organizations  engaged 
(commodity 
producers,  fast-food  restaurants,  gas  stations);  inevitable,  procedurally 
subject  to constituent  direction  (law  firms,  med- 
legitimate  organizations 
ical  clinics, 
legitimate  or- 
ganizations 
(advocacy  groups,  political 
parties,  social  movements).  Whether  or  not  these  archetypes  are  either 
more  common  or  more  successful 
than  other  "mixed"  forms  is  a  worthy 
empirical  question. 

local  schools);  and  plausible,  charismatically 
sharing  constituents' 

in valued  exchanges 

interests 

Linking  Legitimacies 

As  the  preceding  discussion 

suggests,  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cogni- 
in  most  real-world  settings,  and  before  proceed- 
tive  legitimacy  co-exist 
ing,  a  few  words  about  their  interrelations  may  be  in  order.  Although 
these  legitimacies  do  not  constitute  a  strict  hierarchy,  they  do  reflect  two 
important  underlying  distinctions.  First,  pragmatic 
legitimacy  rests  on 
self-interest,  whereas  moral  and  cognitive 
legitimacy  do  not: 
audience 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

585 

tangible 

rewards 
legitimation 

Audiences  base  pragmatic  assessments 
largely  on  self-regarding  utility 
calculations,  and  organizations  often  can  purchase  pragmatic  legitimacy 
by  directing 
to  specific  constituencies; 
in  contrast, 
moral  and  cognitive 
implicate  larger  cultural  rules,  and  side 
in  contravention  of  these  rules  tend  to  diminish  the  organiza- 
payments 
tion's  stature  and  coherence,  often  even  in  the  eyes  of  the  favored  con- 
itself.  Second,  both  pragmatic  and  moral  legitimacy  rest  on 
stituency, 
discursive  evaluation,  whereas  cognitive 
legitimacy  does  not: Audiences 
arrive  at  cost-benefit  appraisals  and  ethical  judgments 
largely  through 
explicit  public  discussion, 
and  organizations  often  can  win  pragmatic 
and  moral  legitimacy  by  participating  vigorously 
in 
contrast,  cognitive 
legitimation 
implicates  unspoken  orienting  assump- 
tions,  and  heated  defenses  of  organizational  endeavors 
tend  to  imperil 
the  objectivity  and  exteriority  of  such  taken-for-granted  schemata. 

in  such  dialogues; 

suggest 

suggests 

Together, 

these  observations 

that  as  one  moves  from  the 
pragmatic  to the  moral  to the  cognitive, 
legitimacy  becomes  more  elusive 
to  obtain  and  more  difficult  to  manipulate,  but  it  also  becomes  more 
subtle,  more  profound,  and  more  self-sustaining, 
once  established.  Fur- 
ther,  the  foregoing  analysis 
that  although  different  types  of  le- 
gitimacy  often  reinforce  one  another,  they  occasionally 
can  come  into 
conflict,  as  well.  Crass  pragmatic  appeals  may  debase 
lofty  moral 
claims,  and  hollow  moral  platitudes  may  signal  shirking  in  pragmatic 
exchanges.  Partisan  moral  fervor  may  undercut  "naturalizing"  cognitive 
reifications,  and  narrow-minded  cognitive  complacency  may  encourage 
iconoclastic  moral  challenges.  Even  pragmatic  and  cognitive 
legitimacy, 
which  differ  so  greatly  that  they  often  seem  to operate  in mutual  oblivion, 
may  nonetheless  pull  in  opposite  directions  when  new  constituencies 
prove  difficult  to  satisfy  through  established  practices,  or when  old  con- 
stituencies  resist  the  adoption  of  emerging  models.  As  a  general  matter, 
frictions  among  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cognitive  considerations 
seem 
most  likely  to  arise  when  larger  social 
institutions  either  are  poorly  ar- 
ticulated  with  one  another  or are  undergoing  historical  transitions.  Better 
integrated,  more  firmly  established 
regimes  tend  to  hold  these  diverse 
legitimacy  dynamics 
for example,  by  defining  certain 
arenas  in  which  self-interest 
is  considered  morally  laudable,  or in  which 
social  conscience 

is  considered  personally  rewarding- 

in close  alignment, 

PART III: CHALLENGES OF LEGITIMACY MANAGEMENT 

The  multiplicity  of legitimacy  dynamics  creates  considerable 

latitude 
for  managers 
to  maneuver  strategically  within  their  cultural  environ- 
ments  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990; Oliver,  1991). Admittedly,  no  organization 
can  completely 
satisfy  all  audiences,  and  no  manager  can  completely 
step  outside  of the  belief  system  that  renders  the  organization  plausible  to 
himself  or  herself,  as  well  as  to  others.  However,  at  the  margin,  mana- 
gerial  initiatives  can  make  a  substantial  difference  in the  extent  to which 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

586 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

organizational  activities  are  perceived  as  desirable,  proper,  and  appro- 
priate  within  any  given  cultural  context. 

Like  most  cultural  processes, 

legitimacy  management  rests  heavily 
this  case,  communication  between  the  organiza- 

(see,  e.g.,  Elsbach,  1994; Ginzel,  Kramer,  & 
this  communication  extends  well 

on  communication-in 
tion  and  its  various  audiences 
Sutton,  1992).  Significantly,  however, 
to  include  a  wide  range  of  meaning-laden 
beyond  traditional  discourse, 
actions  and  nonverbal  displays.  Thus,  skillful  legitimacy  management 
requires  a  diverse  arsenal  of techniques  and  a  discriminating  awareness 
of which  situations  merit  which  responses.  In this  section  I examine  three 
le- 
general  challenges  of  legitimation-gaining 
legitimacy,  maintaining 
I offer  a  selection  of  strategies 
gitimacy,  and  repairing  legitimacy-and 
levels. 
for  responding 
simulta- 
Although  most  organizations 
neously,  different  legitimation  strategies  operate  on  different  logics,  and 
I 
by  distinguishing 
that  few  organizations  pursue  all  three  forms  of  legitimacy 
acknowledge 
with  equal  zeal.  In addition,  of course,  not  all  legitimation  attempts  meet 
to  legiti- 
with  equal  success,  and  after  elaborating  various  approaches 
I close  this  section  with  a  brief  cautionary  examina- 
macy  management, 
tion  of  some  ways  in  which  such  efforts  may  go  awry.3 

among  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cognitive  techniques, 

to  each  at  the  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cognitive 

seek  several  types  of  legitimacy 

Gaining  Legitimacy 

The challenge.  Upon  embarking  on a new  line  of activity,  particularly 
in  the  social  order,  organizations  of- 
one  with  few  precedents  elsewhere 
ten  face  the  daunting  task  of  winning  acceptance  either  for the  propriety 
in  general  or  for  their  own  validity  as  practitioners.  This 
of  the  activity 
(Freeman,  Carroll,  &  Hannan,  1983: 692;  Stinch- 
"liability  of  newness" 
combe,  1965: 148) has  at  least  two  distinct  aspects.  First,  when  new  op- 
erations  are  technically  problematic  or poorly  institutionalized, 
early  en- 
trants  must  devote  a  substantial  amount  of energy  to sector  building,  that 
is,  to  creating  objectivity  and  exteriority,  a  sense  that  the  new  endeavors 
define  a  sector  that  exists  independent  of  particular  incumbents  (Aldrich 
that  such  "facticity"  arises  pri- 
& Fiol,  1994). Zucker  (1983: 25) suggested 
marily  through  the  integration  of  new  activities  under  the  umbrella  of 
sectoral  pioneers  also  may 
pre-existing 
in 
need  to  disentangle  new  activities 
which  the  activities  would  seem  marginal,  ancillary,  or  illegitimate. 
Thus,  for example,  government  and  industry  officials  in the  1950s actively 

from  certain  preexisting  regimes, 

taken-for-granteds; 

however, 

3 Stylistically, 

in  this  section  I adopt  the  perspective  of  a  manager  seeking 

legitimacy 
some  of  my  "observations"  may  strike  nonman- 
for  his  or  her  organization.  Consequently, 
inclined  readers  as  uncomfortably  callous  or Machiavellian.  The  intention  here, 
agerially 
however,  is  simply  to survey  the  range  of legitimation  tactics  without  euphemism.  A careful 
reading  should  thus  hold  as  many  lessons  for organizational  critics  pursuing  delegitimation 
as  for organizational 

leaders  pursuing  the  reverse. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

587 

constructed  the  concept  of  "civilian  nuclear  power,"  simultaneously 
ing  it to  the  inevitable 
from the  incompatible 
& Modigliani,  1989). 

link- 
forward  march  of technology  and  differentiating 
it 
logic  of nuclear  weapons  manufacture  (cf. Gamson 

The  second  challenge  of legitimacy  building  applies  with  equal  force 
both  to  new  sectors  and  also  to  new  entrants  into  old  sectors.  This  chal- 
is  the  two-pronged  outreach  task  of  (a)  creating  new,  allegiant 
lenge 
constituencies 
legitimate  entities  to  lend 
support.  Ashforth  and  Gibbs  (1990: 182) noted  that  both  constituents  and 
supporters  are  likely  to  prove  most  grudging  when  organizational 
tech- 
nologies  are  uncertain  or  risky,  when  organizational  objectives  are  con- 
tested  or unconventional,  and  when  the  anticipated  relationship  with  the 
organization 

is  lengthy  and  difficult  to  exit. 

and  (b) convincing  preexisting 

Strategies  for gaining 

fall  into  three  clusters:  (a) efforts  to  conform  to  the  dictates  of 
(b) 

legitimacy.  Legitimacy  building  is  generally  a 
proactive  enterprise,  because  managers  have  advance  knowledge  of 
their  plans  and  of the  need  for legitimation.  Roughly,  legitimacy-building 
strategies 
preexisting  audiences  within  the  organization's  current  environment, 
in  pursuit  of  an  audience 
efforts  to  select  among  multiple  environments 
that  will  support  current  practices,  and  (c) efforts  to  manipulate  environ- 
mental  structure  by  creating  new  audiences  and  new  legitimating  be- 
involve  complex  mixtures  of  concrete  organiza- 
liefs.  All  three  clusters 
tional  change  and  persuasive  organizational  communication 
(cf. Dowling 
& Pfeffer,  1975); however,  they  clearly  fall  along  a  continuum  from  rela- 
tively  passive  conformity  to  relatively  active  manipulation 
(cf.  Oliver, 
1991). 

their  superficial 

Conform  to environments.  Often,  managers  seeking  legitimacy  find  it 
easiest  simply  to  position  their  organization  within  a  preexisting 
institu- 
tional  regime.  Such  conformity  can  be  achieved  by  individual  organiza- 
tions  acting  alone,  manipulating  only  their  own  structures  (or, more  mod- 
estly, 
signal 
to  established 
allegiance 
institutional 
logics  (Meyer  & Rowan,  1991). Equally  important,  this  type  of 
adaptation  does  not  require  managers  to break  out of prevailing  cognitive 
frames  (Oliver,  1990); rather,  the  conformist  can  turn  a  liability 
into  an 
asset,  taking  advantage  of  being  a  cultural  "insider"  and  asking,  "What 
would  make  this  organization 
look  more  desirable,  proper,  and  appropri- 
ate  to  me?" 

to  the  cultural  order  and  pose  few  challenges 

appearances). 

Conformist 

strategies 

Not surprisingly, 

legitimacy.  To achieve  pragmatic  legitimacy 

the  nature  of conformism  varies  somewhat,  depend- 
ing  on  whether  the  organization 
seeks  primarily  pragmatic,  moral,  or 
cognitive 
through  conform- 
ity,  an  organization  must  either  meet  the  substantive  needs  of  various 
audiences  or  offer  decision-making 
access,  or  both.  The  former  task  in- 
volves  the  familiar  marketing  challenge  of responding  to client  tastes;  the 
the  technically  easier  but  managerially  more  prob- 
latter  task  involves 
lematic  challenge  of  co-opting  constituents  without  succumbing 
to  goal 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

588 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

seeking  to  gain  pragmatic 

(Clark,  1956; Messinger,  1955; Selznick,  1949; Zald & Denton, 
legitimacy 

displacement 
1963). Significantly,  organizations 
rarely  can  rely  on  purely  dispositional  appeals,  because  assumptions  of 
good  character  generally  require  an  established  record  of consistent  per- 
however,  an  organization  may  overcome  this 
formance.  Occasionally, 
obstacle  by  trading  on  its  strong  reputation  in  related  activities  or on  the 
reputation  of its  key  personnel  in previous  endeavors.  These  dispositional 
spillovers  may  be  reinforced  by  the  use  of  character  references,  who  are 
willing  to  vouch  for the  untested  entity's  innate  reliability  (cf.  Bernstein, 
1992; Suchman,  1993). 

in  networks  of  other  already  legitimate 

Organizations  also  may  adopt  conformist  stances 

in  pursuit  of  moral 
legitimacy.  In doing  so,  however,  they  must  conform  to principled  ideals, 
not  purely  instrumental  demands.  Thus,  for example,  one  obvious  moral 
legitimation  strategy  is  for the  organization  actually  to produce  concrete, 
the  equivalent  of  achieving 
meritorious  outcomes.  This  is,  in  a  sense, 
pragmatic  legitimacy  by satisfying  constituent  tastes.  Unfortunately,  con- 
crete  moral  outcomes  often  are  difficult  to  attain  or  impossible 
to  docu- 
frequently  opt for less  direct  approaches.  Among 
ment,  and  organizations 
the  most  common  of these  approaches  are  efforts  to embed  new  structures 
institutions.  Thus, 
and  practices 
for example,  managers  occasionally  employ  co-optation  as  an  essentially 
moral  strategy,  not  to  incorporate  the  pragmatic  concerns  of  exchange 
in  its 
partners,  but  to  associate 
1985; Oliver,  1991). 
environment 
Less  directly  still,  carefully  chosen  displays  of symbolism  may  circumvent 
(DiMaggio  &  Powell,  1983; 
change  entirely 
the  need  for  substantive 
Meyer  & Rowan,  1991; Pfeffer,  1981). Outputs,  procedures,  structures,  and 
labors  on  the  side  of  the 
personnel  can  all  signal  that  the  organization 
indicators  amount  to  little  more  than 
if  these  supposed 
angels-even 
face  work  (Goffman,  1967). At the  extreme,  because  organizational  goals 
often  serve  primarily  as  rationales  for existence  rather  than  as  technical 
directives,  managers  can  cynically  revise  even  their  core  mission  state- 
ments  in  order  to  give  off  a  false  appearance  of  conformity  to  societal 
ideals  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990; Pfeffer  & Salancik,  1978). 

the  organization  with  respected  entities 

(Dowling  & Pfeffer,  1975; Galaskiewicz, 

Nonetheless, 

despite  ample  evidence  of  such  symbolic  responses 
(e.g.,  Selznick,  1949; Zald  & Denton,  1963), the  argument  that  organiza- 
in  order  to  dupe  naive  audiences 
tions  insincerely  manage  symbolism 
may  be  somewhat  overdrawn.  Occasionally,  audiences  will  actually  de- 
in order  to further their  own  cultural  or political 
sire  a  symbolic  response, 
(cf.  Pfeffer,  1981).  Further,  even  initially  superficial  changes 
objectives 
can  prove  quite  profound  over  the  long  run,  as  cognitive  dissonance  and 
self-selection 
members  who  adhere  to  the  announced  goals,  rather  than  to  the  hidden 
agenda.  These  dynamics  suggest  that  moral  legitimation,  perhaps  even 
likelihood 
more  than  pragmatic  legitimation,  carries  with  it a  substantial 
of  unanticipated  goal  displacement 

gradually  produce  a  new  generation  of  organizational 

(cf.  Selznick,  1949). 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

589 

lines, 

institutionalists  point  out  that 

If organizations  gain  pragmatic 

in  uncertain  environments  often  pursue  comprehensibility 

legitimacy  by  conforming  to  instru- 
mental  demands  and  moral  legitimacy  by  conforming  to altruistic  ideals, 
legitimacy  primarily  by  conforming  to  established 
they  gain  cognitive 
models  or  standards.  Along  these 
organizations 
through  mimetic  isomorphism,  that  is,  by mim- 
and  taken-for-grantedness 
icking  the  most  prominent  and  secure  entities  in  their  fields  (DiMaggio  & 
Powell,  1983; Suchman  & Eyre,  1992; Tolbert  & Zucker,  1983). Even  in  new 
sectors  without  such  established  models,  however,  pioneers  can  protect 
to  prevailing  "heuristics." 
by  conforming 
their  cognitive 
Within  a  legal-rational  order  (Weber,  1978), for example,  novel  organiza- 
that  is,  by 
tions  often  gain  cognitive 
(Zucker,  1988),  bringing  previously  mar- 
codifying 
ginal  activities  under  official  control  (Zucker,  1991: 86), and  establishing 
hierarchical 
1991).  In  a  related  manner,  organizations  often  pursue  professionaliza- 
to  external  definitions  of  authority 
tion,  thereby  linking  their  activities 
and  competence 

links  with  superordinate  environmental  units  (Scott  & Meyer, 

through  formalization, 

informal  procedures 

(Scott,  1991). 

legitimacy 

legitimacy 

Select  among  environments. 

If managers  wish  to  avoid  having  their 
they  must  move 
organizations  remade  in  the  image  of  the  environment, 
beyond  conformity  to  other,  more  proactive  strategies.  The  simplest  of 
these  is  selecting  an  environment  that  will  grant  the  organization 
legiti- 
in  return.  Although  cog- 
macy  "as  is,"  without  demanding  many  changes 
(including  manag- 
nitive  taken-for-grantedness  may  prevent  individuals 
institutions  of  any 
to  the  prevailing 
ers)  from  formulating  alternatives 
given  context,  the  fragmented  and  often  conflictual  nature  of  the  larger 
cultural  terrain  frequently  creates  gaps  in  which  actors  can  select  among 
logics  (cf.  Friedland  & Alford, 
preexisting 
1991; Hinings  & Greenwood,  1988; Scheid-Cook,  1992). Thus,  rather  than 
simply  conforming  to  the  demands  of  a  specific  setting,  managers  may 
in  which  otherwise  dubious 
attempt  to  locate  a  more  amicable  venue, 
activities  appear  unusually  desirable,  proper,  or appropriate. 

(but  not  necessarily  consistent) 

selecting  a  favorable  environment 

Again,  this  approach  to  legitimation 

includes  pragmatic,  moral,  and 
is 
cognitive  aspects.  Pragmatically, 
usually  a  matter  of  market  research:  The  organization  must  identify  and 
that  the  organiza- 
attract  constituents  who  value  the  sorts  of  exchanges 
tion  is  equipped  to  provide  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990). Along  similar  lines, 
it  must  also  recruit  co- 
if  the  organization 
optation  targets  who  are  credible  to key  constituents,  yet  who  are  unlikely 
to  demand  dramatic  changes 

in  organizational  activities. 

legitimacy, 

influence 

seeks 

Because  moral  legitimacy  reflects  more  generalized  cultural  concerns 
legitimacy,  organizations  are  somewhat  more  lim- 
than  does  pragmatic 
ited  in  their  choice  of  moral  standards  than  in  their  choice  of  exchange 
the  range  of  moral  criteria  remains  quite  broad, 
partners.  Nonetheless, 
largely  on  the 
and  the  relative  weighting  of  various  desiderata  depends 
goals  that  the  organization  sets  for  itself  and  on  the  domain  of  activity 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

590 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

society 

for  example, 

for  the  direct  consequences 

imply  (Scott,  1991).  Organizations, 

that  those  goals 
face 
higher  standards  of  responsibility 
of  core 
activities  than  for other,  more  remote  impacts  (Wood,  1991; Zenisek,  1979). 
Additionally, 
imposes  heavier  obligations 
(such  as  "fiduciary 
duty"  and  "strict  liability")  on  those  entities  that  hold  themselves  out  as 
providing  certain  particularly 
important  or  problematic  goods  and  ser- 
vices.  Consequently,  by  adjusting  organizational  goals,  managers  often 
can  select  among  alternative  moral  criteria,  such  as  efficiency,  account- 
ability,  confidentiality, 
and  so  on  (cf. Carroll, 
reliability,  responsiveness, 
1979). 

selection, 

too,  may  operate 

that  their  organizations 

Finally,  managers  also  may  exert  at least  a  small  amount  of selection 
over  the  cognitive  environments 
face.  Although 
this  third  variety  of  environmental 
in  part 
through  the  strategic  manipulation  of  goal  statements,  many  highly  in- 
stitutionalized  environments  contain  formal  gatekeepers  and  labeling 
in- 
stitutions  that  limit  access 
to  privileged  categories,  definitions,  and  ac- 
counts.  To  position  an  organization  within  such  restricted  arenas, 
management  must  obtain  explicit  certification,  usually  by  conforming  to 
detailed  formal  requirements.  An  intention  to  sell  produce  may  make  an 
organization  a  grocery;  however,  an  intention  to  sell  drugs  does  not  nec- 
essarily  make  an  organization  a  pharmacy.  Thus,  sectors  differ  in  the 
degree  of cognitive  selection  that  they  allow,  and  choice  often  is  the  most 
free  in  precisely 
those  sectors  that  offer  the  weakest 
sup- 
ports.  For  this  reason,  among  others,  centrally 
sectors 
provide  the  most  favorable  environments 
that  conform 
to prevailing  standards  (Scott,  1991), whereas  fragmented  sectors  offer the 
that  wish  to promote  unconventional  alter- 
most  leeway  for organizations 
natives.  With  regard  to  cognitive 
legitimation,  dissensus  "levels  down," 
and  reducing  the  authority  of  even  the  most 
undercutting  gatekeeping 
central  sectoral  actors  (Meyer  & Scott,  1983b). 

for organizations 

institutionalized 

institutional 

reconfiguring  environmental 

It  is  worth  noting  that  organizations  occasionally 

find  themselves 
in  a  single,  coherent  environment,  despite  their  best 
unable  to  operate 
efforts.  When  this  problem  occurs,  managers  may  attempt  to control  con- 
flicts  by  selectively 
constraints,  either  by 
segregating  environments  and  catering  to one  at the  expense  of the  other, 
or  by  integrating  environments  and  demonstrating 
that  organizational 
behaviors  would  be  legitimate  under  any  applicable  standard.  Meyer  and 
Rowan  (1991)  identified 
(a)  exalting  cere- 
mony  while 
(b)  displaying  cynicism  and  openly 
that  entrenched  rituals  serve  no  purpose,  and  (c) promis- 
acknowledging 
today's  reality  from  tomorrow's  ideal. 
ing  reform,  thereby  segregating 
Unfortunately, 
cynicism 
makes  the  organization  appear  irrational  and  out  of  control,  and  reform- 
the  current  structure  and  undercuts  morale.  Conse- 
ism  delegitimates 
efforts  to  segregate  environments  must 
quently,  for  some  organizations, 
give  way  to  more  integrative  claims  of  "inter-environmental  robustness." 

impedes  pragmatic  exchange, 

ignoring  performance, 

three  segregation 

ceremonialism 

strategies: 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

591 

First,  managers  can  exercise  entrepreneurship, 
constructingn]  an  orga- 
nization  out  of a  diverse  set  of legitimated  practices"  (Powell,  1991: 197; cf. 
Pfeffer,  1981: 22).  Second,  managers  can  decouple  activities,  diligently 
performing  contradictory  tasks  while  leaving 
formal  coordinative  struc- 
(Elsbach  & Sutton,  1992; Meyer  & Rowan,  1991; Ol- 
tures  underdeveloped 
iver,  1990).  Finally,  managers 
to  implement  multi- 
institutional  or  institutional/technical  matrix  structures  (Scott,  1987; cf. 
Powell,  1991; Scott  & Meyer,  1991). Even  though  no  one  has  yet  devoted 
sustained  empirical  or theoretical  attention  to such  matrix  forms,  military 
academies  and  Catholic  universities  might  offer  good  case  studies. 

can  attempt 

selection, 

Manipulate  environments.  Even  though  most  organizations  gain  le- 
gitimacy  primarily  through  conformity  and  environment 
for 
some,  these  strategies  will  not  suffice.  In particular,  innovators  who  de- 
from  prior  practice  must  often  intervene  preemptively 
part  substantially 
in  order  to  develop  bases  of  support  specifi- 
in  the  cultural  environment 
cally  tailored  to  their  distinctive  needs  (cf.  Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994; Tushman 
& Anderson,  1986; Tushman  & Rosenkopf,  1992). In  this  case,  managers 
must  go  beyond  simply  selecting  among  existing  cultural  beliefs;  they 
must  actively  promulgate  new  explanations  of  social  reality  (see,  e.g., 
Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994; Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990). Such  proactive  cultural  ma- 
nipulation 
far  less 
understood  than  either  conformity  or  environment  selection 
(Ashforth  & 
Gibbs,  1990; Dowling  & Pfeffer,  1975); however,  the  limited  literature  on 
that  one  key  may  lie  in  the  ca- 
"institutional  entrepreneurship"  suggests 
pacity  of affected  organizations 
to reach  beyond  their  boundaries  and  act 
in  concert: 

less  common,  and,  consequently, 

is  less  controllable, 

In order to render its  public  theory plausible  ... 
an  institu- 
tionalizing organizational form requires the help of subsidiary 
actors . . . Recruiting or creating an environment that can en- 
act their claims  is  the central task that institutional entrepre- 
neurs  face  in  carrying  out  a  successful  institutionalization 
project.  (DiMaggio,  1988: 15; see  also  Aldrich & Fiol,  1994; 
DiMaggio,  1991; Hinings & Greenwood,  1988; Suchman,  1994) 

Thus,  promulgating  novel  legitimacy  claims  is  less  a  matter  of  manage- 
ment  than  of  evangelism.  As  the  following  pages 
such  collective  mobilization  becomes 
cus  of  legitimation  moves  from  pragmatism  to  morality  to  cognition. 

illustrate,  the  need  for 
increasingly  pronounced  as  the  fo- 

the  easiest 

Because  pragmatic  legitimacy  reflects  direct  exchange  and  influence 
relations  between  a  focal  organization  and  specific  constituents, 
it  is 
to  manipulate.  Usually,  such 
generally 
takes  the  form  of  product  advertising,  as  the  organization 
manipulation 
attempts  to  persuade  particular  exchange  partners  to  value  particular 
offerings.  In addition  to molding  constituent  tastes,  however,  organizations 
to  highlight 
also  may  use  strategic  communication 
the 
influence  and  to  channel  demands  for participation 
extent  of  constituent 

form  of  legitimacy 

(or  exaggerate) 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

592 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

into  nondisruptive  arenas.  Further,  organizations  may  employ  image  ad- 
the  pace  at  which  discrete  exchanges  and  deci- 
vertising 
attributions  of  good 
sion-making  procedures 
disposition 

foster  more  generalized 

(Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994). 

to  accelerate 

success 

consequential 

Establishing  new  grounds  for  moral  legitimacy  poses  a  somewhat 
the  best  hope  is  simply  to 
greater  challenge.  For isolated  organizations, 
accumulate  a  record  of  technical  success  (see,  e.g.,  Ashforth  & Gibbs, 
1990). Within  the  contemporary  rationalist  order,  technical  performance 
legitimacy,  but  it also  exerts  spillover 
not  only  establishes 
effects  on  other  moral  dynamics  as  well,  with  attention-grabbing  "dem- 
onstration  events"  providing  lasting  validation  for procedures,  structures, 
and  personnel  (e.g.,  Baron,  Dobbin,  & Jennings,  1986; Meyer,  Stevenson, 
& Webster,  1985; Mezias,  1990; Suchman  & Eyre,  1992; Tolbert  & Zucker, 
is  in  large  part  socially  constructed 
1983).  Moreover,  because 
(e.g.,  Powell,  1991), an  emphasis  on performance  hardly  precludes  skillful 
for example,  "the selective  release 
impression  management-including, 
of  ...  numerous  indicators  of  inputs  at  the  same  time  information  about 
processes  and  particularly  outcomes  is  not  released"  (Pfeffer,  1981: 30; for 
iso- 
a  more  extreme  example,  see  Elsbach  & Sutton,  1992). Nonetheless, 
lated  performance  demonstrations  rarely  represent  the  quickest  or  most 
effective  route  to  moral  change.  Even  technical  successes  become  most 
convincing  when  they  proliferate  across  many  organizations,  and  more 
concerted  collective  strategies  usually  are  more  potent  still.  In particular, 
groups  of organizations  may  exert  major pressures  on the  normative  order 
for  a  morality  in  which  their 
by  joining  together  to  actively  proselytize 
outputs,  procedures,  structures,  and  personnel  occupy  positions  of  honor 
and  respect  (cf.  Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994; Suchman,  1993).  Over  time,  such 
collective  evangelism  helps  to  build  a  winning  coalition  of  believers, 
whose  conceptions  of  socially  desirable  activity  set  the  terms  for subse- 
quent  moral  debate. 

legitimacy, 

When  the  focus  of  environment  manipulation 

turns  from  moral  to 
the  need  for  collective  action  becomes  even  more 
cognitive 
individual  organizations  do  enjoy  some  ability  to 
apparent.  Admittedly, 
and  taken-for-grantedness  merely  by persisting; 
foster  comprehensibility 
however,  even  this  basic  strategy  rests  on  the  fundamentally  collective 
nature  of reproducible  organizational  action:  "The history  of transmission 
provides  a  basis  for assuming 
that  the  meaning  of  the  act  is  part  of  the 
intersubjective  common-sense  world"  (Zucker,  1991: 87; see  also  Zucker, 
1983, 1988). Further,  simple  persistence  rarely  matches  the  transformative 
power  of  true  collective  action.  In  the  cognitive  realm,  such  collective 
action  usually  takes  the  form of either  popularization 
(promoting  compre- 
hensibility  by  explicating  new  cultural  formulations)  or  standardization 
(promoting  taken-for-grantedness 
& Fiol,  1994). Regarding  popularization,  Pfeffer  (1981: 23) suggested 
managers 
"through  continually  articulating 

of  a  new  perspective 
its  reality." 

isomorphism)  (Aldrich 
that 

stories  which  [illustrate] 

the  comprehensibility 

by  encouraging 

can  enhance 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

593 

Concrete  examples  of  this  strategy  include  lobbying,  advertising,  event 
litigation,  and  scientific  research  (Hinings  & Greenwood, 
sponsorship, 
1988; Miles,  1982; Nielsen  & Rao,  1987). Regarding  standardization,  Han- 
nan  and  Freeman  (1989: 132) argued  that  the  "simple  prevalence  of a  form 
tends  to give  it legitimacy,"  and  Pfeffer  and  Salancik  (1978: 201) observed, 
that  "legitimacy  appears  to  be  especially  problematic  when 
conversely, 
types  compete  for  the  same 
organizations 
resources."  Thus,  organizations  may  enhance  their  taken-for-grantedness 
by  remaking  others  in  their  own  image,  either  through  success  and  mod- 
eling,  or through  coercion  and  regulation  (DiMaggio  & Powell,  1983; Tol- 
bert  & Zucker,  1983; but  cf.  Zucker,  1988). 

of  different  distinguishable 

entrepreneurship, 
strategic  prescriptions 

Other  than  these  broad  commonalities  among  reported  instances  of 
literature  offers  few  de- 
the  legitimacy 
institutional 
to  promote  new 
for  managers 
tailed 
seeking 
myths.  This  may,  in  part,  reflect  that  institutionalization  projects  tend  to 
having  poorly  understood 
be  underdetermined, 
loops  and 
highly  chaotic  path  dependencies 
(cf.  Arthur,  1990; David,  1986). DiMag- 
gio  highlighted  one  such  feedback  pattern  when  he  noted  that 

feedback 

the success  of an institutionalization process creates new sets 
of legitimated  actors who,  in the course of pursuing distinct 
interests,  tend to delegitimate  and deinstitutionalize  aspects 
of the  institutional  forms to which  they  owe  their autonomy 
and legitimacy.  (1988: 13; cf. Singh, Tucker, & Meinhard, 1991) 

for years  to come"  (DiMaggio  & Powell,  1983: 

As  this  cultural  tumult  settles,  outcomes  will  often  reflect  "point[s]  of 
critical  intervention  at  which  elites  can  define  appropriate  models 
which  then  go  unquestioned 
157).  Alternatively,  however, 
take  on  lives  of  their  own,  reflecting  entrepreneurial  activities,  but  de- 
parting  dramatically  from entrepreneurial  objectives.  Unfortunately,  such 
transitions  are  difficult  to  predict  beforehand,  and  social  scientists  may 
intervention  strategies  without  falling 
be  hard  put  to  formulate  useful 
victim  to  the  cardinal  methodological 
sin  of  sampling  on  the  dependent 
variable  (Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994). 

projects  occasionally 

institutionalization 

... 

Maintaining  Legitimacy 

The challenge. 

tends  to  be  taken  largely  for  granted. 

In general,  the  literature  depicts  the  task  of maintain- 
ing  legitimacy  as  a  far  easier  enterprise  than  either  gaining  or repairing 
legitimacy.  According  to  Ashforth  and  Gibbs  (1990: 183), "once  conferred, 
of 
legitimacy 
legitimacy  become  increasingly  perfunctory  if not  'mindless'  (Ashforth  & 
Fried,  1988) and  legitimation  activities  become  increasingly  routinized." 
Similarly,  Zucker  (1991) suggested 
that  the  institutional  order  generally 
acts  as  a  cybernetic  system  (Boulding,  1956), resisting  or  repairing  acci- 
dental 
as  Zucker 
life,  and  few 
noted  (1988),  entropy 

in  any  single  component.  Nonetheless, 

.  .  .  Reassessments 

feature  of  social 

is  a  persistent 

fluctuations 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

594 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

ignore  the  task  of  legitimacy  maintenance  en- 
organizations  can  safely 
tirely.  Anomalies,  miscues, 
imitation  failures, 
innovations,  and  external 
shocks  threaten  the  legitimacy  of  even  the  most  secure  organization,  es- 
if  such  misfortunes  either  arrive  in  rapid  succession  or  are  left 
pecially 
unaddressed 

for a  significant  period  of  time. 

In  a  fragmented 

institutional  environment, 

Three  aspects  of  legitimacy  make  its  maintenance  at  least  intermit- 
(a)  audiences  are  often  heterogeneous, 
tently  problematic: 
(b)  stability 
often  entails  rigidity,  and  (c) institutionalization  often  generates 
its  own 
opposition.  The first of these  centers  on the  fact  that  legitimacy  represents 
a  relationship  with  an  audience,  rather  than  being  a  possession  of  the 
organization. 
satisfying,  or 
even  recognizing,  all  factions  may  prove  virtually  impossible 
(Ashforth  & 
Gibbs,  1990; Scheid-Cook,  1992). Over  time,  this  problem  leaves  the  orga- 
nization  vulnerable 
in  the  mix  of  constituent 
is  then  aggravated  by  a  second  problematic 
demands.  This  vulnerability 
aspect:  the  tendency  for  legitimation 
to  become  a  "house  of  cards,"  as 
mutual  adjustment, 
impede  re- 
to  shifting  conditions  (Jepperson,  1991). If organizations  be- 
sponsiveness 
come  homogeneous  while  cultural  environments  remain  heterogeneous, 
unsatisfied  demands  will  create  niches  for "outlaw"  entrepreneurs,  who 
devise  and  adopt 
forms 
(Hannan,  1986; Powell,  1991). 

innovative,  albeit  peripheral,  organizational 

isomorphism,  and  taken-for-grantedness 

to  unanticipated  changes 

to generate 

Such  endogenous 

instabilities  play  into  the  third  problematic  aspect 
of legitimation:  the  tendency  for any  degree  of institutionalization, 
short of 
total  taken-for-grantedness, 
its  own  opposition.  Legitimation 
projects  (particularly  proactive  attempts  at  advertising,  proselytization, 
and  popularization)  usually  attract  attention,  and  often  this  attention 
proves  hostile-if 
only  because  proactive  managers  will  already  have 
enlisted  most  of the  potentially  supportive  audiences  during  the  project's 
earlier  stages.  Some  of  the  new  critics  may  hope  to  delegitimate 
the 
whole  sector  by  attacking 
its  least  institutionalized  member.  Others  will 
institutionalization  per  se,  either  on  ideological  grounds 
simply  oppose 
(Rothschild-Whitt,  1979) or because  they  experience  the  newly  institution- 
alized  organization  as  an  unwanted  external  constraint  (Jepperson,  1991). 
Still  others  may  precipitate  a  legitimation  crisis  in  order  to  appeal 
to 
idiosyncratic  audiences  of  their  own  (cf.  Elsbach  &  Sutton, 
particular 
1992). In  any  case,  each  of  these  hostile  responses  produces  a  so-near- 
in  which  every  victory  seems  to  mobilize  a  new, 
but-yet-so-far  dynamic, 
more  radical  opponent.  For  this  reason,  managers  rarely  can  afford  to 
treat  legitimation  as  a  completed  task. 

Strategies  for maintaining 

le- 
gitimacy  fall  into  two  groups:  perceiving 
future  changes  and  protecting 
past  accomplishments.  Although  neither  group  is  as  active  as  the  fore- 
going  strategies 
legitimacy,  protective  strategies  generally 
require  more  initiative  than  purely  perceptual  techniques. 

legitimacy.  Strategies  for maintaining 

for  gaining 

Perceive  change.  The  first  cluster  of  legitimacy-maintenance 

strate- 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

595 

the  organization's  ability  to  recognize  audi- 
gies  focuses  on  enhancing 
ence  reactions  and  to  foresee  emerging  challenges.  As  Hinings  and 
Greenwood  (1988: 16) noted,  "a common  theme  in  the  [organizational]  de- 
into  be- 
cline  literature  is  that  decision-makers  often  delude  themselves 
that  a  problem  does  not  exist  or  that  it  is  not  serious."  Thus, 
lieving 
so  enamored  with  their  own 
managers  must  guard  against  becoming 
that 
legitimating  myths  that  they  lose  sight  of  external  developments 
might  bring  those  myths  into  question.  With  advanced  warning,  manag- 
in  preemptive  conformity,  selection,  or  manipulation, 
ers  can  engage 
keeping  the  organization  and  its  environment  in close  alignment;  without 
to 
such  warning,  managers  will  find  themselves 
involve  monitoring 
regain  lost  ground.  In general,  perceptual  strategies 
elements  of  that  environment 
the  cultural  environment  and  assimilating 
into  organizational  decision  processes,  usually  by  employing  boundary- 
spanning  personnel  as  bridges  across  which  the  organization  can  learn 
about  audience  values,  beliefs,  and  reactions  (Levitt & March,  1988; Scott, 
1992). 

constantly  struggling 

insights 

to  provide  symbolic  reassurances 

The  nature  of these  bridging  efforts,  however,  depends  upon  whether 
they  emphasize  pragmatic,  moral,  or  cognitive  concerns.  To  perceive 
the  organization  must  monitor  multiple 
emerging  pragmatic  demands, 
into  organizational 
interests,  and,  to  this  end,  it  may  co-opt  audiences 
to  constituents 
decision  making-not 
to  managers.  To 
(Pfeffer,  1981),  but  rather  to  provide  cultural 
perceive  emerging  moral  beliefs,  the  organization  must  incorporate  mul- 
chartering 
tiple  ethics,  and  to this  end,  it may  pursue  professionalization, 
in  external  normative  dis- 
certain  organizational  members  to  participate 
courses  (DiMaggio  & Powell,  1983). Finally,  to  perceive  emerging  cogni- 
the  organization  must  explore  multiple  outlooks, 
tive  understandings, 
specific  subunits  as  "doubting  Tho- 
and  to  this  end, 
to  question  others'  taken-for-granted  assump- 
mases,"  with  a  mandate 
in 
tions  (cf. Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990; Mitroff & Kilmann,  1984). Significantly, 
all  of  these  cases,  the  use  of  bridging  strategies  to  track  external  culture 
suggests  a  flip  side  to  traditional  concerns  regarding  environmental  ab- 
sorption  of peripheral  subunits  (e.g.,  Selznick,  1949): Where  organizations 
seek  to perceive  changing  audience  beliefs,  the  risk  is  not that  centrifugal 
forces  will  lead  boundary  spanners  to "run wild,"  but  rather  than  centrip- 
etal  forces  will  lead  them  to  become  lapdogs  (cf.  Arrow,  1974). 

it  may  establish 

Protect  accomplishments. 

In addition  to guarding  against  unforeseen 
they  have 
organizations  may  seek  to  buttress  the  legitimacy 
challenges, 
already  acquired.  In particular,  organizations  can  enhance  their  security 
forms.  To  a  large 
legitimacy 
by  converting 
internal  operations  to  prevent 
extent,  this  task  boils  down  to  (a) policing 
(b) curtailing  highly  visible  legitimation  efforts  in  favor  of  more 
miscues, 
subtle  techniques,  and  (c) developing  a  defensive  stockpile  of  supportive 
beliefs,  attitudes,  and  accounts. 
As  Ashforth  and  Gibbs 

(1980:  183)  noted,  "having  adjudged 

from  episodic 

to  continual 

the 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

596 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

of  'business-as-usual.'" 

organization  credible,  constituents 
tend  to  relax  their  vigilance  and  con- 
tent  themselves  with  evidence  of  ongoing  performance  vis-a-vis  their  in- 
terests 
and  with  periodic 
assurances 
Consequently,  organizations 
should  avoid  unexpected  events  that  might 
reawaken  scrutiny.  At a  pragmatic  level,  exchanges  should  be  consistent 
and  predictable,  not  only  meeting  constituent  needs,  but also  eliminating 
uncertainties  and  fostering  a  sense  of  constituent  control.  At  a  moral 
level,  activities  should  exemplify  responsibility,  not  only  refraining  from 
impropriety,  but  also  downplaying 
the  role  of purely  instrumental  or con- 
sequential  concerns.  At  a  cognitive 
level,  accounts  should  be  simple  or 
even  banal,  not only  explaining  organizational  behavior,  but also  making 
it  seem  natural  and  inevitable. 

is  even  partly  cognitive 

Further,  in  all  actions,  managers  should  carefully  weigh  the  direct 
benefits  of  new  legitimation 
the  scrutiny  that  these 
initiatives  against 
efforts  might  attract.  When  legitimacy 
in  nature, 
any  overt  attention-including 
have  the  det- 
supportive  attention-may 
rimental  side  effect  of  problematizing  comprehensibility 
and  disrupting 
taken-for-grantedness.  Thus,  direct  value-based  appeals  should  give  way 
to  "cooler"  techniques, 
such  as  matter-of-fact  explanations  of  "common 
knowledge"  (Pfeffer,  1981: 15), and  managers  should  avoid  validating 
the 
opposition  by  overtly  treating  it  as  a  threat.  In  particular,  raw  coercion 
(Oliver,  1991)  rarely  represents  a  productive 
it  is  morally  problematic  and  tends  to  undercut  exteri- 
strategy,  because 
ority  and  objectivity  (Zucker,  1988). Instead,  organizations  should  manage 
challenges  by  invoking  legitimate  authority  (Scott,  1991), by manipulating 
language 
cesses 
(Reed,  1978). 

for  demographic  pro- 
to  replace  cohorts  of  critics  with  new  generations  of  supporters 

(Pfeffer,  1981),  and  by  simply  waiting 

legitimacy-maintenance 

As a  final  legitimacy-maintenance 

strategy,  organizations  may  stock- 
pile  goodwill  and  support.  Generally,  such  stockpiles  are  dispositional 
in 
character,  reflecting  either  pragmatic  attributions  (such  as  trust) or moral 
attributions 
(such  as  esteem).  These  dispositional  perceptions  act  as  a 
kind  of  capital  reserve,  "whereby  management  can  occasionally  deviate 
from  social  norms  without  seriously  upsetting  the  organization's 
stand- 
ing" (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990: 189). Significantly, 
that 
maintain  financial  war  chests  must  distinguish  between  working  capital 
and  potential  capital  in order  to avoid  letting  cash  on  hand  obscure  loom- 
ing  debts  (Hambrick  &  D'Aveni,  1988),  so,  too,  must  organizations 
in 
highly 
sectors  distinguish  between  elite  and  popular 
support  in  order  to avoid  letting  regulatory  backing  obscure  looming  pub- 
lic  doubts.  Beyond  such  pragmatic  and  moral  reserves,  however,  manag- 
ers  also  can  stockpile  cognitive 
legitimacy,  primarily  by  constructing 
communication 
the  organization  and  its  social  surround- 
ings.  Frequent  and  intense 
interaction  creates  dense  webs  of  meaning 
that  can  resist,  survive,  and  repair  disruptions 
in  individual  strands  of 
the  more  tightly  intercon- 
understanding 

(cf.  Pfeffer,  1981). Consequently, 

just  as  organizations 

institutionalized 

links  between 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

597 

nected  an  environment  becomes,  the  more  likely  it is  that  institutions  and 
beliefs  will  approach  the  homeostatic 

ideal  (Scott,  1987). 

Repairing  Legitimacy 

in  cultural  support,  until  some  cognitively 

In many  ways,  the  task  of repairing  legitimacy  resem- 
The challenge. 
legitimacy.  Unlike  legitimacy  creation,  however, 
bles  the  task  of gaining 
legitimacy  repair  generally  represents  a  reactive  response  to  an  unfore- 
seen  crisis  of  meaning.  Such  crises  usually  befall  managers  who  have 
in  their  own  legitimating  myths  and  have  failed  to 
become  enmeshed 
salient  trip 
notice  a  decline 
wire  (such  as  a  resource  interruption)  sets  off  alarms.  By the  time  these 
reactive  managers  begin  to address  their  problems,  familiar  legitimation 
legitimacy  claims  may  already  be  discredited. 
strategies  and  familiar 
Suddenly, 
"[P]revious  claims  to  legitimacy 
to respond,  [and]  scrutiny  makes  it difficult  to decouple  activities 
to  engage 
performance"  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990: 183). 

.  ..  and 
in  routine  impression  management  or  puffery  regarding  role 

constrain  the  ability  of  management 

the  successes  of  the  past  become 

to  the  future: 

impediments 

... 

legitimation 

In  addition  to  impairing  management's  ability  to  maneuver,  an  un- 
from  previously  reli- 
folding  legitimacy  crisis  may  also  sever  managers 
crises  tend  to  become  self- 
Indeed, 
able  external  allies. 
loops,  as  social  networks  recoil  to  avoid  guilt  by 
reinforcing  feedback 
this  retraction  of  support  can 
association.  At  the  most  concrete 
failures  simply  by  disrupting  critical  resource 
exacerbate  performance 
the  "retraction  cascade" 
flows  (cf.  Sutton  &  Callahan, 
becomes  still  more  threatening  when  the  networks  in  question  provide 
legitimacy,  rather  than  purely  material  exchanges.  Because  legitimation 
the  risk  of  negative  contagion  may  drive  even 
is  frequently  mutualistic, 
from  a  troubled  counter- 
long-standing  allies  to  disassociate 
part  and  to  engage 

in  ritualistic  sniping  and  ostracism. 

1987); however, 

themselves 

level, 

Strategies  for repairing  legitimacy. 

In the  abstract,  most  of  the  legit- 
strategies  described  previously  also  can  serve  to reestab- 
imacy-building 
following  a  crisis,  provided  that  the  organization  contin- 
lish  legitimacy 
ues  to enjoy  some  modicum  of credibility  and  interconnectedness  with  the 
relevant  audiences.  Often,  however,  the  delegitimated  organization  must 
first  address  the  immediate  disruption,  before  initiating  more  global  le- 
gitimation  activities.  In particular,  organizations  must  construct  a  sort  of 
of  specific  past  actions  and 
"firewall"  between  audience  assessments 
of general  ongoing  essences.  The limited  literature 
audience  assessments 
three  broad  prescriptions:  (a) offer  normalizing  ac- 
on  this  topic  suggests 
counts,  (b) restructure,  and  (c) don't  panic. 

Although  legitimacy  crises  may  coalesce  around  performance  issues, 
most  challenges  ultimately  rest  on  failures  of  meaning:  Audiences  begin 
to  suspect  that  putatively  desirable  outputs  are  hazards,  that  putatively 
efficacious  procedures  are  tricks,  or that  putatively  genuine  structures  are 
the  initial  task  in mending  a breech  of legitimacy 
facades.  Consequently, 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

598 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

the  organization's 

revelations  may  severely  deplete 

usually  will  be  to  formulate  a  normalizing  account  that  separates 
the 
threatening  revelation  from  larger  assessments 
of  the  organization  as  a 
whole  (cf.  Giacalone  & Rosenfeld,  1989; Marcus  & Goodman,  1991; Scott  & 
Lyman,  1968). At least  four  types  of  accounts  are  possible  (cf.  Ashforth  & 
Gibbs,  1990; Elsbach,  1994; Staw,  McKechnie,  & Puffer,  1983). First,  man- 
agers  may  attempt  to  deny  the  problem,  hoping  to  allay  constituents' 
pragmatic  concerns,  at  least  until  the  organization  can  assemble  a  com- 
pensating  side  payment.  Unfortunately,  unless  such  denials  are  sincere, 
subsequent 
long- 
term  legitimacy  reserves.  Thus,  rather  than  denying  the  problem,  man- 
the  organization's  moral 
agers  may  choose  to  excuse 
responsibility.  Unfortunately,  this  second  tactic,  which  often  amounts  to 
individual  employees  or external  authorities,  also  has  a  double 
blaming 
lack  of managerial  control  (Ash- 
edge,  because 
forth  & Gibbs,  1990; Salancik  & Meindl,  1984; Staw  et  al.,  1983; Sutton  & 
in- 
Callahan,  1987).  To  avoid  this  implication,  managers  may  attempt, 
to  justify  the  disruption,  redefining  means  and  ends  retrospec- 
stead, 
tively,  in  order  to  make  the  disruptive  events  appear  consonant  with  pre- 
if  managers  cannot  devise 
vailing  moral  and  cognitive  beliefs.  Finally, 
an  account  that  eliminates  moral  responsibility, 
they  may  nonetheless 
preserve  a  modicum  of  cognitive 
the 
disruptive  events  in  a  way  that  preserves  an  otherwise  supportive  world- 
is  the  principle  behind  Perrow's  (1984) concept  of 
view.  This,  for example, 
the  discrete  accident. 

it suggests  an  underlying 

simply  by  explaining 

it  by  questioning 

legitimacy 

Beyond  offering  denials,  excuses, 

justifications,  and  explanations, 

organizations  also  may  facilitate  relegitimation 
through  strategic  restruc- 
turing  (Pfeffer,  1981). Although  indiscriminate 
structural  shifts  may  make 
the  organization  appear  unstable  and  unreliable 
(Hannan  & Freeman, 
1984), narrowly  tailored  changes  that  mesh  with  equally  focused  normal- 
izing  accounts  can  serve  as  effective  damage-containment 
techniques: 
Rather  than  straining  audience  credulity  with  a  blanket  exoneration  (of- 
ten  followed  by  a  contradictory  restructuring),  the  organization  can  selec- 
tively  confess  that  limited  aspects  of  its  operations  were  flawed  and  can 
then  act  decisively  and  visibly  to remedy  those  specific  faults  (cf. Perrow, 
1981,  1984). Two  types  of restructuring  play  particularly  large  roles  in  this 
regard.  The  first-creation 
the  orga- 
nization  to  "post  a  bond"  against 
in- 
or  instituting 
viting  government  regulation,  chartering  ombudspersons, 
grievance  procedures  (Pfeffer,  1981). Although  such  bonding  cannot  rees- 
it  symbolizes  contrition  and  may  persuade 
tablish 
that  they  can  safely  resume  pragmatic  exchanges  with 
some  constituents 
the  troubled  organization.  The  second  major  form  of  restructuring 
the 
disassociation-employs 
from  "bad  influences."  Perhaps  the  most  common  form  of 
organization 
is  executive  replacement,  which  invokes  the  symbolism  of 
disassociation 
charismatic  authority  to  signify  a  desire  for change  (Gephart,  1978; Pfef- 

structural  change  to  symbolically  distance 

future  recidivism  by,  for  example, 

of monitors  and  watchdogs-allows 

legitimacy  directly, 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

599 

from  delegitimated 

fer,  1981; Weber,  1978); however,  organizations  also  may  disassociate 
themselves 
structures,  and  even  geo- 
graphic  locales.  Thus,  for example,  when  it  launched 
its  Saturn  project, 
General  Motors  sought  to  regain  legitimacy  by  creating  a  new  division 
with  new  vehicles  and  new  sales  procedures  and  by  locating  this  "differ- 
ent  kind  of  car  company"  not  in  Detroit,  but  in  Spring  Hill,  Tennessee. 

procedures, 

Finally,  managers 

facing  a  legitimacy  crisis  should  avoid  panic.  Al- 
it is  not.  Staw, 
and  Dutton  (1981) argued  that  "precipitous  crises  lead  to  a 
that  severely 
impairs  decision  making  and  pro- 
failure."  Even  though  legitimacy  repair  may  re- 
legitimacy  creation  in  that  both  call  for intense  activity  and  dra- 
legitimacy 

though  this  injunction  (Adams,  1979) may  sound  facetious, 
Sandelands, 
threat-rigidity  response 
motes  [organizational] 
semble 
matic  displays 
repair  also  resembles 
legitimacy  maintenance 
in  that  both  require  a  light  touch  and  a  sensitiv- 
ity  to environmental  reactions.  Delegitimated  organizations 
that  seek  too 
frantically  to  reestablish 
legitimacy  may  dull  the  very  tools  that,  if  used 
with  patience  and  restraint,  might  save  them  (Ashforth  & Gibbs,  1990). 

of  decisiveness, 

Table  1 locates  the  foregoing 

legitimation 
corresponds 

strategies  within  a  3  x  3 
to  the  pragmatic-moral- 

trichotomy,  whereas 

the  horizontal  dimension  corresponds 

to 
trichotomy.  Following  Oliver  (1990), 

matrix.  The  vertical  dimension 
cognitive 
the  acquisition-maintenance-repair 
strategies  within  each  block  are  arrayed  "from conforming  to  resistant, 
from passive  to active,  from preconscious 
to controlling,  from impotent  to 
influential,  and  from habitual  to opportunistic."  Significantly,  within  this 
table, 
legitimacy  mainte- 
nance  and  legitimacy  repair  strategies,  combined.  This  pattern  both  re- 
flects  the  biases  of  the  existing 
the 
need  for further  research. 

literature  and  indicates 

legitimacy  acquisition 

strategies  outnumber 

legitimacy 

Two  Caveats 

in  Closing 

The  preceding  discussion 

identified  a  number  of  risks  that  attend 
specific  legitimation  strategies.  Past  research,  however,  also  suggests  at 
least  two  dangers 
that  attend  legitimacy  management 
in  general.  The 
following  review  is  intended  primarily  to highlight  the  possibility  of dan- 
loops  in  the  dynamics  of  legitimation. 
It offers  no  solu- 
gerous  feedback 
tions,  and  it  almost  certainly 
It merely  sounds  a 
cautionary  note  in  the  hope  of  encouraging 
reflection  and  further  re- 
search. 

is  not  comprehensive. 

The  first  caveat  revolves  around  what  Ashforth  and  Gibbs  (1990: 186) 

identified  as  the  self-promoter's  paradox:  Because  audiences  are  active 
in  the  process  of  meaning  construction  (Ginzel,  Kramer,  & 
participants 
Sutton,  1992; Nielsen  & Rao,  1987), audience 
ally  diverge 
expectations. 
codified  and  consistent 
legitimacy-management 
more  likely  it  is  that  audiences  will  cynically 
as  clues  that  something 

interpretations  may  occasion- 
the  more 
the 
interpret  such  activities 
is  amiss.  Such  skepticism  effectively  removes 

In  particular, 
strategies  become, 

from  organizational 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

600 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

TABLE 1 
Legitimation  Strategies 

Gain 

Maintain 

Repair 

General 

Conform  to  environment 

Perceive  change 

Select  environment 

Protect  accomplishments 
-Police  operations 
-Communicate 
-Stockpile 

subtly 
legitimacy 

Normalize 

Restructure 

Manipulate  environment 

Don't  panic 

Pragmatic 

Conform  to demands 
-Respond 
-Co-opt  constituents 
-Build  reputation 

to  needs 

Monitor  tastes 
-Consult  opinion  leaders 

Deny 

Select  markets 
-Locate  friendly 
audiences 

-Recruit  friendly  co-optees 

Protect  exchanges 
-Police  reliability 
-Communicate  honestly 
-Stockpile 

trust 

Create  monitors 

Advertise 
-Advertise  product 
-Advertise 

image 

Moral 

Conform  to  ideals 
-Produce  proper  outcomes 
-Embed 
-Offer  symbolic  displays 

in  institutions 

Select  domain 
-Define  goals 

Persuade 
-Demonstrate 
-  Proselytize 

success 

Monitor  ethics 
-Consult  professions 

Excuse/Justify 

Protect  propriety 
-Police  responsibility 
-Communicate 

authoritatively 
-Stockpile  esteem 

Disassociate 
-Replace  personnel 
-Revise  practices 
-Reconfigure 

Cognitive 

Conform  to  models 
-Mimic  standards 
-Formalize  operations 
-Professionalize 

operations 

Monitor  outlooks 
-Consult  doubters 

Explain 

Protect  assumptions 
-Police  simplicity 
-Speak  matter-of-factly 
-Stockpile 

interconnections 

Select  labels 
-Seek  certification 

Institutionalize 
-  Persist 
-Popularize  new  models 
-Standardize  new  models 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

601 

certain  strategies 
of  individual 
tory  of  society  as  a  whole. 

legitimacy 

from  the  legitimation  arsenal, 

seekers  and  impoverishing 

impeding  the  flexibility 
the  symbolic  reper- 

legitimation 

enough.  Specifically, 

emulation  of  ineffectual 

this  process  proves  unproblematic  or even  beneficial, 

A  similar  impoverishment  also  forms  the  basis  for a  second  caveat, 
which  might  be  termed  the  sector-leader's  paradox.  In this  scenario,  dif- 
is  too successful,  rather  than  because 
ficulties  arise  because 
efforts  to  legitimate  a  sector- 
it  is  not  successful 
(particularly  a  government  agency)  may  inadver- 
leading  organization 
tently  remake  the  entire  sector  in  the  leader's  image  (cf. Jepperson,  1991). 
for ex- 
Sometimes, 
ample,  when  sector  members  streamline  and  coordinate  their  routine  in- 
lead- 
teractions  (Powell,  1991; Suchman,  1993). At  other  times,  however, 
ership  may  foster  far  less  desirable  forms  of  uniformity,  such  as  faddish 
(Kim- 
mimicry  and  the  indiscriminate 
berly,  1981; Neilsen  & Rao,  1987; Nystrom  & Starbuck,  1984). Further,  sector 
leaders  often  find  themselves  caught  between,  on  the  one  hand,  wishing 
in  order  to  establish  moral  and  cognitive  he- 
to  encourage 
gemony,  and,  on the  other  hand,  wishing  to restrain  isomorphism  in order 
(Aldrich  & Fiol,  1994). 
to  monopolize  competitive 

(pragmatic)  advantages 
At  the  extreme,  sector  leadership  occasionally  produces  outcomes 
that  benefit  neither  the  leader,  the  followers,  the  sector,  nor the  society  as 
the  in- 
a  whole.  Thus,  for  example,  Suchman  and  Eyre  (1992) examined 
that  the  sector-defining  high- 
ternational  military  order  and  concluded 
tech  mythology  of  the  superpowers  has  driven  a  massive  mimetic  prolif- 
eration  of ever-more-deadly  weapons  to third-world  countries  that  neither 
need  such  armaments  nor possess  the  political  structures  to control  them. 
Another  particularly  significant  example  of  a  leadership  effect  that  ulti- 
mately  benefits  no  one  is  the  isomorphic  rigidification  of  highly  institu- 
tionalized  orders: 

isomorphism 

facades 

To the  extent  that  centralization  of power and  resources  re- 
sults  in increasing  homogenization of structural forms within 
an  organizational  sector (see  DiMaggio & Powell,  1983), then 
one must be concerned with the loss  of this diversity. As Han- 
nan  and  Freeman  (1989: 7) point  out,  such  a  reduction may 
diminish  "the capacity  of  a  society  to  respond  to  uncertain 
future changes."  (Scott & Meyer, 1991: 140) 

This  loss  of  diversity  may  prove  particularly  regrettable 
dustries  and  in  "social  problem"  sectors,  where  the  "best"  technologies 
are  often  only  barely  adequate. 

in  emerging 

in- 

IV. CONCLUSION 

This  article  has  attempted  to bring  some  coherence  to a  literature  on 

organizational 
strategic  and  institutional;  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cognitive; 

that  is,  in  reality,  several  distinct  literatures- 

legitimacy 

legitimacy 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

602 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

building,  legitimacy  maintaining,  and  legitimacy  repairing.  The reformu- 
introduced  here  suggests  a  number  of  di- 
lated  conception  of  legitimacy 
rections  for future  research.  First,  and  most  simply,  it highlights  the  need 
for explicit  scholarly  attention  to the  existence  of  many  distinct  legitima- 
tion  dynamics.  Researchers  who  study  legitimacy  either  should  address 
identify  which  as- 
the  full  range  of  the  phenomenon  or  should  clearly 
morality,  or  cognition;  acquisi- 
pect(s)  they  have  in  mind-pragmatism, 
tion,  maintenance,  or repair.  Such  care  might  go  a long  way  toward  quell- 
in 
ing  unproductive  debates  over  the  operationalization 
the  typologies 
specific  studies.  Further,  beyond  clarifying  terminology, 
lines  along 
introduced 
which  both  the  sources  and  the  effects  of legitimacy  may  diverge.  Though 
little  systematic  evidence  comparing  the 
researchers  currently  possess 
effects  of organizational  activities  on multiple  types  of legitimacy,  or com- 
paring  the  effects  of  multiple  types  of  legitimacy  on  organizational  out- 
is  hardly  homoge- 
comes,  the  preceding  pages  suggest  that  legitimation 
neous  and  that,  in  fact,  the  different  facets  of  legitimacy  are  not  always 
fully  compatible. 

in  this  article  also  suggest 

important  dividing 

of  legitimacy 

to  private  organizations, 

from  public  organizations 

that  selective  affinities  might  exist  among  legitimacies 

Future  research  must  explore  both  the  conflicts  and  the  synergies 
among  various  legitimation  dynamics.  Thus,  for  example,  Part  II of  this 
article  suggests 
and/or  similar  temporal  tex- 
with  similar  structural  foci  (actions-essences) 
tures  (episodic-continual);  despite  such  speculations,  however,  theorists 
currently  know  little  about  how  legitimacy  differs  from  one  industry  to 
from  new 
another, 
life 
sectors  to  old  sectors,  or  from  the  beginning  of  the  organizational 
imagine  constructing  indicators 
cycle  to the  end.  One  could,  nonetheless, 
(based,  perhaps,  on  audience/constituent 
of  different  types  of  legitimacy 
surveys)  and  then  employing  those  indicators  to ascertain  the  legitimacy 
profiles  of  specific  organizations,  professions, 
Elsbach,  1994). In this  way,  researchers  could  examine  (a) the  incidence 
of particular  legitimacy  profiles  across  social  locations,  (b) the  dynamics 
of profile  patterns  over  time,  (c) the  relationship  between  profiles  at,  say, 
the  organizational  and  the  industrial  levels,  and  (d) the  impact  of specific 
profiles  on  short-run  performance  and  long-run  mortality.  In addition,  by 
inves- 
exploring  the  empirical  correlates  of  assorted  legitimacy  profiles, 
tigators  could  test  whether  indirect  measures  of legitimacy,  such  as  pop- 
ulation  density  (Hannan  & Carroll,  1992; Hannan  & Freeman,  1989), can 
provide  valid  proxies  in  settings 
(cf. 
Zucker,  1989). 

in  which  direct  data  are  unavailable 

industries,  or  sectors  (cf. 

The  understanding  of  legitimacy  also  might  benefit  greatly  from em- 

pirical  research  on  the  use  and  effectiveness 
management 
cause  we 
techniques,  we  currently  can  say  very  little  about  the  nature  (or even  the 
existence)  of  "typical"  legitimation  progressions.  Do  organizations  em- 

locations  and  through  time.  Be- 
the  full  range  of  legitimation 

strategies  across  social 
that  address 

lack  studies 

legitimacy- 

of  various 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

603 

histories 

in  relatively 

fixed  sequences? 

legitimacy-management 

from  press  accounts  or  from 

ploy  limited  repertoires  of  techniques 
Does  the  sequencing  of  legitimation  efforts  affect  the  ultimate  success  of 
a  legitimation  project?  Can  certain  legitimation  progressions  become  in- 
laden?  All  of  these  questions  remain  unan- 
stitutionalized  and  meaning 
swered,  yet  all  merit  close  empirical  attention.  One  could,  for example, 
extract 
interviews  and  then  subject  these  histories  to  qualitative 
key-informant 
(Polkinghorne,  1988) or to  quantitative  sequence 
narrative  interpretation 
(Abbott,  1990). One  could  also  study  the  impact  that  particular 
analysis 
strategies  and  progressions  have  on  the  legiti- 
legitimacy-management 
macy  profiles  described  previously,  using  either  naturalistic  field  obser- 
vations  or  experimental 

(Elsbach,  1994). 
the  preceding  pages  hy- 
Beyond  such  general  exploratory  questions, 
that  all  merit  future 
pothesize  a  number  of  more  specific  relationships 
empirical  attention.  These  include  (a)  the  aforementioned  affinities  be- 
tween  corresponding  cells  in the  pragmatic,  moral,  and  cognitive  areas  of 
instrumental  and  sociotropic 
Figure  1; (b) the  predicted  tensions  between 
in 
effects,  and  between  discursive  and  nondiscursive  effects  in  situations 
which  multiple  legitimation  dynamics  collide;  and  (c) the  suggested  cor- 
strategies  and 
respondences  between 
of  legitimacy  creation,  maintenance,  and  repair.  In 
specific  challenges 
introduced 
addition,  researchers  might  profitably  conjoin  the  typologies 
above  with  other  characterizations  of  organizational  environments  else- 
in  order  to  predict  which  conditions  bring  which 
where  in  the  literature, 
legitimation  dynamics  to  the  fore. 

interventions  and  vignettes 

legitimacy-management 

specific 

Consider, 

legitimacy.  This  observation 

for  example,  Scott  and  Meyer's  (1991) four-fold  typology, 
societal  sectors  according  to  the  strength  of  both 
which  cross-classifies 
is 
technical  and  institutional  pressures:  Noting  that  a  strong  environment 
the  same  as  a  hostile  environment,  these  authors  argued 
not  necessarily 
constraints  offer  criteria,  not  impedi- 
that  technical  and  institutional 
implies  a  pattern 
ments,  for organizational 
of  differential  affinities  between  specific  environment  types  and  specific 
favor  organiza- 
legitimation  dynamics.  In brief,  technical  considerations 
tions  (such  as  commodity  manufacturers  and  emergency  response  teams) 
that  "get  the  job  done"  or that  "do what  it takes,"  even  if such  proficiency 
the  stronger  the  technical 
requires  cutting  a  few  corners.  Consequently, 
legitimacy  of  all  kinds 
the  greater  the  need  for  pragmatic 
environment, 
and  procedures.  Insti- 
and  for  moral  legitimacy  based  on  consequences 
(such  as  schools, 
tutional  considerations, 
churches,  and  courts)  that  "make  sense"  and  that  "play  by the  rules,"  even 
if  such  conformity  reduces  the  immediate  payoff  to  constituents.  There- 
the  greater  the  need  for 
fore,  the  stronger  the  institutional  environment, 
legitimacy  of  all  kinds  and  for moral  legitimacy  based  on  pro- 
cognitive 
cedures  and  structures.  In  some  sectors  (such  as  banking  and  health 
simulta- 
care),  both  technical 
their  public-spirited 
neously, 

in  contrast,  favor  organizations 

requiring  organizations 

to  emphasize 

institutional 

constraints 

operate 

and 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

604 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

collaborate 

friction  between  achieving 

in  order  to  lubricate  the  in- 

dispositions  and  their  relative  permanence, 
evitable 
specific  objectives  and  following 
general  rules.  Such  sectors  often  develop  relatively  high  levels  of  macro- 
to  channel  competition 
structure,  as  member  organizations 
and  to  protect  the  legitimacy  of  the  sector  as  a  whole.  Finally,  certain 
sectors  (such  as  fitness  training,  day  care,  and  grass-roots  politics)  pos- 
sess  neither  technical  nor institutional  structure.  In these  cases,  outcomes 
are  too  poorly  defined  to  permit  truly  satisfying  exchanges,  control  is  too 
uncertain  to  allow  assessments 
is 
to generate  principles  of good  practice  or proper  structure, 
too  ambiguous 
and  behavioral  patterns  are  too  fleeting  to  support  clear  cognitive  mod- 
els.  In  such  settings,  organizations  usually  rely  on  the  most  superficial 
forms  of pragmatic  and  cognitive  legitimation 
locations, 
fortifying  these  with  heavy  doses  of  personal  cha- 
frequent  newsletters), 
risma. 

of  influence  and  disposition,  causality 

(e.g.,  convenient 

Scott  and  Meyer's  typology 

is  only  one  of  many  that  have  potential 

relevance.  Others  can  be  found  in  the  works  of  Emery  and  Trist  (1965), 
Thompson  (1967), Doeringer  and  Piore  (1971), Jurkovitch  (1974), Lammers 
and  Hickson  (1979), Oliver  (1991), and  Aldrich  and  Fiol  (1994), to name  but 
a  few.  In each  case,  researchers  might  productively  ask  whether  partic- 
to  particular 
ular  environmental 
types  of  legitimacy  or  distinctively  conducive  to  particular  legitimation 
strategies.  The  typologies  and  analyses  outlined  previously  should  prove 
helpful  in  the  framing  of  such  questions. 

conditions  are  distinctively  congenial 

is  not  the  unitary  phenomenon 

it to be.  However,  researchers  also  have  come  far enough  to 

Clearly,  this  article  constitutes  only  one  step  in  a  long  journey.  After 
that 
that  many  previous  investiga- 

several  decades,  researchers  have  come  far  enough  to  understand 
legitimacy 
tors  assumed 
is  more  than  merely  an  artificial  hodgepodge 
understand  that  legitimacy 
foci,  the  multiple 
of  unrelated  concepts. 
literatures  display  remarkable  consistency,  and  their  asser- 
legitimacy 
In a  discipline  dominated  by  theoretical 
tions,  remarkable  compatibility. 
traditions  that  disagree  even  when  they  focus  on  a  single  phenomenon, 
is  reassuring, 
such  unexpected  congruence 

Indeed,  given  their  disparate 

to  say  the  least. 

REFERENCES 

Abbott,  A.  1981. Status  and  status  strain  in  the  professions.  American  Journal  of Sociology, 

86: 819-833. 

Abbott,  A.  1990. Measuring  resemblance 

in  sequence  data:  An optimal  matching  analysis  of 

musicians'  careers.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,  96:  144-185. 

Adams,  D.  1979. The  hitchhiker's  guide  to  the  galaxy.  New  York: Pocket  Books. 

Aldrich,  H.  E.,  & Fiol,  C.  M.  1994.  Fools  rush  in?  The  institutional  context  of  industry  cre- 

ation.  Academy  of Management  Review,  19: 645-670. 

Arrow,  K. J.  1974. The  limits  of  organization.  New  York: Norton. 

Arthur,  B.  1990. Positive  feedbacks 

in  the  economy.  Scientific  American,  262(2): 92-99. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

605 

Ashforth,  B. E.,  &  Fried,  Y.  1988.  The  mindlessness 

of  organizational  behaviors.  Human 

Relations,  41: 305-329. 

Ashforth,  B.  E.,  & Gibbs,  B.  W.  1990. The  double-edge  of organizational 

legitimation.  Orga- 

nization  Science,  1: 177-194. 

Baron,  J. P.,  Dobbin,  F.,  & Jennings,  P.  D.  1986. War  and  peace:  The  evolution  of  modern 
in  U.S.  industry.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,  92: 250-283. 

personnel  administration 

Berger,  P.  L.,  Berger,  B.,  & Kellner,  H.  1973.  The  homeless  mind:  Modernization  and  con- 

sciousness.  New  York: Random  House. 

Bernstein,  L.  1992.  Opting  out  of  the  legal  system:  Extralegal  contractual  relations 

in  the 

diamond  industry.  Journal  of  Legal  Studies,  21: 115-157. 

Boulding,  K. E.  1956. General  systems  theory:  The skeleton  of science.  Management  Science, 

2:  197-208. 

Carroll,  A.  B.  1979. A three-dimensional 

conceptual  model  of corporate  social  performance. 

Academy  of  Management  Review,  4: 497-505. 

Clark,  B.  R.  1956. Adult  education 

in  transition.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

Coleman,  J. S.  1974. Power  and  the  structure  of  society.  New  York: Norton. 

Cyert,  R.  M.,  & March,  J. G.  1963. A  behavioral 

theory  of  the  firm.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 

Prentice  Hall. 

David,  P.  1986.  Understanding 

the  economics  of  QWERTY: The  necessity  of  history.  In W. 
Parker  (Ed.),  Economic  history  and  the  modern  economist:  30-49.  London:  Basil  Black- 
well. 

DiMaggio,  P.  J. 1988. Interest  and  agency  in  institutional  theory.  In L. G.  Zucker (Ed.), Insti- 

tutional  patterns  and  organizations:  3-22.  Cambridge,  MA: Ballinger. 

DiMaggio,  P.  J. 1991. Constructing  an  organizational 

field  as  a  professional  project:  U.S.  art 

museums,  1920-1940.  In W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
in  organizational  analysis:  267-292.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

DiMaggio,  P.  J.,  & Powell,  W.  W.  1983.  The  iron  cage  revisited:  Institutional 
in  organizational 

fields.  American  Sociological  Review,  48: 

isomorphism 

and  collective  rationality 
147-160. 

DiMaggio,  P.  J., & Powell,  W.  W.  1991. Introduction.  In W.  W. Powell  & P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.), 
in  organizational  analysis:  1-38.  Chicago:  University  of  Chi- 

The  new  institutionalism 
cago  Press. 

Doeringer,  P.  B.,  & Piore,  M. J.  1971. Internal  labor  markets  and  manpower  analysis.  Lex- 

ington,  MA: Heath. 

Dowling,  J., & Pfeffer,  J. 1975. Organizational 

legitimacy:  Social  values  and  organizational 

behavior.  Pacific  Sociological  Review,  18: 122-136. 

Elsbach,  K. D.  1994. Managing  organizational 

The  construction  and  effectiveness 
terly,  39: 57-88. 

legitimacy 

in  the  California  cattle  industry: 
of  verbal  accounts.  Administrative  Science  Quar- 

Elsbach,  K. D.,  & Sutton,  R.  I. 1992. Acquiring  organizational 

legitimacy  through  illegitimate 

actions:  A marriage  of  institutional  and  impression  management 
Management  Journal,  35: 699-738. 

theories.  Academy  of 

Emerson,  R.  M.  1962.  Power-dependence 

relations.  American  Sociological  Review,  27: 31- 

40. 

Emery,  F.  E.,  & Trist,  E.  L.  1965. The  causal  texture  of organizational  environments.  Human 

Relations,  18: 21-32. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

606 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

Festinger,  L.  1957. A  theory  of  cognitive  dissonance.  Evanston,  IL: Row,  Peterson. 

Freeman,  J. H.,  Carroll,  G.  R.,  & Hannan,  M.  T.  1983. The  liability  of  newness:  Age  depen- 
dence  in  organizational  death  rates.  American  Sociological  Review,  48: 692-710. 

Friedland,  R.,  & Alford,  R. R.  1991.  Bringing  society  back  in:  Symbols,  practices  and  insti- 
In W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutional- 

tutional  contradictions. 
ism  in  organizational  analysis:  232-267.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Galaskiewicz, 
304. 

J.  1985.  Interorganizational 

relations.  Annual  Review  of  Sociology,  11: 281- 

Gamson,  W.  A.,  &  Modigliani,  A.  1989.  Media  discourse  and  public  opinion  on  nuclear 

power:  A constructionist  approach.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,  95:  1-37. 

Geertz,  C.  1973. The  interpretation  of  cultures.  New  York: Basic  Books. 

Gephart,  R.  P.  1978.  Status  degradation  and  organizational 

succession:  An  ethnomethod- 

ological  approach.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  23: 553-581. 

Giacalone,  R. A.,  & Rosenfeld,  P.  1989. Impression  management 

in  the  organization.  Hills- 

dale,  NJ: Erlbaum. 

Ginzel,  L. E., Kramer,  R.  M., & Sutton,  R.  I. 1992. Organizational 

impression  management  as 
a  reciprocal 
In 
L. L. Cummings  & B.  M. Staw  (Eds.),  Research  in  organizational  behavior,  vol.  14: 227- 
266.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

influence  process:  The  neglected  role  of  the  organizational  audience. 

Goffman,  E.  1967. Interaction  ritual:  Essays  on  face-to-face  behavior.  Garden  City,  NY: Dou- 

bleday/Anchor. 

Hambrick,  D.  C.,  & D'Aveni,  R. A.  1988. Large  corporate  failures  as  downward  spirals.  Ad- 

ministrative  Science  Quarterly,  33: 1-23. 

Hannan,  M.  T.  1986. Uncertainty,  diversity  and  organizational  change.  In  N.  Smelser  & D. 
Gerstein  (Eds.),  Behavioral  and  social  sciences:  Fifty  years  of  discovery:  73-94.  Wash- 
ington,  DC: National  Academy  Press. 

Hannan,  M.  T.,  &  Carroll,  G.  R.  1992.  Dynamics  of  organizational  populations:  Density, 

legitimation  and  competition.  New  York: Oxford  University  Press. 

Hannan,  M.  T.,  & Freeman,  J. H.  1984. Structural  inertia  and  organizational  change.  Amer- 

ican  Sociological  Review,  49:  149-164. 

Hannan,  M.  T.,  & Freeman,  J. H.  1989.  Organizational  ecology.  Cambridge,  MA: Harvard 

University  Press. 

Hinings,  R.,  & Greenwood,  R.  1988.  The  normative  prescription  of  organizations. 

In  L. G. 
Zucker (Ed.), Institutional  patterns  and  organizations:  53-70.  Cambridge,  MA: Ballinger. 

Horowitz,  M.  J.  1986. Santa  Clara  revisited:  The  development  of  corporate  theory.  West  Vir- 

ginia  Law  Review,  88:  173-224. 

Jepperson,  R.  L.  1991. Institutions, 

institutional  effects,  and  institutionalism. 

In W.  W.  Pow- 
in organizational  analysis:  143-163. 

ell  & P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Jurkovich,  R.  1974. A core  typology  of  organizational  environments.  Administrative  Science 

Quarterly,  19: 380-394. 

Kimberly,  J. R.  1981. Managerial 

innovation.  In P.  C. Nystrom  & W.  H. Starbuck  (Eds.),  Hand- 

book  of  organizational  design:  84-104.  New  York: Oxford  University  Press. 

Lammers,  C.  J.,  & Hickson,  D.  J.  1979. A  cross-national  and  cross-institutional 

typology  of 
In C.  J. Lammers  & D.  J. Hickson  (Eds.),  Organizations  alike  and  unlike: 
studies  in  the  sociology  of  organizations:  420-434. 

organizations. 
International  and  interinstitutional 
London:  Routledge  & Kegan  Paul. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

607 

Levitt,  B.,  & March,  J. G.  1988.  Organizational 

learning.  Annual  Review  of  Sociology,  14: 

319-340. 

March,  J. G.,  & Simon,  H.  A.  1958. Organizations.  New  York: Wiley. 

Marcus,  A.  A.,  & Goodman,  R.  S.  1991. Victims  and  shareholders:  The  dilemmas  of present- 
ing  corporate  policy  during  a  crisis.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  34: 281-305. 

Marx,  K.  1978. Capital,  volume  one.  In R.  C.  Tucker  (Ed.), The Marx-Engels  reader  (2nd ed.): 

294-438.  New  York: Norton. 

Maurer,  J. G.  1971. Readings 

in  organizational 

theory:  Open  system  approaches.  New  York: 

Random  House. 

Messinger,  S.  L.  1955.  Organizational 

transformation:  A  case  study  of  a  declining 

social 

movement.  American  Sociological  Review,  20: 3-  10. 

Meyer,  J. W.  1977. The  effects  of education  as  an  institution.  American  Journal  of Sociology, 

83: 55-77. 

Meyer,  J. W.,  & Rowan,  B.  1991.  Institutionalized  organizations:  Formal  structure  as  myth 
and  ceremony.  In  W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J.  DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The  new  institutionalism 
in 
organizational  analysis:  41-62.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Meyer,  J. W.,  & Scott,  W.  R.  (Eds.).  1983a.  Organizational  environments:  Ritual  and  ratio- 

nality.  Beverly  Hills,  CA: Sage. 

Meyer,  J. W.,  &  Scott,  W.  R.  1983b.  Centralization  and  the  legitimacy  problems  of  local 
In  J. W.  Meyer  & W.  R.  Scott  (Eds.),  Organizational  environments:  Ritual 

government. 
and  rationality:  199-215.  Beverly  Hills,  CA: Sage. 

Meyer,  M.,  Stevenson,  W.,  & Webster,  S.  1985. Limits  to bureaucratic  growth.  Berlin:  Walter 

de  Gruyter. 

Mezias,  S.  J.  1990. An  institutional  model  of  organizational  practice:  Financial  reporting  at 

the  Fortune  200.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  35: 431-457. 

Miles,  R.  H.  1982. Coffin  nails  and  corporate  strategies.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice  Hall. 

Mills,  C.  W.  1940. Situated  actions  and  vocabularies  of  motive.  American  Sociological  Re- 

view,  5: 904-913. 

Mitroff,  I.,  & Kilmann,  R.  H.  1984.  Corporate  tragedies:  Product  tampering,  sabotage,  and 

other  catastrophes.  New  York: Praeger. 

Nauta,  R.  1988.  Task  performance  and  attributional  biases 

in  the  ministry.  Journal  for  the 

Scientific  Study  of  Religion,  27: 609-620. 

Neilsen,  E.  H.,  & Rao,  M.  V.  H.  1987.  The  strategy-legitimacy 

nexus:  A  thick  description. 

Academy  of  Management  Review,  12: 523-533. 

Nystrom,  P.  C.,  & Starbuck,  W.  H.  1984. Organizational 

facades.  Academy  of  Management 

Proceedings:  182-184. 

Oliver,  C.  1991.  Strategic  responses 

to  institutional  processes.  Academy  of  Management 

Review,  16: 145-179. 

Olson,  M.  1965. The  logic  of  collective  action.  Cambridge,  MA: Harvard  University  Press. 

Parsons,  T.  1960. Structure  and  process  in  modern  societies.  Glencoe,  IL: Free  Press. 

Perrow,  C.  1970. Organizational  analysis:  A  sociological  view.  Belmont,  CA: Wadsworth. 

Perrow,  C.  1981. Normal  accident  at  Three  Mile  Island.  Society,  18: 17-26. 

Perrow,  C.  1984.  Normal  accidents:  Living  with  high-risk  technologies.  New  York:  Basic 

Books. 

Pfeffer,  J.  1981. Management  as  symbolic  action:  The  creation  and  maintenance  of  organi- 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

608 

Academy  of Management  Review 

July 

zational  paradigms.  In L. L. Cummings  & B.  M. Staw  (Eds.),  Research  in  organizational 
behavior,  vol.  13: 1-52.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

Pfeffer,  J., & Salancik,  G.  1978. The external  control  of organizations:  A resource  dependence 

perspective.  New  York: Harper  & Row. 

Polkinghorne,  D.  1988. Narrative  knowing  and  the  human  sciences.  Albany:  State  University 

of  New  York Press. 

Powell,  W.  W.  1991. Expanding  the  scope  of  institutional  analysis. 

In W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J. 
in  organizational  analysis:  183-203.  Chicago: 

DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Powell,  W.  W.,  & DiMaggio,  P.  J. (Eds.).  1991.  The  new  institutionalism 

in  organizational 

analysis.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Reed,  T.  L.  1978.  Organizational 

change 

in  the  American  foreign  service,  1925-1965:  The 

utility  of  cohort  analysis.  American  Sociological  Review,  43: 404-421. 

Roberts,  K.  1990. Some  characteristics  of  one  type  of  high-reliability  organization.  Organi- 

zation  Science,  1: 60-176. 

Rogers,  E.  M.,  & Larson,  J. K.  1984. Silicon  Valley  fever:  Growth  of high-technology  culture. 

New  York: Basic  Books. 

Rothschild-Whitt,  J.  1979.  The  collectivist  organization:  An  alternative 

to  rational  bureau- 

cratic  models.  American  Sociological  Review,  44: 509-527. 

Salancik,  G.  R.,  & Meindl,  J. R.  1984.  Corporate  attributions  as  strategic 
agement  control.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  29: 238-254. 

illusions  of  man- 

Scheid-Cook,  T.  L.  1992. Organizational  enactments  and  conformity  to  environmental  pre- 

scriptions.  Human  Relations,  45: 537-554. 

Scott,  M.  B.,  & Lyman,  S.  M.  1968. Accounts.  American  Sociological  Review,  33: 46-62. 

Scott,  W.  R.  1977. Effectiveness  of organizational  effectiveness 

(Eds.),  New  perspectives  on  organizational 

studies.  In P.  S.  Goodman  & 
effectiveness:  63-95.  San 

J. M.  Pennings 
Francisco:  Jossey-Bass. 

Scott,  W.  R.  1987. Organizations:  Rational,  natural  and  open  systems  (2nd  ed.).  Englewood 

Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice  Hall. 

Scott,  W.  R.  1991.  Unpacking 

(Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
of  Chicago  Press. 

institutional  arguments.  In  W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J.  DiMaggio 
in organizational  analysis:  164-182.  Chicago:  University 

Scott,  W.  R.  1992.  Organizations:  Rational,  natural  and  open  systems  (3rd ed.).  Englewood 

Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice  Hall. 

Scott,  W.  R.,  & Meyer,  J. W.  1991. The  organization  of  societal  sectors.  In W.  W.  Powell  & 
in organizational  analysis:  108-140.  Chi- 

P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
cago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Selznick,  P.  1949. TVA and  the  grass  roots.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

Singh,  J. V.,  Tucker,  D.  J., & Meinhard,  A.  G.  1991. Institutional  change  and  ecological  dy- 
in  organiza- 

namics.  In W.  W.  Powell  & P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
tional  analysis:  390-422.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Staw,  B.  M.,  McKechnie,  P.  I.,  & Puffer,  S.  M.  1983. The  justification  of  organizational  per- 

formance.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  28: 582-600. 

Staw,  B.  M.,  Sandelands,  L. E.,  & Dutton,  J. E.  1981. Threat-rigidity  effects  in  organizational 
behavior:  A multilevel  analysis.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  26: 501-524. 

Stinchcombe,  A.  L.  1965. Social  structure  and  organizations. 
of  organizations:  142-193.  Chicago:  Rand-McNally. 

In J. G.  March  (Ed.), Handbook 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995 

Suchman 

609 

Suchman,  M.  C.  1988. Constructing  an  institutional  ecology:  Notes  on  the  structural  dynam- 
ics  of organizational  communities.  Paper  presented  at  the  annual  meeting  of the  Amer- 
ican  Sociological  Association,  Atlanta,  GA. 

Suchman,  M.  C.  1993.  On  the  role  of  law  firms  in  the  structuration  of  Silicon  Valley.  Paper 

presented  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Law  and  Society  Association,  Chicago. 

Suchman,  M.  C.  1994.  On  advice  of  counsel:  Law  firms  and  venture  capital  funds  as  infor- 
in  the  structuration  of  Silicon  Valley.  Unpublished  doctoral  dis- 

mation  intermediaries 
sertation,  Stanford  University,  Stanford,  CA. 

Suchman,  M.  C.,  & Eyre,  D.  P.  1992.  Military  procurement  as  rational  myth:  Notes  on  the 

social  construction  of  weapons  proliferation.  Sociological  Forum,  7:  137-161. 

Sutton,  R.  I.,  &  Callahan,  A.  L.  1987.  The  stigma  of  bankruptcy:  Spoiled  organizational 

image  and  its  management.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  30: 405-436. 

Swidler,  A.  1986. Culture  in  action:  Symbols  and  strategies.  American  Sociological  Review, 

51: 273-286. 

Terreberry,  S.  1968. The  evolution  of  organizational  environments.  Administrative  Science 

Quarterly,  12: 590-613. 

Thompson,  J. D.  1967. Organizations 

in  action.  New  York: McGraw-Hill. 

Tolbert,  P.  S..  & Zucker,  L. G.  1983. Institutional  sources  of change  in  the  formal  structure  of 
organizations:  The  diffusion  of  civil  service  reform,  1880-1935.  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly,  28: 22-39. 

Tushman,  M.  L.,  & Anderson,  P.  1986. Technological  discontinuities  and  organizational  en- 

vironments.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  31: 439-465. 

Tushman,  M.  L., & Rosenkopf.  L.  1992. On  the  organizational  determinants  of  technological 

evolution.  In  B. M.  Staw  & L. L.  Cum- 
change:  Towards  a  sociology  of  technological 
mings  (Eds.),  Research  in  organizational  behavior,  vol.  14: 311-347.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI 
Press. 

Tuzzolino,  F.,  & Armandi,  B. R.  1981.  A  need  hierarchy  for  assessing 

corporate  social  re- 

sponsibility.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  6: 21-28. 

Van  de  Ven,  A.  H..  & Garud,  R.  1989. A framework  for understanding 
(Ed.).  Research  on  technological 

industries.  In  R.  S.  Rosenbloom 
ment  and  policy,  vol.  4:  185-225.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

the  emergence  of  new 
innovation,  manage- 

Wartick,  S.  L..  & Cochran,  P.  L.  1985.  The  evolution  of  the  corporate  social  performance 

model.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  10: 758-769. 

Weber.  M.  1978. Economy  and  society.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press. 

Weick,  K. E.  1969. The  social  psychology  of  organizing.  Reading,  MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Wood,  D.  J. 1991. Corporate  social  performance  revisited.  Academy  of Management  Review, 

16: 691-718. 

Wuthnow,  R.,  Hunter,  J. D..  Bergesen.  A..  & Kurzweil,  E.  1984.  Cultural  analysis.  Boston: 

Routledge  & Kegan  Paul. 

Zald,  M.  N..  & Denton,  P.  1963. From  evangelism 

to  general  service:  The  transformation  of 

the  YMCA. Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  8: 214-234. 

Zenisek,  T. J. 1979. Corporate  social  responsibility:  A conceptualization  based  on  organiza- 

tional  literature.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  4: 359-368. 

Zucker,  L. G.  1983. Organizations  as  institutions.  In S.  B.  Bacharach  (Ed.),  Research  in  the 

sociology  of  organizations:  1-42.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

Zucker,  L. G.  1986.  Production  of  trust:  Institutional  sources  of  economic  structure,  1840- 

1920. Research  in  Organizational  Behavior,  8: 53-111. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

610 

Academy  of  Management  Review 

July 

Zucker,  L. G.  1987. Institutional  theories  of  organizations.  Annual  Review  of  Sociology,  13: 

443-644. 

Zucker,  L. G.  1988. Where  do  institutional  patterns  come  from?  Organizations  as  actors  in 
In  L. G.  Zucker  (Ed.),  Institutional  patterns  and  organizations:  23-52. 

social  systems. 
Cambridge,  MA: Ballinger. 

Zucker,  L. G.  1989. Combining 

institutional 

theory  and  population  ecology:  No  legitimacy, 

no  history.  American  Sociological  Review,  54: 542-545. 

Zucker,  L. G.  1991. The  role  of institutionalization 

P.  J. DiMaggio  (Eds.),  The new  institutionalism 
cago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 

in cultural  persistence.  In W.  W.  Powell  & 
in  organizational  analysis:  83-107.  Chi- 

Mark  C.  Suchman  holds  a  Ph.D.  in  sociology 
from  Stanford  University  and  a  J.D. 
from Yale  Law School.  He is  an  assistant  professor  of sociology  and  law  (by courtesy) 
at  the  University  of  Wisconsin-Madison.  His  current  research  examines 
the  role  of 
law  firms  and  venture  capital  funds  in  the  structuration  of  Silicon  Valley. 

This content downloaded from 134.153.184.170 on Tue, 12 Nov 2013 13:57:54 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions