Article

Creating ‘value’ beyond the
point of production: branding,
financialization and market
capitalization

Organization
17(5) 517–542
© The Author(s) 2010
Reprints and permission: sagepub.
co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1350508410374194
http://org.sagepub.com

Hugh Willmott

Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Abstract
The contemporary significance of branding as a source of value is explored by situating the
creation and valorization of brand equity within ‘the full circuit of capital’. Conceived as a form
of co-production occurring in the sphere of circulation (as well as production), brand-building is
connected to: the surpluses generated by the labour of user-consumers as well as the designers
and producers of branded products and services; the realization of surplus through control of
revenues derived from sales of these products and services and the appropriation of surpluses,
including the conversion of brand equity into brand value after deduction of costs. Contemporary
investment in branding is related to the financialization of brands as intangibles that make a growing
contribution to market capitalization. By attending to multiple facets of the circuit of capital,
including the co-production brand equity by user-consumers, some pointers are proposed for
developing a more ‘joined-up’ view of the ‘bigger picture’ of contemporary capitalist reproduction.
Keywords
brand equity, co-production, ethical surplus, financialization, full circuit of capital, intangibles,
Samsung, social networking, valorization
… brand owning companies can earn huge returns on their capital and grow faster, unencumbered by
factories and masses of manual workers. Those are the things that the stock market rewards with high
price/earnings ratios. (Akasia, 2000: 30)

What is value and how is it created? Claims about ‘value’, and assessments of these claims, tend
to be presented, debated and justified in relation to what is taken to be their capture of some, or
all, of its essence.1 The position advanced here, in contrast, doubts that ‘value’ has any essential
Corresponding author:
H. Willmott, Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Aberconway Building, Colum Drive, Cardiff CF10 3EU, UK.
Email: willmotth@cardiff.ac.uk

518		

Organization 17(5)

meaning. Propositions about value are interpreted as articulations of ethico-political complexes
(see below), and not as more or less adequate representations of what value ‘really is’. The present
analysis offers a political cultural economy of the value created by branding.
It is its lack of any essential meaning which enables the concept of ‘value’ to accommodate
many, diverse meanings. Within the discursive terrain of economic life, there are multiple values
which include use (or functional) value, exchange or market value, and symbolic or sign value.
This plurality does not imply that ‘value’ is too ill-defined or vacuous to be intelligible or significant.
To the contrary, value is a flexible and capacious signifier that becomes filled with diverse
meanings that extend to ‘aesthetic value’, ‘ethical value’, and so on.
Competing senses of ‘value’ are inspired and supported within particular ethico-political
complexes. For example, the complex of feudalism is distinguished by institutionalized deference to local lords, and ultimately to a ruler embodying divine right; and the complex of capitalism is distinguished by its institutionalized celebration of the private accumulation of wealth
through harnessing freely traded labour. Each complex lends plausibility and virtue to particular
meanings ascribed to ‘value’ (see Graham, 2002; Graham and Jones, 2005). Establishing and
maintaining the institutions (e.g. markets) comprising ethico-political complexes depends upon
mundane constructions and expert advocacy of what Weber terms ‘value-orientations that are
‘simultaneously theoretical and practical’ (Brubaker, 1984: 62) and which ‘constitute the framework within which interests are defined (Brubaker, 1984: 63). With regard to contemporary capitalism, ‘expert’ and lay proponents of dominant, neo-classical thinking attribute value to goods
which satisfy the subjective perceptions and preferences of persons as utility-maximizing individualists. From a neo-classical standpoint, the creation of websites such as YouTube or Facebook, for example, is (normatively) interpreted in terms of utility to their visitors. In contrast,
proponents of classical theory, and especially Marxian critique of political economy, relate the
creation of value to the exercise of human labour power. From a Marxian perspective, the value
of YouTube is framed in terms of the wage labour that is objectified in its design and content.
From a post-Marxian stance developed here, attentiveness to value creation extends to the sphere
of circulation where the labour of unwaged user-consumers is seen to participate in providing the
content, and thereby to building the brand equity, of such businesses.
The term ‘ethico-political complex’ underscores how, as value is more or less explicitly placed
upon ‘this’ (e.g. ‘exchange’) rather than ‘that’ (e.g. ‘use’), the construction of social reality is an
endemically ethical undertaking. More grandly put, all social constructions comprise a precarious
moral membrane, or ‘canopy’ (Berger, 1967), in the face of other, possible ethico-politically
charged possibilities. It is (recurrent) moments of choice, or decision—whether comparatively
reflexive or more habitual—that reproduce or transform social realities. Their formation and alteration are materially conditioned, but are is not propelled, by economic forces. It is the hegemonic
value invested in particular practices (e.g. the practices of consumption or of production) that is
critical for social reproduction and transformation. In Gamble’s (2009: 143) words, ‘The establishment of the conditions under which economics drives politics can only be done through politics’.
‘Politics’ endows the world with particular meanings that offer precarious fixes for, but repeatedly
fail to overcome, ‘the ethical irrationality of the world’ (Weber, 1946: 122). Hegemonic ‘fixes’ that
establish and maintain ethico-political complexes are inherently unstable and contestable, not least
because they are pregnant with unintended consequences.
The conjecture that value lacks any essential meaning does not preclude the adoption or revision
of particular notions of value (e.g. classical or neo-classical ideas) so long as the meaning(s) attributed to value are recognized to be articulations of ethico-political complexes, and not passed off as

Willmott

519

reflections of supposedly essential qualities. How might this perspective be relevant for studying
branding and for analysing the sense of value associated with brands as intangible assets; and, more
pointedly, is it credible to suggest that ‘brand value’ is constructed within particular ethico-political
complexes? The value attributed to branding, it will be argued, is conditioned by layered phases of
the development of capitalism conceived as a dynamic ethico-political complex. Initially, branding
accompanies and enables an expansion of alienated exchange by offering the reassurance of standardized quality indicated by a brand name and/or logo to prospective purchasers of impersonally
traded goods. In a second phase, the ethico-political significance of standardized quality is elaborated to enhance the symbolic appeal of products or services as distinctive (e.g. ‘sexy’, ‘cool’)—
that is, exploring and amplifying the possibilities presented by what Marx terms the ‘metaphysical
subtleties and ‘theological niceties’ of commodities (see Harvey, 2001). This increases what is
termed brand equity (e.g. recognition and loyalty) as it further stimulates mass consumption. Then,
in a third phase, the brand assumes a monetized value as an intangible asset. This article is principally directed to an exploration of this phase where
Brands are financial assets and their importance in relation to the tangible assets of most businesses
continues to grow. The management of brand value is simply another aspect of managing shareholder
value. (Batchelor, 1998: 101)

How, then, is the term ‘value’ being invoked here to examine the monetization of brand equity?
Without attributing to it any essential quality, the term ‘value’ is used, in a post-Marxian manner,
to illuminate the generation and distribution of wealth through the production of symbolic artifacts,
including brands, in the context of an increasingly financialized economy (see Exhibit 1) where
intangible assets assume a leading role and importance. Such assets, as Serfati (2008: 45) observes,
‘add one new, less addressed layer to financialization’ which, resulting from a liberalization of
markets, has been central to a post-1970s–2008 recuperation of profitability.
Exhibit 1. Financialization
The term ‘financialization’ has been invoked and defined in numerous ways (Krippner, 2004). It
is here taken to refer to a contemporary drive to subordinate and reconstitute all forms of
economic activity—consumption as well as production—in relation to its financial relevance and
significance. A widely commended definition of financialization is offered by Epstein (2005: 3): ‘...
financialization means the increasing role of financial motives, financial markets, financial actors
and financial institutions in the operation of domestic and international economies’. The present
analysis is consistent with this formulation as it gives as much attention to ‘financial motives’and
‘financial markets’ as it does to financial institutions. A rather narrower conception of financialization focuses upon the growing dominance of financial institutions in the global economy;
and a wider definition extends beyond ‘economies’ to everyday life (Martin, 2002). Of course,
financialization is not new and, arguably, is a potential inherent to capitalist accumulation (see
Kindleberger and Aliber, 2005). In the post-1970s era of neo-liberal deregulation, financialization—in
the sense advancing a ‘pattern of accumulation in which profit-making occurs increasingly through
financial channels rather than through trade and commodity production’ (Krippner 2004: 14)—
became an increasingly important driver of growth. As we shall see, the monetization of brand equity
is an area where ‘financial channels’ interact with, and increasingly condition, the (re)organization of
‘commodity production’ within increasingly globalized value chains.

520		

Organization 17(5)

The ‘new layer’ is analysed by adopting a revised classical political economy framework in
which the cultural production of value orientations is assigned greater significance than in more
orthodox forms of analysis. In this regard, it is conjectured that cultural ‘discourses of finance and
management’—such as the discourse of shareholder value (Ezzamel et al., 2009)—‘shape rather
than observe processes of financialization’ (Erturk et al., 2007: 44). Proponents of a political cultural
economy perspective endeavour to interrogate, challenge and transform—rather than reflect, capture or legitimize—the dynamics of advanced capitalism, conceived here as a particular ethicopolitical complex. More specifically, such analysis attends to the culturally mediated contribution of
user-consumers, as co-producers, in generating the equity secreted in brands; it also attends to how
this equity is monetized and privately appropriated as property rights are asserted over the use and
disposal of such intangible assets; and, finally, it appreciates how this appropriation is underwritten
by the means of violence vested in the legal system within capitalist states (Coombe, 1998).2
By relating branding to analysis of the ‘bigger picture’, which includes the role of the state in
organized capitalism as well as contemporary processes of financialization, this approach is
responsive to criticism that studies of branding, and of consumption more generally, tend to be
‘uneconomised’ and ‘oversocialised’ as their focus is predominantly upon ‘the individual and
social rewards’ (Cova and Dalli, 2009: 326). The present, ‘economised’ analysis of branding, in
contrast, pays attention inter alia to the ‘the disparity in the distribution of profits arising from
consumers’ work’ (Cova and Dalli, 2009: 326) as co-producers of brand equity where, in an era
of financialization, this equity is ascribed a monetized, dollar value as a financial asset. An orthodox
Marxist analysis with its focus upon the productive activities of wage labour in workplaces is
thereby revised to consider how value-productive activity is increasingly occuring in the sphere of
circulation. Any claim that labour is exploited—whether in the sphere of production or circulation—
is understood to articulate a particular ethico-political orientation; and, contra scientific Marxism,
this post-structuralist, post-foundationalist approach doubts the possibility of making an independent or non-self-referential (e.g. ‘scientific’) justification of its claims.
The article is organized as follows. In the first section, the meaning of value is elaborated. The
second section explores the development of branding and the potential for brand equity to be
monetized through processes of ‘brandization’. The third section discusses the contribution of
user-consumers to the building of brand equity. The final section focuses upon the relationship
between financialization and branding where the process of translating brand equity into brand
value is elucidated, using Samsung as an example.

Making sense of value
From the perspective taken here, absence of consensus on the meaning of ‘value’, its creation and
capture is not attributable to as-yet-imperfect theories or metrics. Consensus is elusive as a consequence of incompatible normative frameworks embedded in ethico-political complexes. Competing conceptions of value are effects of struggles through which new complexes emerge and become
institutionalized. They do not reflect or capture some aspect(s) or essence of what they aspire to
disclose. Particular notions of ‘value’ become meaningful, achieve ‘grip’ and exert their effects
though processes of contestation. Arvidsson (2009) expresses a similar view:
Since value is a normative concept, it follows that standards of value are socially constructed: they are the
result of political struggles and, consequently, they vary from one social formation to another. (Arvidsson,
2009: 16)

Willmott

521

To this can be added the understanding that standards of value also vary within ethico-political
complexes in ways that circumscribe ‘value’ as a field of study. When, for example, the creative
power of labour is associated with workplaces in which goods are manufactured, the field is located
in the workplace; and other ways of divining value, notably those that attend to the sphere of
circulation, are regarded as misguided or false. The neo-classical focus upon subjective preferences exercised in the sphere of circulation is, from a Marxian perspective, ideological—a view
that affirms the virtue of restricting the study of value to the workplace.3 Thompson and Smith
(2009: 922–4), for example, acknowledge the presence of different moments of political economy—
production, circulation, realization—but also assume their time-space distinctiveness so that the
sphere of circulation is conceived as external and epiphenomenal to productive, value-creating
activity. When this assumption is made, critical analysis struggles to make sense of forms of valueproductive activity—such as the co-production of the symbolic values that comprise brand
equity—that occur outside of an employment relationship (see also Foster, 2007, 2008).

Studying value critically?
The virtue of studying the sphere of production and the employment relationship is that, from a
Marxian standpoint, it affords an appreciation of how the creation of exchangeable products and
services depends upon subordinating and disciplining the value-producing powers of wage labour.
Sellers of labour are shown to be dispossessed of the means of production, degraded in the execution of what others design, and rewarded for only a fraction of the surplus that is realized from the
sale of what they produce. From this standpoint, attentiveness to the (fetishised) ‘exchange value’
of commodities in the sphere of circulation is associated with (bourgeois) analysis where the ‘hidden
abode of production’ is disregarded, and where the value appropriated by the owners of productive
assets is regarded as a necessary reward for entrepreneurial risk-taking.
The perspective adopted here retains a connection between value and labour power but it assumes
an ethico-political, rather than scientific, basis of this relation. It does not assume some essential
meaning of ‘value’ that is objectively attributable to ‘labour’, and which leads to an entanglement
in debates over ‘the labour theory of value’. Labour is here distinguished by its creative (and selfreproductive) capacities, and not by whatever value, whether material or symbolic, it is assessed to
create. The specific focus of the analysis is the creative participation of user-consumers in building
brand equity. In the process of creating brands, the role of the consumer, as co-producer, resides in
recognizing the brand, and attributing qualities (e.g. reliability, prestige) to it. This process is
enabled, but not determined, by the labour of product developers, packaging designers, advertising
specialists and so on. As Goldman (n.d.) puts it, those who seek to increase brand equity ‘try to
encode a sign by prompting an exchange of meanings. But, it is on the decoding side of this “forced”
exchange that a sign is either valorized or not’. These processes of co-production now extend to
activities such as ‘crowdsourcing’ (see Kozinets et al., 2008; see also Business Week, 2006; Cook,
2008) as internet platform owners (e.g. YouTube, Lego) mobilize the labour of user-consumers to
develop products and provide content. The perspective favoured here is attentive to how, in the
contemporary era of financialized capitalism, the brand equity produced by user-consumers
becomes a target of valorization as the monetary value attributed to branded goods, such as Lego
bricks or Virgin broadband, is factored into the stock price of the companies owning the intellectual
property vested in the brand. Dividends and capital gains enjoyed by shareholders flow, in part,
from the labour power of consumers [e.g brand communities (see Muniz and O’Guinn, 2001)] as
well as producers (e.g. brand managers), who co-create the equity that is monetized.

522		

Organization 17(5)

The point of highlighting this development is not to revise the labour theory of value or to
displace labour process analysis but, rather, to draw attention to the contribution of user-consumers
in co-producing the (intangible) assets which are an increasingly significant source of privately
appropriated wealth. This co-creation is integral to all phases of branding as the consumer does
active interpretive work on the ‘decoding side’ of processes of brand building. Consumers are not
empty vessels for marketing propositions but active interpreters and evaluators of their relevance
and appeal (see Jhally and Livant, 1986; Smythe, 1977). In the UK, the early branding of Bass
beer and Tate and Lyle sugar, for example, products which became household names with recognizable logos, packaging and so on, required the involvement of consumers in assessing brand
messages and sharing their knowledge, thereby co-producing the brand equity ascribed to these
products.
This perspective is pertinent for illuminating questions that defy orthodox Marxism—namely,
why workers have not realized their ‘interests’ by revolting against their institutionalized exploitation; why user-consumers enthusiastically pay substantial premiums for branded goods, and finally
why time is freely given by consumers to refining and publicizing brand-name goods (e.g. Lego)
for which they then pay a premium price. Such puzzles are not convincingly tackled by appealing
to some version of essential value or false consciousness—such as the argument that capitalist
work organization obscures the pumping of surplus value from their labour (Burawoy, 1986, see
esp. 32–35), or that consumers are unwittingly hoodwinked or ensnared into paying for the designer
label, rather than paying a fraction of the price for an otherwise identical, unbranded product.
Instead of assuming that there is an unbiased, objective standpoint from which to survey and disclose the reality of economic relations and declare these relations to be utility-maximizing or
exploitative or whatever, the present analysis proceeds from the understanding that both adopted
frameworks of analysis and the ‘objects’ (e.g. ‘value’ or ‘branding’) which they aspire to examine—regardless of whether these objects are branded goods or exotic financial instruments
(MacKenzie, 2009)—are articulations of particular ethical-political commitments, and in this
sense are constitutive, not reflective, of the world that they aspire to know.4

Branding and brandization
Branding has until very recently been marginal to critical scholarship across business and management studies (see Arvidsson, 2006; Holt, 2002; Kornberger, in press). Marketers, with few exceptions
(e.g. Holt, 2002, 2004), have treated branding as a functional means of differentiating products or
services, increasing product recognition and reputation and thereby securing or gaining market share.5
Other students of business have been inclined to regard branding as external to their domain, the principal exceptions being organization specialists interested in corporate branding (e.g. Hatch and
Schultz, 2005; Schultz et al., 2000, 2005) and accounting specialists interested in the issue of accounting for brands (e.g. Tollington, 2001). Attentiveness to branding amongst social scientists, whether
mainstream or critical, has also been muted, perhaps because it is viewed as too superficial to merit
close or serious examination. It seems that the ‘soft’ and intangible qualities of consumer behaviour
make branding an unattractive topic for students of political economy. Lury’s (2004) Brands: The
Logos of the Global Economy promises to balance the account (see also du Gay et al., 1996). Yet,
rooted in cultural studies (see Crane and Bovone, 2006 for an overview of culturalist approaches),
Lury’s study does little to remedy the neglect of branding as an integral element of contemporary
political economy. That No Logo, a book authored by a journalist-activist, has had such an impact by
bringing the ‘new branded world’ (Klein, 2000: Ch 1) into some focus is symptomatic of a popular
recognition of branding’s contemporary significance and indicative of a scholarly vacuum.

Willmott

523

Whatever the source of the antipathy or blindness to the contemporary significance of branding
for capitalist expansion (see Marazzi, 2010) and, more recently, for market capitalization (see
Frieder and Subrahmanyam, 2004), its comparative neglect is remarkable. Branding is increasingly important in shaping the identity, strategy and structure of organizations (O’Neill, 2001; Schultz
et al., 2000)—in the public and not-for-profit as well as the private sectors (see Lury and Moor,
2010). Yet, the role of branding in facilitating the expansion of impersonal, market-mediated economic relations is marginalized in the field of organization studies and in critical (e.g. Marxist)
studies of capitalist political economy. In the next section, a schematic history of branding is
sketched as a basis for appreciating how, in the present era of financialization, brands are identified
as intangible assets with a monetizable value.

The dynamics of branding—a schematic history
Branding was first introduced6 to provide assurances to customers that a product or service, such
as silvermithing, could be trusted as unadulterated or reliable. In this phase, branding does not differentiate a product or service from reputable substitutes but, instead, provides a symbolic guarantee of a standardized quality. In this context, the ethico-political significance of branding resides in
its inspiration of confidence which is a critical condition of the expansion of (impersonal, market)
exchange. The assurance of a recognizable and trusted brand name, enabled through advertising
and promotion, was particularly important for entry into markets where customers had previously
relied upon personal knowledge of local producers. Branding facilitates a substitution of branded
for unbranded products which is a condition of possibility for enlarging sales, thereby securing an
expanding, privately appropriated, surplus from the proceeds.
A second phase or layer of branding places emphasis upon elaborating a distinctive, symbolic
meaning or ‘personality’ that differentiates a product or service from rival (branded) competitors.
Customers’ attention and loyalty is atttracted by, for example, associating products with an aspirational life-style. In this phase, fetishing the brand comes to play an increasingly central role in
retaining market share and supporting premium pricing. Customer identification and emotional
attachment is encouraged, thereby protecting the revenue flows from which a privately appropriated surplus is realized. As Thompson et al. (2007: 634) observe of popular music, ‘what is marketed is more than music, it is the “uniqueness” of the act, its look, its “story”, as well as its sound’.
As they also point out, the development of these qualities—that is, elements of brand equity—
‘doesn’t start after but takes place during the production process’ (Thompson et al., 2007: 635).
What they omit to appreciate, however, and so represent the prospective consumer of pop music as
a passive absorber of the brand ‘story’, is how consumers are actively involved, as co-creators, in
interpreting and assessing this story and are active participants in elaborating and disseminating its
narrative—notably, in the contemporary context, through social networking sites.7
During the second phase, when the brand is differentiated from other brands, substantial
resources are ploughed into styling and mass advertising by employing branding specialists and
agencies (see Low and Fullerton, 1994: esp 177 et seq). In this process, the creation of brand
equity—in the form of brand awareness and positive associations—is a consequence of successful
branding campaigns directed at increasing sales by attracting and retaining customers. The third
phase is distinguished by a recognition of how brand equity can, potentially, be monetized as brand
value—something that becomes very apparent when a company owning a prized brand name is
acquired at a price that far exceeds the value ascribed to its physical assets (see Exhibit 2), thereby
demonstrating how investment in brand building can produce an intangible asset capable of realizing a dollar value.8 Building upon the mass consumption phase of branding, and in particular the

524		

Organization 17(5)

Exhibit 2. The financial importance of brands: Unilever’s acquisition of Bestfoods
When Unilever finally succeeded in a US$8.6 billion takeover of Bestfoods, the primary focus of
analysts and fund managers were the leading brands that this would add to the company’s financial
portfolio. So while institutional investors were pressuring Unilever for more than a decade to reduce
its brand portfolio, the financial value attributed to Bestfoods’ top brands justified the debt-financed
acquisition of this company (IUF, 2006)

institutionalized expansion of consumption through credit, investment in branding, combined with
outsourcing of production, becomes a more purposeful, strategic means of increasing the return on
capital invested. Feldwick (1996: 85), for example, notes how, in the 1990s,
hardnosed business people began to notice that brands appeared to be changing hands for huge sums of
money … (and) the difference between balance sheet valuations and the prices paid by predators was
substantially attributed to the value of brands.

As brand equity becomes a monetized quantity, its dollar value is incorporated into market capitalization (against which cheaper lines of credit and the debt-financing of expansion or acquisition activity can be secured). In an ethico-political complex where financialization becomes the
driving source of capital accumulation (see Exhibit 1), the contribution of branding to generating
surpluses—for example, through royalties derived from subsidiaries and other companies’ use of
the brand name—begins to up-stage its (continuing, phase two) role in constructing symbolic
value for consumers. A report discussing the emergent strategy of global food companies, such as
Nestlé, Kraft and Unilever, published in 1996 was prescient in its observation that
As income from brand royalties contributes a larger proportion of earnings growth there is a stronger
motivation to direct investment into raising the value of intangible assets—especially increased expenditure on branding and marketing operations. This means that if the major food transnational corporations (TNCs) exercise control over these brands and focus on branding and marketing, food processing
and packaging activities can be outsourced to subcontractors and co-packers … The fact that the major
TNCs can generate a major source of revenue from intangible assets—in this case royalties paid not only
by subsidiaries but eventually by co-packers—suggests that this could be the future of the global food
industry. (IUF, 2006: 11)

From being an elusive quality that warrants and/or (re)enchants mundane commodities, the intangible qualities of brand equity are translated into a dollar equivalent, in the form of ‘brand value’.
Exhibit 3 sets out the difference, and relationship, between brand equity and brand value.
From being regarded as a somewhat mysterious way of increasing sales volumes and raising
price points, the pay-off of investment in branding becomes articulated more directly as a dollar
value that provides an increasingly substantial element of the stock price. Indeed, it has been
argued that ‘“brand managers” primary task is to maximise and leverage brand equity to increase
brand value’ (Raggio and Leone, 2007: 380; see also Raggio and Leone, 2009). To the extent
that financial decision-makers (e.g. stock analysts, fund managers) assess that ‘brand owning
companies can earn huge returns on their capital and grow faster’ (Akasia, 2000: 30), corporate
executives, being mindful of the fate of their share price, invest in, and build, brands in a manner
that is responsive to such assessments. The suitably inelegant term ‘brandization’9 is coined here
to refer to the leveraging of brand equity to increase the contribution of brand value, as an intangible asset, to market capitalization.

525

Willmott
Exhibit 3. Comparing brand equity and brand value
Brand equity

Brand value

Definition

‘The differential effect of brand
knowledge on consumer response
to the marketing of the brand’
(Keller, 1993: 1) (e.g. recognition,
image, ‘personality’, etc.)

The Process of
translation

‘Brand equity’—conceptualized as a
distinctive set of assets relating to
product awareness, loyalty, quality,
etc. —is understood to contribute
to shareholder value as it represents
‘a reservoir of cash flow that has
accumulated from marketing
activities but has not yet [been fully]
translated into revenue’ (Rust et al.,
2004: 78, emphasis added; see also
Madden et al., 2006)

The financial valuation given to a
branded product, service or company
in terms of income, potential income,
reputation, prestige, and market value.
Brand value is the valorization of
brand equity
‘From a financial perspective,
tangible wealth emanates from the
incremental capitalized earnings and
cash flows achieved by linking a
successful, established brand name to a
product or service. These incremental
earnings and cash flows came to be
labelled brand value’ (Kerin and
Sethuraman, 1998: 260, emphasis added)

Brandization
In a ‘post-consumer’,10 increasingly financialized, world, the management of brands is increasingly about treating them as ‘objects’ that can be monetized and leveraged. The monetization of
brand equity is significant for at least two reasons. First, it underscores how intangible assets,
including brands, are increasingly important in the valuation of companies. Simply in order to
better understand the distinctive organization and dynamics of contemporary, financialized
capitalism, it is relevant to incorporate an examination of how intangible assets are co-created,
and how their value is calculated and realized. With specific regard to branding, its study
includes the participation of user-consumers in the building of brand equity. The process of coproduction in brand-branding occurs in both industrial and consumer markets; and, today, it is
most readily evident in internet-based businesses like Amazon and Ebay where user-consumers
willingly provide feedback on goods and sellers that contributes to the appeal, and thus to the
brand equity, of those companies.11
Second, the monetization of brand equity invites consideration of whether capital invested in
branding can produce a higher rate of return than an equivalent investment in the production of
goods and services. This becomes a ‘real option’ (Baldi and Trigeorgis, 2008) when it is comparatively easy, technically and politically, to outsource manufacturing and/or service delivery (see
Alvarez and Stenbacka, 2007). Brandization occurs as the disciplines of finance (including financial accounting) and marketing (including brand management) converge and interact with corporate strategy. In this intersection, intangibles assume increasing significance as a higher proportion
of market capitalization is attributed to them. The logic is applied most vigorously by companies
such as Benetton and especially Virgin12 which leverage the equity in the brand name by applying
it to an extended range of products and services;13 but, as noted earlier, this logic is also being
embraced by longer established companies like Nestlé and Unilever. In this regard, brandization
has significant implications for the (re)structuring of economic organization as companies, pressed

526		

Organization 17(5)

to deliver shareholder value, concentrate upon cultivating and leveraging their intangible assets,
including their brands, and outsource other activities (see O’Neil, 2001; Pike and Pollard, 2010).
As Davis (2009: 35) comments on Hewlett Packard’s decision to outsource much of its manufacturing to a ‘board stuffer’,
the rationale ultimately turned on the idea that the stock market values intellectual property over tangible
assets … [that is why] cell phones, hot dogs, PCs, pet food and pharmaceuticals are routinely produced
by contractors, leaving OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturers) to manage the intellectual property
behind these products—patents, brand names, trademarks and research capabilities. (see also Klein, 2000,
esp. Ch 8)

Why are these intangibles ascribed greater value? It is because the scope for in-house, post-Fordist
squeezing of value from the point of production has diminished relative to what can be achieved
by contracting it out, often to offshore manufacturers or service providers operating flexible facilities with lower wage costs and/or regulatory demands. There is often greater potential for generating surplus from intangibles like branding—even allowing for the vulnerability of brand equity to
displacement by innovation, shifts in fashion or the risk of its destruction by consumer activists.
That said, it should also be born in mind that the contribution of brandization to capital asset
growth pales into comparative insignificance when compared to the asset price bubble produced by
securitization (Klimecki and Willmott, 2009).14 Nonetheless, where financial gains are privileged,
branding is increasingly identified as a cost-effective means of leveraging capital invested, as will
be briefly illustrated later through the example of Samsung.

Building brand equity: consumers as co-producers
The business of branding involves a labour process of sign production and dissemination by
stylists, packaging specialists, copy writers, media producers, etc., as well as brand managers
(Wernick, 1991). In this respect, a focus upon how the contracted labour of brand specialists is
harnessed within workplaces remains fully relevant. However, their labour comprises only one
side of a co-creation process. When analysis is fixated upon the sphere of production, consumers
are (dis)regarded as as their involvement in the production of symbolic values is ignored or
trivialized (see Salzer-Mörling and Strannegård, 2004). On the ‘unseen’ side of the production
process is the labour of user-consumers who, at the very least, make assessments of the product
or service and thereby actively participate in building (or destroying)15 brand equity. This point
is now developed and illustrated by considering the political economy of brand building in the
most contemporary of economies—the Internet—and, more specifically, the contribution of
consumers, as co-producers, to the construction of social networking sites.

Co-producing brand equity
With the advent of ICTs, and especially Web 2.0, the co-productive role of user-consumers—which
can be subversive16, as well as constructive—becomes increasingly apparent. Consider ventures
such as Facebook, Linkedin and YouTube17 but also Google, Ebay, Tripadvisor and Amazon. The
labour of user-consumers directly builds brand equity that, when monetized as brand value, is appropriated by site owners, and not distributed to its content providers. Sites like YouTube and Tripadvisor are well known and used not because they are heavily advertised or because they employ teams
of people producing videos and inspecting hotels. Rather, it is because of the uploading activity and

Willmott

527

social networking of user-consumers that such sites enjoy a degree of recognition approaches that of
long-established brands like Coca-Cola or Disney.
There is, of course, no obligation to expend time and effort in up-loading material or making
user reviews available; and there is no monetary incentive, such as a wage or piece-work payment,
for participating. What, then, is to be made of this ‘gift’? Arvidsson (2006, 2008, 2009) contends
that it forms part of an ‘ethical economy’18 which generates an ‘ethical surplus’ (Lazzaroto, 1997)
in the form of new relationships, meanings and a sense of belonging. This interpretation is persuasive insofar as it draws out the motivation and pleasures associated with such activity. However, in
giving it this emphasis, Arvidsson’s analysis follows other studies of branding in its ‘uneconomised’ focus upon ‘the individual and social rewards’ (Cova and Dalli, 2009: 326). From a political
cultural economy perspective, Arvidsson’s otherwise instructive analysis displaces or marginalizes
consideration of how the production of such ‘ethical surplus’ is embedded in capitalist economies
(see Bauwens, nd; 2009).
By taking time to leave feedback (e.g. Amazon, Tripadvisor) as well as by co-designing products and services (e.g. Nokia Concept Lounge, Lego’s DesignbyMe; see also Stalk and Lachenauer,
2004: 119–120), the labour of consumer-users builds brand equity that becomes convertible into
brand value—although this value creation may be unapparent and/or of no interest to, co-producers even when the equity produced by their labour in the form of site content or even product
development—is sold for very substantial sums.19
Consider YouTube. Founded in February 2005, YouTube is where user-consumers upload and
share their videos and music clips. YouTube was acquired by Google for $1.65bn in 2006 when it
had just 65 employees (Arrington, 2006; Helft, 2007). That is a potent illustration of how the
labour of user-consumers built the brand equity of YouTube that was turned into brand value.20 The
proceeds of the sale of YouTube were shared amongst those legally credited with owning the site,
including share-owning employees, to the exclusion of those who provided its content and built its
reputation (see Coombe, 1998). The capitalist state ensured that, legally, the co-producers of YouTube’s brand equity had no entitlement to the dollar value generated by their labour.
Needless to say, the appeal of YouTube to the owners of Google was not the site’s design.
Google staff could readily emulate what had been created by the three ex-PayPal employees who
established YouTube. What Google purchased was a brand—YouTube—that had become synonymous with videos-on-the-web, and to which a large and growing population of internet users participate as content providers as well as revenue-generating consumers of the advertising placed on
YouTube the site. The labour expended by user-consumers does not simply create ‘ethical value’ for
site visitors, in the form of clips relevant for identity work and networking. In addition, the uploading of content delivers exchange values which take the form of advertising revenues; and it is the
labour of user-consumers that (unintentionally) generates the financial value realized in the sale of
YouTube to Google.

Financialization and branding
The context for understanding how brands have become monetized commodities is the neo-liberal era of the post-1980s in which a liberalization of all markets restored a rate of profit that had
been in decline during the 1970s. Reinvigorated by opportunities to trade in a variety of products
and coupons (Froud et al., 2002), forms of financial liberalization—collectively conceived as
financialization—became a salvationary, bust-beating driver of growth and stability (see
Orhangazi, 2008: 49 et seq.). In the UK, this was signalled loudly and triumphantly in 1986 by
(the) Big Bang of City deregulation. Amongst many others, Harvey (2005) and Dore (2008)

528		

Organization 17(5)

note how, in the post-1970s era, profit-making shifted from trade and commodity production to
the development and use of financial channels (see Krippner, 2005). During these decades,
corporate behaviour
became more and more financial in orientation … it has not been uncommon for corporations to report
losses in production offset by gains from financial operations (everything from credit and insurance
operations to speculating in volatile currency and futures markets. (Harvey, 2005: 32)

A similar but distinctive angle on financialization is taken here where it is conceived in relation to
investment decision-making within corporations and its connectedness to market capitalization. In
this context, financialization includes the subjection of investment decision-making to one preeminent criterion: what will be added to market capitalization and thereby to shareholder value?
For example, if $1 invested in building brand equity or speculating on currency and/or futures
markets is anticipated to produce a higher (short-to-medium term) yield than $1 invested in new
plant, then the financially defensible answer is to offshore or outsource production, and to direct
the resources into coupon trading or branding. Processes of financialization unfold as corporate
strategies are shaped and assessed in relation to their anticipated effectiveness in defending or raising stock prices (see Dore, 2000; Ezzamel et al., 2009).
Such financialization is, of course, nothing inherently new (Kindleberger and Aliber, 2005). It
is perhaps best understood as a potential endemic to capitalism that is released when normative
inhibitions (e.g. limits on share-options and bonuses) and regulatory restraints (e.g. the separation
of retail and investment banking) are weakened. That said, since the ‘Roaring 20s’, the boldest
experiment with (globalized) financialization, turbo-charged by the use of information and communication technologies for trading and marketing, has occurred during the past two decades.
Following the financial meltdown of 2008, the rate of expansion of financialization has been
checked but, to date (mid-2010), it has not been halted, let alone reversed. Indeed, the socialization
of losses arising from the reckless leveraging of paper assets and trading in exotic financial products (e.g collateralized debt obligations and credit defaut swaps; see Klimecki and Willmott, 2009)
has served to sustain, not to reform, an economic system that, in the absence of the political will to
introduce radical reform, remains structurally geared to financialization.

From building brand equity to calculating brand value
What, then, of marketing activity? How is this redefined and restructured in an era of financialization? From a financialization perspective, its value does not reside primarily in developing or
managing an appealing message about a product or service, or even in enabling consumers to interpret this message positively, thereby increasing brand equity and boosting market share. Such
outcomes may be satisfying for marketers; and they may be appreciated by consumers. But when
applying the discipline of financialization, simply increasing the ‘brand equity’ of products or
services—that is, enhancing the positive symbolic meaning—provides a necessary but insufficient
justification for continuing investment in marketing. This presents something of a challenge to
marketers whose functional role was formed prior to the neo-liberal era of financialization. Marketers have found themselves ill-prepared for a shift in value-orientation in which brand equity has
become identified as a significant source of shareholder value. As Lukas et al. (2005) note:
Where in the past, marketing managers were seen as experts on customers, channels, and competitors,
they should be seen in the future as experts on how marketing can increase shareholder value. To do this,

Willmott

529

marketers need to extend their skill base to add expertise in modern financial planning techniques. (Lukas
et al., 2005: 421)

In an era of financialization, marketers are increasingly required to demonstrate how they (and
their advertising agencies, see following quote) can reshape and justify their role in terms of its
contribution to developing intangible assets that ‘deliver to the bottom line’:
Advertising can frequently be the difference between two products … We think of ourselves as part of the
manufacturing process, building advertising properties that fortify brands that in themselves become company assets and deliver to the bottom line. (Bartle et al., 1996: 9, cited in Nixon, 2002: 144, emphasis added)

Where financialization takes hold, shareholder value creation becomes a more explicit and exclusive objective of strategic decision-making, including investment in branding. Marketing and,
more specifically, the value attributed to a company’s brands, is then appraised according to its
contribution to market capitalization. As Lindemann (2004: 37) summarizes this development:
in the pursuit of increasing shareholder value, companies are keen to establish procedures for the management of brands that are aligned with those for other business assets, as well as for the company as a
whole … Economic value creation becomes the focus of brand management and all brand-related investment decisions. Companies as diverse as American Express, IBM, Samsung Electronics, Accenture,
United Way of America, BP, Fujitsu and Duke Energy have used brand valuation to help them refocus
their businesses on their brands and to create an economic rationale for branding decisions and investments. Many companies have made brand value creation part of the remuneration criteria for senior
marketing executives. (Lindemann, 2004)

The body of literature connecting brand value to market capitalization is slender but developing.21
Studies addressing the relationship between the positive valuation of brands and stock price performance point to a strongly positive relationship (for a review of the emergent literature, see Srinivasan and Hanssens, 2008 and commentary by Kimbrough and McAlister, 2008); and studies in
behavioral finance indicate that brand visibility directly influences the chances of a stock being
bought and held. Frieder (2004: 33, 35), for example, reports that ‘a preference for visible, brandname stocks in individuals’ decisions to hold stocks supports the hypothesis that individual investors
exhibit a propensity towards companies with easily recognisable products’. Investment in branding
to create ‘brand-name stocks’ can be a cost-effective means of increasing market capitalization. It is
notable that intangibles, of which ‘brands’ form a substantial part, now far outstrip traditional
accounting assets as a percentage of market value. As Ballow et al. (2004) comment:
About 20 years ago traditional accounting assets composed about 80% of market value. By March
2000, this ratio had flipped to a peak point where the traditional accounting assets only composed
about 15 percent of market value. Despite the subsequent market crash, traditional accounting assets
still explain only about 25% of market value…Some academics and thought leaders make the case that
intangible assets such as powerful brands, are the difference. Whether they make up the entire difference
or not, that they play a large role fits well with the evidence that businesses are becoming less dependent
on physical assets for value creation (Ballow et al., 2004: 29, emphasis added; see also Lev, 2001)

The position is indeed curious. The value attributed to brands can, and from 2005 must, be included
in the balance sheet only when there has been an active market in this asset—for example, in the

530		

Organization 17(5)

process of its acquisition (Whitwell, 2005). The balance sheets of companies like Nike, Microsoft
and Coca-Cola present information on working capital, net fixed assets and financial investments
but are silent on what is arguably their most significant asset, their brand name. As a consequence, there are huge differences between the book value of such companies, as calculated by
accountants, and their market value as determined by financial analysts and the decisions of
investors (see Tollington, 2001).22 That is because the decision-making of analysts and investors
is influenced by non-accounting information which includes assessments of the increasing (or
diminishing) value of a company’s brand(s).

Struggles over brand valuation
In order to make decisions, analysts and investors want information about intangibles, and not least
when these assets are assessed to comprise a significant proportion of market value, even if information on these assets is deemed insufficiently reliable to be included by the preparers and auditors
of financial statements (see Barth et al., 1998: 63).23
As financial statements prepared and audited by accountants do not provide this information,
other players, notably branding consultancies, have filled the information vacuum. Each method of
evaluating brands claims to place brand valuation, and its contribution to the value of capital assets,
upon a more rational or ‘scientific’ basis (see Valuation Methods and Shareholder Value Fernández, 2001; Fernández, 2002: chapter 13 for a discussion of methods developed by different consultancies). The most prominent of the brand valuation consultancies is Interbrand which, in
association with Business Week, calculates and publishes an annual league table listing the changing contribution of brands to market capitalization (see Exhibit 4).24
Brand valuation methods are based upon some combination of price premium, earnings valuation,
royalty payments, market value or historic cost (see Kerin and Sethuraman, 1998; Tollington, 2001),
and these are highly contested.25 For marketers, methods based upon accounting-relevant measures are
unacceptable or suspect as they are assessed to draw insufficiently upon, and therefore fail to reflect the
value of, a marketing perspective and associated expertise (see Roslender and Hart, 2006). A flavour of
the antagonism towards accounting-based metrics can be gained from the following comment:
Although there is a danger the figure will be hopelessly inaccurate, the accountants are keen to gain control
of brands by valuing them without a marketing contribution. If marketers are to control the brands they
Exhibit 4. The contribution of brands to market capitalization (source: Business Week 2007, Interbrand/JP
Morgan)
Company
2002 brand value ($bn)
		
		

Brand contribution to
market capitalization of
parent company (%)

2001 brand value ($bn)

Coca-Cola
Microsoft
IBM
GE
Intel
Nokia
Disney
McDonalds

51
21
39
14
22
51
68
71

69.0
65.1
52.8
42.4
34.7
35.0
32.6
25.3

69.6
64.1
51.2
41.3
30.9
30.0
29.3
26.4

Willmott

531

consider themselves responsible for, it is imperative that they get and stay involved in the brand valuation
process. Greater financial visibility will increase corporate understanding of the value that brands and
those responsible for them contribute to the enterprise. (Whitwell, 2005: 3).

The contest is over how to quantify brand equity, and which management specialism should control
this process. On the one side, accountants favour excluding the value of intangibles from the
balance sheet unless they are newly acquired, in which case they have a recently demonstrated
monetary value. To marketers, on the other side, reliance upon accounting metrics produces values
that are ‘hopelessly inaccurate’, not least because the balance sheet fails to do justice to marketers’
brand-building contribution to the company’s market valuation. There is a parallel here with
securitization. The conservative position is that the value of securities must always be directly
supported by the so-called ‘fundamentals’26 of the tangible assets held on the balance sheet. That
view gives only limited encouragement to the process of brandization, including the securitization
of brands (Taylor et al., 2009). The conservative position unravels when financial analysts and
investors are persuaded, or convince themselves, that hitherto unregistered value resides in an
intangible, such as a brand; and they rely upon the providers of non-accounting valuations in a way
that parallels how fund managers rely upon securities’ ratings agencies to inform and warrant their
buy/ hold/ sell decisions (see Nicholai et al., 2009).
That said, precisely how assessments of brand-name stocks influence the decision-making of
investors and executives remains opaque. Gaining permission to conduct observational research in
financial markets is notoriously difficult (see MacKenzie, 2009: 179). As a consequence, little
research has been undertaken on how analysts, rating agencies and investors use information, including the information provided by consultancies like Interbrand or FinanceWorld. Their illumination
would require access to ‘company insiders who are privy to more of the circumstances that affect
brand equity’ (Simon and Sullivan, 1993: 49). In the absence of such research, one publicly available
source of information is company annual reports where major investments—in acquisitions, for
example, but also in branding—are justified to shareholders. The significance of investment in
branding is now illustrated with the example of Samsung.

Samsung: conjuring value from branding
In his 2007 message to shareholders, the CEO of Samsung states:
We have focused on various marketing activities for our premium products to enhance our brand value.
Consequently, we took 10th place in the world and 7th place among global IT companies in a survey
co-conducted by Interbrand and Business Week, with an estimated brand value of $16.1 billion in 2006,
up from $15 billion of 2005. (Lee, 2007)

This statement is suggestive of how seriously brand valuation may be taken as a key indicator of
corporate performance. Little more than a decade earlier, Samsung was a supplier to OEMs and
a manufacturer of ‘cheap knockoffs’. As a company, it lacked any common brand identity; it was
a ‘house of brands’ which enjoyed minimal recognition and positive evaluation by consumers,
and so lacked brand equity (See Exhibit 5). In the mid-1990s, a decision was taken to abandon
the numerous brands and to market Samsung as a corporate brand—a strategy commended by
contemporary pundits (e.g. Rao et al., 2004) as particularly cost-effective and value-enhancing.
Accompanying this change was a decision to concentrate upon the development flagship products that consumers use on a daily basis—the mobile phone, the flat screen television, the

532		

Organization 17(5)
Possibly, no brand has done a better job
of mining the potential of new brand
building principles than Samsung. Less
than a decade ago it was the maker of
lower-end consumer electronics under
a handful of brand names including
Wisewiew, Tantus, and Yepp, none of
which meant much to consumers.
Figuring that its only shot at moving up
the value chain was to build a stronger
identity, the company ditched all its
other brands to put all its resources
behind the Samsung name. Then it
focused on building a more upscale
image through better quality, design and
innovations ... Most people carry their
mobile phones with them everywhere,
while TV is the center of the family
room. ‘We wanted the brand in users’
presence 24/7’, says Peter Weedfald,
Head of Samsung’s North American
Marketing and Consumer Electronics
Unit. Now that strategy is paying off.
Over the past five years, Samsung (#20)
has posted the biggest gain in value
of any Global 100 brand, with a 186%
surge. (Business Week, 2005)

Exhibit 5. The market performance of Samsung and Sony, February 2004 to May 2005

netbook, etc. Today, Samsung occupies a market position where it competes head-to-head with
established global brands such as Sony and Phillips. Exhibit 5 compares the share price movement of Sony and Samsung from February 2004 to May 2005 and is accompanied by a Business
Week commentary on the success of Samsung’s conversion, or leverage, of increased brand
equity into enlarged brand value.
As an integral part of its strategy to penetrate and dominate established markets, Samsung
reportedly ‘used extensive data on market variables, brand share, marketing expenses and
other variables, and ran simulations to understand how and where marketing investments
yielded the highest returns’ (Chu and Keh, 2006: 329 citing Corstjens and Merrihue, 2003). In
this respect, there is a parallel between models developed to calculate return on investment
from in-house versus outsourced production with calculations about the contribution to market
capitalization from investment in the co-production of symbolic values that build brand equity.
Outsourcing of production is comparatively easy to establish but also easy to copy. From its
years supplying OEMs, Samsung had cost-effective manufacturing facilities, so outsourcing
was not an appealing strategic option. The decision to reinvent the company as a prized global
brand has, of course, required huge investment in product development and state-of-the-art
production plants in addition to massive marketing investment. The strategy is also vulnerable

Willmott

533

to user-consumers’ fickle involvement in the co-production of symbolic value that can extend
to its subversion.27 Yet, as the remarks of the CEO indicate, when investment in brand building
is effectively harnessed to product development and competitive pricing, it can make a very
substantial contribution to shareholder value.
A cautionary note must be sounded, nonetheless. The link between investment in activities
intended to increase brand equity and the emphasis upon supporting the stock price is difficult to
demonstrate as little research has been undertaken on how calculations about the contribution of
branding to market capitalization inform executives’ investment decision-making. In the case of
Samsung, some indication of how the strategy was forged, and is being maintained, can be gleaned
from examining the formation and activities of the Global Strategy Group28 and also in the 2003
message from the Chairman of Samsung in which he announces ‘The Next Phase’ in the company’s
development:
As a company, we are learning that we can remain vital only as long as we pursue our goal of becoming
one of the world’s most admired brands. The forces driving Samsung to become a top global brand are
already in place: the people, processes, partners and products. (emphasis added)29

In its quest to establish Samsung as a ‘top global brand’, the three phases, or layers, of branding
which were sketched earlier have been strategically combined and compressed. Samsung has concentrated primarily upon increasing brand recognition and esteem, using billboards to plaster its
logo and products across the planet and associating these with prestigious events and associated
life-styles. First, and foremost, however, and as the CEO’s 2007 message to the company’s shareholders suggests, investing in branding is justified as a strategic means of increasing ‘brand value’
and thereby increasing market capitalization.

Summary and conclusion
The article has offered a political cultural economy analysis of branding and its valorization. The
insertion of ‘cultural’ between ‘political’ and ‘economy’ recalls that social practices, including
their analysis, are ethico-political in formulation: the (re)construction of reality involves a particular, culturally meaningful engagement with a meaningless and ‘ethically irrational’ world.
There is no pretence that analysis of social phenomena (e.g. of branding) can objectively or
‘scientifically’ disclose their essential features or ‘value’. What counts as ‘value’ is conceived
here as an outcome of struggles through which some meanings are privileged and particular
ethico-political complexes become institutionalized and naturalized. It is through these struggles
that specific notions of ‘value’—whether neo-classical, Marxian or post-Marxian—become
established and exert their effects.
Diverse literatures—marketing, accounting and finance as well as organization studies and the
sociologies of work and consumption—have been drawn together to illuminate how the creation and
realization of value through branding forms an increasingly significant part of a ‘big picture’30 of
contemporary capitalism. Specifically, the focus has been upon how brand equity is co-produced by
user-consumers and translated into monetized value that makes an increasingly substantial contribution to the dividends and capital gains enjoyed by investors. In this respect, the analysis shares Marxian concerns about the conditions of wealth production and the justice of its distribution. But the
basis of this concern is ethico-political; there is no presumption that, for example, the oppressive and
exploitative nature of capitalist political economy and/or work organization can be scientifically
demonstrated, or that the course of its demise can be predicted.

534		

Organization 17(5)

In order to show the ‘bigger picture’, three elements within the ‘full circuit’ of capitalist reproduction have been connected: control over the surpluses generated by labour (e.g. user-consumers of
branded products) that command a price premium; the realization of surplus through control of
revenues derived from sales of products; and the appropriation of surplus in the form of capital
accumulation, after deduction of costs. The growing importance of the production of intangible
assets (e.g. brands) has been linked to processes of financialization; and ‘brandization’ has been
situated with the dynamics of neo-liberal capitalist expansion. The analysis has illuminated how
the labour of user-consumers is mobilized to build brand equity which, through a process of ‘brandization’, is converted into privately appropriated wealth.
In an era of financialization, brand equity is being targeted and leveraged as an hitherto neglected
source of market capitalization and shareholder value. When disciplined by financialization,
investment in branding is not primarily or ultimately justified in relation to the benefits ascribed
to consumers, to penetrating new markets, or to growing market share. Rather, investment is
warranted by its anticipated contribution to shareholder value as illustrated by the example of
Samsung. As branding becomes financialized, attention shifts from brand building per se to how
this activity can be monetized and leveraged for valorisation. With the advent of ‘brandization’,
branding becomes ‘a distinctive mode of capital accumulation’ (Holt, 2006: 300). Whereas branding
can re-enchant mundane, tired or unloved products and services, brandization leverages their value
for investors, and thereby recuperates capitalism as an ethico-political complex.
Notes
Earlier versions of the article were presented at the ‘Re-thinking Cultural Economy Conference’, Centre for
Research on Socio-Cultural Change, University of Manchester, September 2007 and at seminar presentations
at Cardiff, Cambridge, Lund and Nottingham Trent Universities. I am grateful for comments and conversations arising from these presentations that have enabled me to develop the article. The article has also greatly
benefitted from comments provided by referees and the editors of this special issue.
1
2
3

4

5
6
7

For example, contemporary commentaries on differences in propositions about ‘value creation’ are
inclined to suggest that these speak to its ‘different dimensions’ (Lepak et al., 2007: 181).
See also note 30.
For reasons of space, discussion of the critical tradition is confined to Marxian analysis which,
arguably, has been particularly influential in studies of economic organization including labour
process studies.
This is not to suggest that the ‘object’, such as ‘brand value’, is reducible to the framework. On the
contrary, objects always escape efforts of theory to disclose their features (see Glynos and Haworth,
2007). What we know about ‘objects’ is incorrigibly limited by the interpretive frameworks deployed to
characterize and examine them. From this standpoint, objects of analysis are elusive as they cannot be
disentangled from what gives the ‘object’ visibility and significance (see Barud, 2007, especially chapter 8)
within particular ethico-political complexes.
See, for example, the Research Priorities (2006–8) of the Marketing Science Institute at http://www.msi.
org/pdf/MSI_RP06-08.pdf accessed 29 December 2007.
For a fuller history of branding, see Moor (2007).
The example is given by Thompson et al. (2007). They describe a branding agency specializing in ‘truly
holistic identities’ that was used to create an image for Keane, a British popular music band—something
that is alleged to have been kept secret because it contravened conventional ideas of rock authenticity,
This view assumes a touching degree of naivety and/or concern amongst Keane fans but it also projects
upon them a set of values (e.g. about the inappropriateness of involving professional image generators)

Willmott

8

9
10

11

12
13

14
15

16

17
18

535

with which they may not identify. As it happens, Keane themselves clearly did take exception to the
allegation and issued a spirited and stinging rebuttal of any suggestion that Moving Brands, the branding
agency, had manufactured their image. See http://www.keaneshaped.co.uk/faq/#stylist. The existence of
this public domain rebuttal, which would seem to cast further doubt upon the band’s desire to hush it up,
seems to have escaped the attention of Thompson et al. (2007) who make no reference to it.
The purchase of Kraft by Philip Morris in 1988 is widely regarded as a pivotal moment when most of
the purchase price of $12.6m was attributed to ‘the cost of the word “Kraft”’. Instead of being regarded
as an ‘add-on’ to the core business of production and sales, ‘a huge dollar value had been assigned to
something that had previously been abstract and unquantifiable—a brand name’ (Klein, 2000: 7–8).
The neologism is intended to resonate with ‘securitization’, the latter being the key driver of contemporary financialized capital asset growth characterized by some as ‘fictitious capital’ .
The term ‘post-consumer’ does not imply that consumption stops or even declines but, rather, that it is
sustained and driven on by processes of financialization, most notably by developing ingenious ways of
expanding credit for purposes of consumption.
As a thought experiment, imagine how the brand equity, and ultimately the market capitalization, of
Ebay would be damaged if all information provided by sellers and buyers was erased or if the company
was obliged to compensate those providing feedback.
Virgin’s brand-centric stratagem is particularly ‘clever’ as so much of the brand equity is acquired
cheaply by engaging in media stunts, often ending in heroic failure, that attract global publicity.
Branson, the CEO of Virgin, has defined his empire as ‘a leading branded venture capital organization’,
seeking 30 per cent internal rates of return on investments. ‘The Value of Virgin’, Daily Telegraph 3
December 2007. Available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/money/main.jhtml?xml=/money/2007/12/02/
ccrock102.xml. See also Osborne (2007).
To which the growth of speculative corporate treasury activity within companies has significantly
contributed.
The contingency of brand-building means that consumers may drain brands of value as well as infuse
them with worth—as is evident in the (temporary?) loss of ‘coolness’ of brands such as Gap as well as
McDonalds and Starbucks (see Thompson et al., 2006) and also in the subversive, culture-jamming
activities pursued by campaigning groups like ‘Adbusters’ (see Holt, 2002).
An illustrative example is the extensive but divided involvement of a Lego ‘brand community’ in the
development of its product Mindstorm. Its user-consumers were key initiators and facilitators of product
development but they were also resistant to aspects of it (see www.fbtb.com) The interested reader is
encouraged to turn to Kornberger (in press) and Antorini (2007). Recognition of such resistance points
to the emergence of other, potentially more subversive, forms of co-produced value creation (see
Bauwens, 2009)—in the form of peer-to-peer production that escapes private appropriation as it is protected by a general public license that, our course, also makes it available to commercial users.
Linux is a prominent example.
As participants in the ‘ethical economy’, user-consumers, such as ‘the programmer who decides to
spend his evening hours coding away at the Linux kernel’ (Arvidsson, 2009: 22), are seen to engage in
co-production to create and elaborate their identities, life-styles and friendship networks. Attentiveness
to how ‘self-organized forms of production’, mediated by ICTs ‘contain(ing) the possibility of a new,
rational way of organizing social and economic processes’ (Arvidsson, 2009: 14), offers a useful corrective to labour process analysts’ myopic focus upon paid labour in workplaces (see O’Doherty and
Willmott, 2009). It also suggests how ICT-mediated, commons-oriented, peer production of value
unleashes what Marx terms ‘General Intellect’—in the form of ‘networks, tacit knowledge and social
organization’ on ‘a societal scale, which is difficult to control and measure’ (Arvidsson, nd). In the field
of organization studies, Land and Böhm (2009) offer the most developed discussion of Arvidsson’s

536		

19

20

21

22

Organization 17(5)

‘ethical economy’ thesis. They follow Arvidsson’s (2006) debt to Lazzarato’s (1997, 2007) notion of the
‘political entrepreneur’ who, in contrast to the economic entrepreneur, is conceived to mobilize ‘community, affect and communicative flows’ (Arvidsson, 2006: 89). Of most direct relevance for the present
focus upon branding, the idea of ‘political entrepreneurship’ is assessed by Land and Böhm (2009) to be
useful in appreciating how marketing has been extended from a ‘technique for selling’ into a ‘mechanism’, notably in the form of brand management, ‘that is constitutive of social relations, information and
values for the market’ (Lazzarato, 2007: 92 cited in Land and Böhm, 2009: 10). Such entrepreneurship
is characterized as ‘political’ because it is not directly economic in any established sense: it involves the
production of meaning and subjectivity rather than the manufacture of goods. Land and Böhm (2009)
largely overlook post-Bravermanian labour process analysis, especially that influenced by Foucault,
which addresses the production of meaning and subjectivity in the manufacture of goods and services
(see O’Doherty and Willmott, 2009). Also conspicuously absent from their discussion is any reference
to the formation of capital and, more specifically, consideration of how capital is accumulated through
the translation of brand equity into brand value. The closest they come is when, in passing, they note
that ‘brand management continuously seeks to govern the production of immaterial value so as to realize
it as economic value’ (Land and Böhm: 14). There is no direct recognition of how the co-produced brand
equity contributes to market capitalization—something that, as noted earlier, becomes most apparent
when companies (e.g. Kraft, YouTube) are acquired.
As noted earlier, the chief exception to this private appropriation of the brand value generated by unpaid
labour is where production is governed by a general public license. This licence ensures that brand
equity cannot be directly monetized, although, as Bauwens (2009: 125) observes, companies ‘can do
many things to indirectly capture the value created by peer-producing communities’.
It seems doubtful that the architects of YouTube ever conceived of themselves as engaging in a community service, or a charitable venture, devised to facilitate the donation of ‘ethical labour’ for socially
beneficial purposes. If they did, then their venture did not remain charitable for long (see http://www.
nytimes.com/2007/02/07/technology/07cnd-google.html?ex=1328504400&en=96fcc0326d0a7ef6&ei=
5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss).
In a recent review of these studies, de Beijer (2008) notes that: ‘Barth et al. (1998) estimate the association between FinancialWorld brand value estimates and share prices over the period 1991 to 1996. They
find a significant positive association. Kerin and Sethuraman (1998) study US consumer goods companies on the 1995 and 1996 FinancialWorld’s Most-Valued Brands list and report a positive relation
between brand value estimates and firm value. They also find some indications that increases in brand
values are more likely to be reflected in firm value than are decreases in brand values. Custodio and
Rosario (2007) and Delcoure (2008) also find a positive association between brand value estimates and
firm value for US companies. Pahud de Mortanges and van Riel (2003) measure brand equity for Dutch
corporate brands using Young and Rubicam’s Brand Asset Valuator. They find a significant association
between this brand value indicator and various shareholder value measures’.
Accounting specialists are reluctant to include intangibles on the balance sheet even though their absence
places in question the claimed ‘representational faithfulness’ of financial statements. The exclusion of
intangibles is defended on the grounds that measures of intangible value lack the reliability attributed to
those used to value tangible assets. This justification is contested by others who suggest that the valuation
of tangible assets presents comparable difficulties: ‘it is well known that allocations, such as depreciation, are often arbitrary [and] the allocation of value between land and buildings is well accepted despite
its indeterminate nature’ (Power, 1992: 49). From this perspective, the ‘unreliability of measures’
argument is viewed as something of a smokescreen for a failure of collective will to agree a conception
of reliability that will support a common measure of a brand’s value: ‘If what “accountants are currently
prepared to recognise” is a contingent matter, then any attempt to shift the consensus of accepted practice

Willmott

23

24

25
26
27

28
29
30

537

is “political” in the sense that the widespread credibility of a new body of “expert” recognition knowledge must be established’ (Power, 1992: 51). The problem is that, politically, a substantial measure of
agreement on the measurement of tangibles has been brokered but has not (yet) been extended to the
valuation of intangibles.
As indicated in the previous note, accountants are strongly inclined to use and defend a method of
valuation, underpinned by a particular conception of reliability, that predates the era of the intangible
asset.
The methodology for calculating the contribution of brand value to market capitalization is contested. A
number of consultancies offer rival methodologies although Interbrand is by far the most influential. In
essence, the Interbrand methodology strips out operating costs, taxes, and charges for the capital
employed to arrive at the earnings attributable to intangible assets. The contribution of the brand is
estimated within those earnings in relation to other intangible assets (e.g. patents and management strength).
Future earnings are discounted to arrive at a net present value. Interbrand discounts against current interest rates and also against the brand’s overall risk profile so as to factor-in brand strength. See http://www.
businessweek.com/pdfs/2007/0732_globalbrands.pdf. See also Kerin and Suthuraman (1998: 271–2)
See Lury and Moor (2010) for a sociologically informed discussion.
‘So-called’ because their apparent bedrock solidity is precarious. In common with all measures of value,
tangible assets rely upon the buoyancy of confidence to sustain their worth.
This is evident, for example, in a frequently downloaded home video that criticizes one of Samsung’s
viral marketing campaigns. See http://gizmodo.com/gadgets/gadgets/us-to-samsung-viral-marketingdoesnt-work-please-stop-168495.php (accessed 4 November 2009).
See http://www.molinu.org/samsung_global_strategy_group (accessed 4 November 2009).
See http://www.samsung.com/co/aboutsamsung/samsunggroup/annualreport/downloads/2003/SAMAR04_
01_10p.pdf (accessed 4 November 2009).
Other attempts to do something similar include Thompson (2003) and Littler (2009).

Bibliography
Akasia, J. F. (2000) ‘Ford’s Model E’, Forbes 17 July, pp. 30–34.
Alvarez, L. H. R and Stenbacka, R, (2007) ‘Partial Outsourcing: A Real Options Perspective’, International
Journal of Industrial Organization 25(1): 91–102.
Antorini, Y. M. (2007) ‘Brand Community Innovation: An Intrinsic Case Study of the Adult Fans of the
LEGO Community’, Unpublished PhD, Copenhagen Business School.
Arrington, M. (2006) Google Has Acquired YouTube [Online]. TechCrunch. Available at: http://www.
techcrunch.com/2006/10/09/google-has-acquired-youtube/ (accessed 9 October 2006).
Arvidsson, A. (n.d.) ‘ Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy’ available at: http://p2pfoundation.net/
Crisis_of_Value_and_the_Ethical_Economy (accessed 3 November 2009).
Arvidsson, A. (2005) ‘Brands: A Critical Perspective’, Journal of Consumer Culture 5(2): 235–58.
Arvidsson, A. (2006) Brands: Meaning and Value in Media Culture. London: Routledge.
Arvidsson, A. (2007) ‘Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy’ available at: http://p2pfoundation.net/
Crisis_of_Value_and_the_Ethical_Economy (accessed 27 October 2009).
Arvidsson, A. (2008) ‘The Ethical Economy of Customer Coproduction’, Journal of Macromarketing 28(4):
326–38.
Arvidsson, A. (2009) ‘The Ethical Economy: Towards a Post-Capitalist Theory of Value’, New Left Review
97: 13–29.
Baldi, F. and Trigeorgis, L. ( 2008) ‘A Real Options Approach to Valuing Brand Leveraging Options: How
much is Starbucks Brand Equity Worth?’, working paper, available at: http://69.175.2.130/~finman/Reno/
Papers/StarbucksBrandValuation.pdf (accessed 4 November 2009).

538		

Organization 17(5)

Ballow, J. J., Burgman, R. J., Roos, G. and Molnar, M. J. (2004) ‘A New Strategy for Managing for Shareholder
Value: Intangibles, Future Value and Investment Decisions’, Journal of Business Strategy 25(3): 26–34.
Barth, M. E., Clement, M. B., Foster, G. and Kasznik, R. (1998) ‘Brand Values and Market Capitalization’,
Review of Accounting Studies 3(1–2): 41–68.
Barud, K. (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and
Meaning, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Batchelor, A. (1998) ‘Brands as Financial Assets’ in S. Hart and J. Murphy (eds) Brands: The New Wealth
Creators. London: Macmillan Business/Interbrand.
Baudrillard, J. (1981) For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign. St. Louis: Telos.
Bauwens, M. (n.d.) Dornbirn Manifesto Available at http://p2pfoundation.net/Dornbirn_Manifesto (accessed
4 November 2009).
Bauwens, M. (2009) ‘Class and Capital in Peer Production’, New Left Review 97: 121–41.
Berger, P. (1967) The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion. New York, NY:
Doubleday.
Brubaker, R. (1984) The Limits of Rationality: An Essay on the Social and Moral Thought of Max Weber.
London: George Allen and Unwin.
Burawoy, M. (1986) The Politics of Production: Factory Regimes Under Capitalism and Socialism. London:
Verson.
Business Week (2005) ‘Global Brands’, 1 August, available at: http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/
content/05_31/b3945098.htm (accessed 3 November 2009).
Business Week (2006) ‘Crowdsourcing: Consumers as Creators’, 13 July, available at: http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/jul2006/id20060713_755844.htm (accessed 2 November 2009).
Business Week (2007) ‘The 100 Top Brands—Here’s how Interbrand calculates the power in a name’, available
at: http://www.businessweek.com/pdfs/2007/0732_globalbrands.pdf (accessed 3 November 2009).
Chu, S. and Keh, H. T. (2006) ‘Brand Value Creation: Analysis of the Interbrand-Business Week Brand Value
Rankings’, Marketing Letters 17: 323–31.
Cook, S. (2008) ‘The Contribution Revolution: Letting Volunteers Build Your Business’, Harvard Business
Review, October, 60–69.
Coombe, R. (1988) The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation and the Law.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Corstjens, M. and Merrihue, J. (2003) ‘Optimal Marketing’, Harvard Business Review 81: 114–21.
Cova, B. and Dalli, D. (2009) ‘Working Consumers: The Next Step in Marketing Theory?, Marketing Theory
9(3): 315–39.
Custodio, C. and J. Rosario (2007) ‘Corporate Brand and Firm Value’, working paper, London School of
Economics.
Crane, D. and Bovone, L. (2006) ‘Approaches to Material Culture: The Sociology of Fashion and Clothing’,
Poetics 34(6): 319–33.
Davis, G. F. (2009) ‘The Rise and Fall of Finance and the End of the Society of Organizations’, Academy of
Management Perspectives 23(3): 27–44.
De Beijer, D., DeKimple, M., Dutordoir, M. and Verbeeten, F. H. M. (2008) ‘The Impact of Brand Value
Announcements on Firm Value’, working paper, Rotterdam School of Management, The Netherlands.
Also available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1344535 (accessed 3 November 2009).
Delcoure, N. (2008) ‘Corporate Branding and Shareholders’ Wealth’, working paper, Sam Houston State
University.
Dore, R. (2000) Stock Market Capitalism: Welfare Capitalism: Japan and Germany versus the Anglo-Saxons
(Japan Business and Economics Series). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dore, R. (2008) Financialization of the Global Economy, Industrial and Corporate Change, 17(6): 1097–112.

Willmott

539

Du Gay, P. Hall, S., Janes, L. and Mackay, H. (1996) Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman.
London: Sage.
Epstein, G. A. (2005) ‘Introduction’, in G.A. Epstein (ed.) Financialization and the World Economy. London:
Edward Elgar.
Erturk, I., Froud, J., Johal, S., Leaver, A. and Williams, K. (2007) ‘General Introduction: Financialization,
Coupon Pool and Conjecture’ (mimeo) subsequently published in I. Erturk, J. Froud, S. Johal, A. Leaver
and K. Williams (eds) Financialization at Work: Key Texts and Commentary. London: Routledge.
Ezzamel, M., Willmott, H.C. and Worthington, F. (2009) ‘Manufacturing Shareholder Value: The Role of
Accounting in Organizational Transformation’, Accounting, Organizations and Society 33(2–3): 107–40.
Feldwick, P. (1996) ‘What is Brand Equity Anyway, and How Do You Measure It’, Journal of the Market
Research Society 38(2): 85–105.
Fernández, P. (2001) ‘Valuation of Brands and Intellectual Capital’, working paper IESE Business School.
Available at: http://www.avaliacaodeempresas.com.br/artigos3/Valuatin%20of%20Brands%20and%20
Intellectual%20Capital.pdf (accessed 3 November 2009).
Fernández, P. (2002) Valuation Methods and Shareholder Value. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Foster, R. J. (2007) ‘The Work of the New Economy: Consumers, Brands and Value Creation’, Cultural
Antrhopology 22(4): 707–31.
Foster, R. J. (2008) ‘Commodities, Brands, Love and Kula: Comparative Notes on Value Creation in Honor
of Nancy Munn’, Anthropological Theory 8(1): 9–25.
Frieder, L. (2004) ‘Brand Perceptions and the Market for Common Stock’, working paper, The Anderson
School, UCLA subsequently published in Journal of Financial and Qualitative Analysis 40(1): 57–85.
Frieder, L. and Subrahmanyam, A. (2004) ‘Brand Perceptions and the Market for Common Stock’, available
at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=299522, subsequently published in Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40(1): 57–85.
Froud, J., Johal, S. and Williams, K. (2002) ‘Financialisation and the Coupon Pool’, Capital and Class
78: 119–51.
Gamble, A. (2009) The Spectre at the Feast: Capitalist Crisis and the Politics of Recession. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Glyn, A. (2006) Capitalism Unleashed: Finance, Globalization and Welfare. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Glynos, J. and Howarth, D. (2007) Logics of Critical Explanation in Social and Political Theory. London:
Routledge.
Goldman, P. (nd) ‘Advertising and the Production of Commodity Signs’, available at http://legacy.lclark.
edu/~goldman/contradictions/poleconsv3.html (accessed 5 January 2009).
Goldman, R. and Papson, S. (2006) ‘Capital’s Brandscapes’, Journal of Consumer Culture 6(3): 327–53.
Graham, P. (2002) ‘Hypercapitalism: Language, New Media and Social Perceptions of Value’, Discourse and
Society 13(2): 227–49.
Graham, P. and Jones, S. (2005) Hypercapitalism: New Media, Language, and Social Perceptions of Value.
Bern: Peter Lang.
Haigh, D. (1998) Brand Valuation: Understanding, Exploiting and Communicating Brand Values. London:
Financial Times Retail and Consumer.
Harvey, D. (2001) ‘The Art of Rent: Globalization, Monopoly and the Commodification of Culture’, in
L. Panitch and C. Leys (eds) Socialist Register 2002: A World of Contradictions. London: Merlin Press.
Harvey, D. (2005) A Brief History of Neo-Liberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hatch, M. J. and Schultz, M. (2005) Taking Brand Initiative: How Companies Can Align Strategy, Culture,
and Identity Through Corporate Branding. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Glynos, J. and Howarth, D. (2007) Logics of Critical Explanation in Social and Political Theory. London:
Routledge.

540		

Organization 17(5)

Helft, M. (2007) ‘YouTube’s Payoff: Hundreds of Millions for the Founders The New York Times’, available
at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/07/technology/07cnd-google.html?ex=1328504400&en=96fcc0326
d0a7ef6&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss (accessed 3 November 2009).
Holt, D. (2002) ‘Why Do Brands Cause Trouble? A Dialectical Theory of Consumer Culture and Branding’,
Journal of Consumer Research 29: 70–90.
Holt, D. (2004) How Brands Become Icons. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Holt, D. (2006) ‘Toward as Sociology of Branding’, Journal of Consumer Culture 6(3): 299–302.
IUF (2006) Feeding Financial Markets: Financialization and Restructuring in Nestlé, Kraft and Unilever,
(International Union of Food, Agricultural, Hotel, Restaurant, 1 Catering, Tobacco and Allied Workers’
Associations). Available at: http://asianfoodworker.net/tnc/financializing-foodTNCs.pdf (accessed 3
November 2009).
Jhally, S. and Livant, B. (1986) ‘Watching as Working: The Valorization of Audience Consciousness’, Journal
of Communication 36(3): 124–43.
Keller, K. L. (1993) ‘Conceptualizing, Measuring and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity’, Journal of
Marketing 57: 1–22.
Kerin, R. A. and Sethuraman, R. (1998) ‘Exploring the Brand-Value-Shareholder-Value Nexus for Consumer
Goods Companies’, Journal of Academic Marketing Science 26(4): 260–73.
Kimbrough, M. D. and McAlister, L. (2008) ‘Linking Marketing Actions to Value Creation and Firm Value:
Insights from Accounting Research; A Commentary on Shuba Srinivasan and Dominique M. Hanssens’
“Marketing and Firm Value: Metrics, Methods, Findings, and Future Directions”’, Journal of Marketing
Research, forthcoming. Available at: http://www.marketingpower.com/ResourceLibrary/Documents/
JMRForthcoming/Linking%20Marketing%20Actions%20(COM).pdf (accessed 4 November 2009).
Kindleberger, C. P. and Aliber, R. (2005) Manias, Panics and Crashes; A History of Financial Crises.
New York, NY: Wiley.
Klein, N. (2000) No Logo. London: Flamingo.
Klimecki, R. and Willmott, H. C. (2009) ‘From Demutualization to Meltdown: A Tale of Two Wannabe
Banks’, Critical Perspective in International Business 5(1/2): 120–40.
Kornberger, M. (in press) The Brand Society, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kozinets, R. V., Hemetsberger, A. and Schau, H. J. (2008) ‘The Wisdom of Consumer Crowds: Collective
Innovation in the Age of Networked Marketing’, Journal of Macromarketing 28(4): 339–54.
Krippner, G. R. (2005) ‘The Financialization of the American Economy’, Socio-Economic Review 3(2): 173–208.
Land, C. and Böhm, S, (2009) ‘The New “Hidden Abode”: Reflections on Value and Labour in the New
Economy’, Working Paper, Essex Business School, University of Essex.
Lazzarato, M. (1997) Lavoro immateriale, Verona: Ombre Corte.
Lazzarato, M. (2007) ‘Strategies of the Political Entrepreneur’, SubStance 36(1): 87–97.
Lee, Y. W. (2007) Samsung CEO Message. Available at: http://www.samsung.com/us/aboutsamsung/ir/
ceomessage/IR_CEOMessage.html (accessed 5 January 2009).
Lepak, D. P., Smith, K. G. and Taylor, M. S. (2007) ‘Value Creation and Value Capture: A Multilevel Perspective’,
Academy of Management Review 32(1): 18–195.
Lev, B. (2001) Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Lindemann, J. (2004) ‘The Financial Value of Brands’ in Clifton, R. Simmons, J. and Ahmad, S . (eds) Brands
and Branding. London: Economist Books.
Littler, C. (2009) ‘The Current Global Crisis as a Context for Labour and Industry in the Twenty-First Century’,
Labour and Industry 19(3): 5–28.
Low, G. S. and Fullerton, R. A. (1994) ‘Brands, Brand Management and the Brand Manager System:
A Critical-Historical Evaluation’, Journal of Marketing Research XXXI (May): 173–90.

Willmott

541

Lukas, B. A., Whitwell, G. J. and Doyle, P. (2005) ‘How Can a Shareholder Value Approach Improve
Marketing’s Strategic Influence?’, Journal of Business Research 58(4): 414–42.
Lury, C. (2004) Brands: The Logos of the Global Economy. London: Routledge.
Lury, C. and Moor, L. (2010) ‘Brand Valuation and Topological Culture’, in M. Aronczyk and D. Powers (eds)
Blowing up the Brand. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
MacKenzie, D. (2009) Material Markets: How Economic Agents are Constructed. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Madden, T. J., Fehle, F. and Fournier, S. (2006) ‘Brands Matter: An Empirical Demonstration of the Creation
of Shareholder Value Through Branding’, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 34(2): 224–35.
Marazzi, C. (2010) The Violence of Financial Capitalism. New York, NY: Semiotext(e).
Marketing Science Institute (2007) Research Priorities of the Marketing Science Institute (2006–2008).
Available at: http://www.msi.org/pdf/MSI_RP06–08.pdf (accessed 29 December 2007).
Martin, R. (2002) Financialization of Daily Life (Labor in Crisis). Philadephia, PA: Temple University Press.
Moor, L. (2007) The Rise of Brands. Oxford: Berg.
Muniz, A. M. and O’Guinn, T. C. (2001) ‘Brand Community’, Journal of Consumer Research 27: 412–32.
Nicholai, A. T., Schulz, A-C. and Thomas, T. W. (2009) ‘What Wall Street Wants—Exploring the Role of
Security Analysts in the Evolution and Spread of Management Concepts’, Journal of Management Studies,
47(1): 162–89.
Nixon, S. (2002) ‘Re-Imagining the Ad Agency: The Cultural Connotations of Economic Forms’ in P. Du Gay
and M. Pryke (eds) Cultural Economy: Cultural Analysis and Commercial Life. London: Sage.
O’Doherty, D. and Willmott, H. (2009) ‘The Decline of Labour Process Analysis and the Future Sociology of
Work’, Sociology 43(5): 931–51.
O’Neill, P. (2001) ‘Financial Narratives of the Modern Corporation’, Journal of Economic Geography 1: 181–99.
Orhangazi, O. (2008) Financialization and the US Economy. London: Edward Elgar.
Osborne, A. (2007) ‘The Value of Virgin’, Daily Telegraph 3 December 2007.
Pahud de Mortanges, C. and van Riel, A. (2003) ‘Brand Equity and Shareholder Value’, European Management
Journal 21(4): 521–27.
Pike, A. and Pollard, J. (2010) ‘Economic Geographies of Financialization’, Economic Geography 86(1):
29–51.
Power, M. (1992) ‘The Politics of Brand Accounting in the United Kingdom’, European Accounting Review
1: 39–68.
Raggio, R. D. and Leone, R. P. (2007) ‘The Theoretical Separation of Brand Equity and Brand Value: Managerial
Implications for Strategic Planning’, Journal of Brand Management 14: 380–95.
Raggio, R. D. and Leone, R. P. (2009) ‘Chasing Brand Value: Fully Leveraging Brand Equity To Maximise
Brand Value’, Journal of Brand Management 16: 248–63.
Rao, V. R., Agarwal, M. K. and Dahlhoff, D. (2004) ‘How is Manifest Branding Strategy Related to the
Intangible Value of the Corporation?’, Journal of Marketing 68: 126–41.
Roslender, R. and Hart, S.J. (2006) ‘Interfunctional Cooperation in Progressing Accounting for Brands’, Journal
of Accounting and Organizational Change 2(3): 229–47.
Rust, R. T., Ambler, T., Carpenter, G.S., Kumar, V. and Srivastava, R.K. (1994) ‘Measuring Marketing
Productivity: Current Knowledge and Future Directions’, Journal of Marketing 68(4): 76–89.
Salzer-Mörling, M. and Strannegård, L. (2004) ‘Silence of the Brands’, European Journal of Marketing
38(1): 224–38.
Schultz, M., Hatch, M. J. and Larsen, M.H. (2000) The Expressive Organization: Linking Identity, Reputation
and the Corporate Brand. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schulz, M., Antorini, Y. M. and Csaba, F. F. (2005) Corporate Branding: Purpose/People/Process. Copenhagen:
Copenhagen Business School Press.

542		

Organization 17(5)

Serfati, C, (2008) ‘Financial Dimensions of Transnational Corporations, Global Value Chain and Technological
Innovation’, Journal of Innovation Economics 2(2): 35–61.
Samsung Global Strategy (S. G. S.) (2009) Samsung Global Strategy Group. Samsung Global Strategy Group.
Available at: http://www.molinu.org/samsung_global_strategy_group (accessed 4 November 2009).
Simon, C. J. and Sullivan, M. W. (1993) ‘The Measurment and Determinants of Brand Equity: A Financial
Approach’, Marketing Science 12(1): 28–52.
Srinivasan, S. and Hanssens, D.M. (2008) ‘Marketing and Firm Value Metrics, Methods, Findings, and
Future Directions’, Journal of Marketing Research, forthcoming. Available at http://www.marketingpower.com/ResourceLibrary/Documents/JMRForthcoming/Marketing%20and%20Firm%20Value.pdf
(accessed 4 November 2009).
Smythe, D. W. (1977) ‘Communications: Blindspot of Western Marxism’ in T. Guback (ed.) Counterclockwise:
Perspectives on Communication, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Stalk, G. and Lachenauer, R. (2004) Hardball: Are You Playing to Play or Playing to Win?. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Taylor, R. L., Becerra, R., Stuart, P. and Case, S. A (2009) ‘Securitization of Brand Names: Basic Concepts
and its Use in Practice’, The Journal of Brand Management 17(1): 62–83.
Thompson, C. J . Rindfleisch, A. and Arsel, Z. (2006) ‘Emotional Branding and the Strategic Value of the
Doppelgänger Brand Image’, Journal of Marketing 70(January): 50–64.
Thompson, P. (2003) ‘Disconnected Capitalism: Or Why Employers Can’t Keep Their Side of the Bargain’,
Work, Employment and Society 17(3): 359–78.
Thompson, P., Jones, M. and Warhurst, C. (2007) ‘From Conception to Consumption: Creativity and the
Missing Managerial Link’, Journal of Organizational Behaviour 28: 625–40.
Thompson, P. and Smith, C. (2009) ‘Labour Power and Labour Process: Contesting the Marginality of the
Sociology of Work’, Sociology 43(5): 913–30.
Tollington, T. (2001) ‘UK Brand Asset Recognition Beyond “Transactions or Events”’, Long Range Planning
34(4): 463–87.
Weber, M. (1946) ‘Politics as a Vocation’ in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans. and ed. H. H. Gerth
and C. Wright Mills. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wernick, A. (1991) Promotional Culture: Advertising, Ideology and Symbolic Expression. London: Sage.
Whitwell, S. (2005) ‘Brands on the Balance Sheet’, available at: http://www.intangiblebusiness.com/Brandservices/Financial-services/Press-coverage/Brands-on-the-balance-sheet~299.html (accessed 23 November
2007).

Biography
Hugh Willmott is Research Professor in Organization Studies, Cardiff Business School. He
co-founded the International Labour Process Conference and the Critical Management Studies
Conference. He has a strong interest in the application of social theory to the field of management
and business. He currently serves on the board of Academy of Management Review, Organization
Studies, Journal of Management Studies and is an Associate Editor of Organization. Full details
can be found on his homepage: http://dspace.dial.pipex.com/town/close/hr22/hcwhome. Address:
Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Aberconway Building, Colum Drive, Cardiff CF10
3EU, UK. Email: willmotth@cardiff.ac.uk

