Rev Manag Sci (2018) 12:969–1002
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-017-0235-2
ORIGINAL PAPER

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand
equity drivers and moderating effects of product type
and word of mouth
Amin Ansary1 • Nik M. Hazrul Nik Hashim1

Received: 24 December 2015 / Accepted: 19 April 2017 / Published online: 22 April 2017
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2017

Abstract In today’s competitive landscape, organizations are progressively
searching for valuable practices to create strong consumer-based brand equity.
Managers must remain vigilant and receptive to factors that influence brand equity.
Accordingly, this paper addresses this issue. Specifically, the paper empirically
investigates the mediating roles of three drivers of brand equity in the brand
image—consumer-based brand equity relationship and explores the moderating
roles of product type and word of mouth (WOM) on the linkages between brand
image and brand equity. In order to understand these relationships, a questionnaire
survey was administered among brand consumers, yielding a total of 321 responses.
Confirmatory factor analysis and Cronbach’s alpha were utilized to estimate the
validity and reliability of the measures. Structural equation modeling with maximum likelihood estimation was employed to test the hypotheses. The authors find
that brand image positively affects brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand
awareness. Brand attachment and attitude positively influence consumer-based
brand equity. The findings show that brand attachment and brand attitude partially
mediate the relationship between brand image and brand equity. Product type and
WOM have a significant moderating effect on the relationships among brand image,
drivers of brand equity, and brand equity. The authors discuss the limitations of the
study and provide future research directions.
Keywords Brand image  Consumer-based brand equity  Drivers of brand equity 
Word of mouth  Contingent effects
JEL Classification M310
& Amin Ansary
amin.ansary1358@yahoo.com
1

Graduate School of Business, National University of Malaysia, 43600 Bangi, Selangor,
Malaysia

123

970

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

1 Introduction
Building strong brand equity is a key issue in today’s business world. Consumerbased brand equity could lead to robust distribution networks, establish product
brand extensions, and reinforce price elasticity (Kay 2006). Accordingly, marketers
are giving particular attention to the future outlook of brands, and are increasingly
searching for effective methods to create strong brand equity to remain competitive
or avoid becoming obsolete (Wilcox et al. 2008). To meet these challenges,
marketers and researchers have intensified the role of brand equity (Faircloth et al.
2001), as consumers are generally committed to a limited number of brands
(Thomson et al. 2005). Obviously, effective branding that results in favorable
consumer evaluations is a critical element in brand success.
Keller (1993) suggested that there are two types of brand equity measurements:
financial-based and consumer-based. Nonetheless, Keller’s consumer-based brand
equity model provides a framework for how consumers’ responses help in building
brand equity (Kakati and Choudhury 2013). A number of studies have focused on
this topic (e.g., Faircloth et al. 2001; Jaiprakash 2008; Mourad et al. 2011).
Notwithstanding the attention the topic has received, one of the main concerns for
marketers is the complex issue and inadequate understanding of consumer-based
brand equity, particularly with respect to predicting consumer behavior toward the
brand from a contingency perspective (Hamzaoui-Essoussi et al. 2011; Wang et al.
2006).
Another critical dimension of branding that has received considerable attention
is brand image (Keller 2001). Researchers have generally viewed brand image as
an important factor that affects consumers’ purchase decisions. A good brand
image strategy distinguishes a company’s brand from its competitors, resulting in
favorable evaluations and associations in the consumers’ mind (Kumaravel and
Kandasamy 2012). Accordingly, brand image is one of the most significant
factors that builds brand equity. Previous studies (e.g., Faircloth et al. 2001;
Jaiprakash 2008; Kim et al. 2003) have shown that brand image has a direct
effect on brand equity; however, they have not indicated how this relationship
exists. The existing literature has not yet identified the intervening mechanism
that describes the path of influence from the brand image context to brand
equity. It thus remains uncertain whether brand equity drivers play a significant
role in connecting brand image and brand equity. Consequently, drivers of brand
equity could be one of the prevailing mechanisms through which brand image
influences brand equity. Thus, it is important to identify potential brand equity
drivers (e.g., brand attachment, brand attitude, brand awareness) that shape the
relationship between brand image and brand equity. Accordingly, decision
makers could pay more attention to these drivers in order to boost consumerbased brand equity.
Very few researchers have tried to systematically investigate the moderating
effects between brand image and brand equity. Identifying moderating effects is
necessary, as it will enable scholars to understand whether differential relationships arise according to identifiable portions of their sample (Bryman and Cramer
1999). According to Christodoulides and Chernatony (2010), the brand category is

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

971

a critical factor in brand equity measurement. In this line, Lovett et al. (2013)
claimed that product type may act as a moderating variable, and suggested that
future research explore such frameworks. To the best of our knowledge, despite
efforts to assess the effect of brand image on brand equity, no research to date has
considered how such a relationship is affected by differences in product type. We
propose that brand image per se cannot adequately explain all variations in brand
equity, but rather that it is contingent on product type. Accordingly, among
different types of products, such as search goods and experience goods, the effect
of brand image on consumer-based brand equity may differ. As an example,
Adidas and Nike brands, which belong to the clothing and shoes categories, are
considered search goods, while Head & Shoulders and Pantene brands, which
belong to the haircare category, are treated as experience goods. The effect of
brand image on consumer-based brand equity may thus vary among these brands.
For instance, what if Adidas and Nike were to focus more on their brand image
compared to Head & Shoulders and Pantene? Or what if Adidas and Nike
attempted to strengthen their brand equity drivers to a greater extent compared to
Head & Shoulders and Pantene? Additionally, marketers wish to better understand
word of mouth (WOM) because traditional forms of communication (e.g.,
advertising) are tending to lose their effectiveness (Trusov et al. 2009). In other
words, WOM has become a much more influential factor on consumer behavior
compared to other forms of marketing communications, such as advertising and
publicity (Alam and Yasin 2010). Although WOM has been acknowledged as the
most effective marketing strategy (Misner 1999), the role of WOM and its impact
on the relationship between brand image and consumer-based brand equity has yet
to be investigated.
This study attempts to fill these gaps. It is designed to test a conceptual model
that incorporates the relationships between brand image and consumer-based brand
equity. Specifically, this study has two main purposes. First, it acknowledges that
both brand image and drivers of brand equity are vital to building strong brand
equity. Using a path model, the study examines how brand equity drivers mediate
the relationship between brand image and brand equity. Second, this study
investigates the moderating role of product type and WOM on the relationships
between brand image, drivers of brand equity, and brand equity. This study adds to
the existing literature by assessing the linkages between important brand constructs,
and examines the moderating impact of product type and WOM on brand equity.
Understanding such relationships can have important implications for branding
strategies. In this study, the model and hypotheses are conceptualized using
associative network memory theory.
This paper proceeds in the following manner. First, the theory of associative
network memory is described. The constructs of brand image, brand equity, and
drivers of brand equity are then defined. Next, the research hypotheses and
framework are introduced. This is followed by the research methodology, analysis,
and results. We conclude with implications and directions for future research.

123

972

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

2 Conceptual framework
2.1 Associative network memory theory
Associative network memory theory (ANMT) relies on how memory works (Srull
and Wyer 1989). Indeed, the theory assumes that memory contains pieces of
information called nodes (Smith 2004). A node plays the role of activator for other
nodes, either through external information obtained from external sources or
internal information retrieved from long-term memory (Keller 1993). Once an
individual perceives information from internal or external sources, it is decoded into
an abstract, mental language and is allocated to a node in the network knowledge
structure (Kreuzbauer and Malter 2005).
According to Keller (1993), memory principles influence understanding and
knowledge about a brand, and ultimately affect brand equity. Understanding the
structure of brand knowledge is critical because this knowledge influences
consumers’ when they think of the specific brand. That said, ANMT suggests that
semantic memory consists of a set of nodes that are connected to each other by
associations (Keller 1993). According to this theory, semantic information is ranked
in consumers’ minds in a hierarchical model, wherein nodes are connected by
association (Morrin 1999). Accordingly, the relationships between brand image,
drivers of brand equity, and brand equity, including the moderating effects of WOM
and product type, could be explained by ANMT because a necessary condition for
such links is establishing a brand node in a consumer’s memory.
2.2 Consumer-based brand equity and its drivers
According to Keller (1993), brand equity can be defined in terms of marketing
effects that are attributed to a brand; for example, particular behavioral responses
from the marketing of a product due to its name that would not occur if the same
product did not have a brand name. Accordingly, Keller (1993, p. 8) defined
consumer-based brand equity as ‘‘the differential effect of brand knowledge on
consumer response to the marketing of the brand’’. Consistent with this description,
Keller (1993) noted that a brand has a positive (negative) consumer-based brand
community if consumers respond more (less) enthusiastically to the product, price,
or promotion than they do to the same marketing mix activities when associated
with a fictitiously named version of the product. Therefore, measurement and
examination of brand equity are important because they reflect the health of the
brand and indicate whether the firm’s brand management is effective (Shabbir and
Rehman 2013). Indeed, a brand with higher equity tends to acquire higher market
share and prices can be positioned at a premium relative to competitors (Liao and
Cheng 2014). Accordingly, the importance of brand equity has been highlighted by
many researchers and marketers alike. For instance, Ailawadi et al. (2003),
Broniarczyk and Alba (1994), and Loken and John (1993) have written extensively
on the concept of brand equity and how it can be properly managed. Brand equity is
measured using two approaches: financial-based and consumer-based (Keller 1993).

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

973

From a financial perspective, brand equity focuses on the value of a brand for the
company. From the consumers’ point of view, brand equity concentrates on the
measurement of brand equity based on consumer behavior (Buil et al. 2013).
Keller’s consumer-based brand equity model provides a framework of how
consumers’ responses help in building brand equity (Kakati and Choudhury 2013).
Thus, the present study focuses on consumer-based brand equity. Numerous studies
have attempted to identify the fundamental drivers of brand equity (e.g., Chen 2010;
Keller and Lehmann 2003; Park et al. 2010).
From an array of brand constructs, we choose to focus here on three fundamental
brand equity drivers; namely, brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand
awareness. Park et al. (2010) defined brand attachment as the feeling of selfconnection, bond, or attachment towards a brand. Attachment to a brand is an
emotional state involving the relationship between consumers and the brand (Louis
and Lombart 2010). Brand attachment is important because it affects consumers’
behavior and boosts brand profitability and consumers’ lifetime value (Park et al.
2010). In other words, strong brand attachment results in resistance among
consumers to changing to other brands and an enhanced ability of the brand to stand
up to unexpected news or information (e.g., a product failure; Keller and Lehmann
2003). In the context of brand equity, it is important to predict psychological
influences and their continuity, even in the face of an unclear future or fluctuating
environments (Meyer 2012). Consistent with this, some scholars (e.g., Fedorikhin
et al. 2008; Thomson et al. 2005) have emphasized the importance of emotion,
which is a psychological attribute in brand attachment. Indeed, brand attachment
concentrates on the connection between brand and consumer, so understanding it
provides insight into consumer behavior, and especially purchase behavior (Meyer
2012). In addition, once consumers have become attached to a certain brand, they
are more likely to purchase it (Meyer 2012) and pay a premium price for it
(Thomson et al. 2005). Therefore, attachment is crucial in explaining the strength of
the tie between consumer and brand, because attachment influences behaviors that
enhance brand profitability (Thomson et al. 2005), resulting in higher brand equity.
Accordingly, researchers have shown a significant interest in consumers’ attachment
to brands as a determinant of brand equity (Park et al. 2010).
Brand attitude refers to a consumer’s overall evaluation of a brand in terms of
both product and non-product attributes. These attributes include a set of established
assumptions or feelings toward the brand, including brand appeal, likability, and
favoritism (Spears and Singh 2004). Brand attitude is important because it forms the
basis of consumers’ behavior (e.g., choosing the brand), such that a positive
consumer attitude toward a brand and a negative attitude toward competing brands
affect their intention to purchase the brand (Laroche et al. 1996; Voester et al.
2016). As a result, some researchers have found that brands acquire more market
share when consumer attitude toward them becomes more positive (e.g., Faircloth
et al. 2001). Brand attitude is considered to be a vital factor because it is a
foundation of consumer behavior (Keller 1993). Brand attitude can predict
behaviors that are of interest to companies, such as purchase intention, purchase
behavior, and brand choice (Priester et al. 2004). In addition, a consumer’s brand
attitude is considered to be representative of their overall associations with the

123

974

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

brand, and as a factor that brings about higher durability in consumer memory in
relation to other associations (Chattopadhyay and Alba 1988). According to the
above discussion, previous research in commercial branding has highlighted the
significance of brand attitude and its possible antecedent relationship to outcome
constructs such as brand equity (Faircloth 2001; Keller 1993; Lane and Jacobson
1995). Hence, Park et al. (2010) suggested that brand attachment and brand attitude
are two essential drivers of brand equity.
Aaker (1991, p. 61) defined brand awareness as ‘‘the ability for a buyer to
recognize or recall that a brand is a member of a certain product category’’. There
can be no brand if there is an absence of brand awareness (Wilcox et al. 2008), and
brands that are better known among consumers are more likely to be included in
consumers’ consideration set (Huang and Sarigöllü 2012). Consumers only choose
brands of which they are aware (Shabbir and Rehman 2013); in fact, brand
awareness plays a critical role in their final choice (Baker et al. 1986). In accordance
with ANMT, Yasin (2009) claimed that brand awareness refers to a brand node in
consumers’ memory that indicates the ability of consumers to recognize the brand
among others in its category. In other words, brand awareness indicates how well a
brand identity (e.g., a brand name) comes to consumers’ minds. Brand awareness is
considered to be a significant factor in the consumer decision-making process, and
plays a critical role in ensuring that consumers think about a certain brand when
they envision a particular product category (Keller 1993). Put another way,
increasing brand awareness enhances the likelihood that a specific brand will enter a
consumer’s consideration set (i.e., range of brands contemplated for purchase)
(Nedungadi 1990). Moreover, brand awareness could influence brand choice in the
consideration set, even in the absence of other brand associations (Keller 1993).
Many consumers tend to make purchase decisions only from familiar and wellestablished brands (Jacoby et al. 1977). In addition, in low-involvement buying
decision processes, a minimum level of brand awareness will naturally help
consumers to choose a specific product (Bettman and Park 1980). Accordingly,
Keller and Lehmann (2003) claimed that brand awareness is one of the most
important factors of the brand value chain, contributing to enhanced brand equity.
This implies that brand awareness could be considered an important driver of brand
equity. Overall, these constructs are highly relevant for strategic brand decisions
(Eastman and Eastman 2011; Keller and Lehmann 2003; Park et al. 2010; Yasin
2009), which, in turn, influence brand equity (Yoo et al. 2000).
To sum up, brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand awareness are three
interrelated constructs that reflect the domain of essential brand equity drivers. In
Keller and Lehmann’s (2003) brand value chain model, brand attachment, brand
attitude, and brand awareness, which are the sources of brand equity, are transferred
to the next stage of the value chain; namely, brand performance. Taken together,
these brand equity drivers influence how consumers will respond in the marketplace
(Ambler et al. 2002). Ambler et al. (2002) noted six specific consequences of such
reactions: price premium (i.e., how much extra consumers are willing to pay for an
alternative product due to its brand), price elasticity (i.e., the extent to which
consumers becoming more or less demanding when the price goes up or down),
market share (i.e., the ability of marketing programs to build loyalty and drive brand

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

975

sales), brand expansion (i.e., the success of the brand in supporting category
extensions and new product development in relevant categories), cost structure (i.e.,
the ability to cut marketing expenses due to prevailing consumer mindset), and
brand profitability. Accordingly, in order to better understand how to manage and
monitor consumer-based brand equity, we examine brand attachment, brand
attitude, and brand awareness.
2.3 Brand image and brand equity
Since the 1950s, brand image has been considered a vital concept in marketing
(Gardner and Levy 1955). Consistent with ANMT, Keller (1993, p. 3) defined the
brand image as ‘‘perceptions about a brand as reflected by the brand associations
held in consumer memory’’. Brand associations are informal nodes that are linked in
memory to the meaning of the brand for consumers, and play a vital role in
achieving strong brand equity (Keller 1993). In other words, brand image describes
the way consumers think about a brand and the feelings the brand brings to their
minds when they think about it (Keller 2001). Therefore, a good brand image
enables firms to achieve competitive advantage in the market (Roy and Banerjee
2007). From the end-users’ perspective, a strong brand image has a positive effect
on consumers’ perception of the brand, which results in their being more likely to
choose the brand over those competitors, and thereby makes the brand more
competitive overall (Keller 1993). Moreover, Keller (1993) stated that a strong
brand image affects the firm’s pricing strategy, promotion efforts, and distribution
of the brand. Similarly, Kim et al. (2008) claimed that brand image has a significant
effect on the brand’s marketing activities. According to Park et al. (1986), once a
new product has acquired a distinct image relative to competing brands, its position
in the market will become secure and its market share enhanced. However, some
scholars have suggested that the significance of brand image in relation to
consumers’ product assessment varies among product types, such that brand image
may not be the main appraisal criteria for all products. For example, Graeff (1997)
suggested that beer is frequently advertised and marketed mainly based on image,
whereas automobile producers market their products based on non-image aspects,
such as safety, warranty, price, and headroom.
Marketing researchers have proposed that brand image is a significant component
of brand equity (e.g., Keller 1993). Consistent with this, a number of studies have
conceptualized the direct impact of the brand image on brand equity (Faircloth et al.
2001; Krishnan 1996; Lassar et al. 1995). A summary of empirical studies on the
relationship between brand image and brand equity is provided in Table 1. Several
observations can be drawn from the review. First, most studies have examined the
direct effect of brand image on brand equity. Thus, there is a lack of studies
identifying the intervening mechanism that clarifies the path of influence from brand
image to brand equity. Brand equity drivers potentially play a mediating role in
connecting the brand image with brand equity, such that enhancing these drivers is
believed to potentially increase brand equity (Keller and Lehmann 2003; Park et al.
2010). Brand equity drivers could serve as one of the mechanisms through which
brand image influences brand equity, and their mediating role thus needs to be

123

Product/service category

Athletic shoes, Camera
film, and television sets

Sweaters

Electronics products

Toothpaste

Author(s)/year

Yoo et al. (2000)

Faircloth et al.
(2001)

123

Chen (2010)

Gill and Dawra
(2010)

Evaluating Aaker’s sources of brand
equity and the mediating role of
brand image

Examining the effect of green brand
image on green brand equity

Examining the effect of brand
attitude and brand image on brand
equity

Exploring the relationship between
retail brand image and brand equity

Purpose of the study

Table 1 Empirical studies on the relationship between brand image and brand equity

(3) Both green satisfaction and green
trust positively and significantly
influenced green brand equity

DV: green brand equity

DV: brand equity

Mediator: brand image

Results indicated that brand
awareness positively and
significantly influenced the brand
image. In addition, brand image
positively and significantly
affected brand equity

(2) Green brand image significantly
and positively influenced both
green satisfaction and green trust

Mediator: green satisfaction, green trust

IV: brand awareness

(1) Green brand image significantly
and positively influenced green
brand equity

The results indicate that brand image
is significantly influenced brand
equity; however, brand attitude
does not significantly affect brand
equity

Retail brand image indirectly
influenced brand equity through
dimensions of brand equity
(perceived quality and brand
awareness)

Major findings

IV: green brand image

DV: brand equity

IV: brand image, brand attitude

DV: brand equity

Mediator: dimensions of brand equity

IV: retail brand image (or store image)

Variables

976
A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Product/service category

Mobile phone

Healthcare sector

Chocolate

Bank

Author(s)/year

Akbar and Azhar
(2011)

Chahal and Bala
(2012)

Emari et al.
(2012)

Fatema et al.
(2013)

Table 1 continued

Examining the effect of brand image
and brand loyalty on brand equity

Examining the mediating impact of
brand image on brand equity

Examining the effect of perceived
service quality, brand loyalty, and
brand image on brand equity

Investigating the impact of brand
image on brand equity

Purpose of the study

DV: brand equity

IV: brand image, brand loyalty

DV: brand equity

Mediator: brand image

IV: brand association, brand personality

DV: brand equity

Mediator: brand loyalty

IV: perceived service quality, brand
loyalty, brand image

DV: brand equity

IV: brand image

Variables

Both brand loyalty and brand image
significantly and positively
influenced brand equity

Brand image is significantly and
positively influenced brand equity.
Moreover, the mediating role of the
brand image between the brand
association and brand personality
as independent variables and brand
equity as dependent variables was
confirmed

The direct effect of brand image on
brand equity was negative and
insignificant. Yet, Brand image
indirectly influenced brand equity
through brand loyalty

The authors showed that brand image
has a significant positive effect on
brand equity

Major findings

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…
977

123

123

Electric and electronic
products

Bank

Clothing

Cosmetic products

Ng et al. (2014)

Subramaniam
et al. (2014)

Sasmita and
Mohd Suki
(2015)

Liao et al.
(2017)

Exploring the effect of brand
personality on the relationship
between antecedents of brand
personality (e.g. brand awareness,
brand association, perceived brand
quality, brand image, and brand
reputation) and brand equity

Examining the effect of brand
association, brand loyalty, brand
awareness, and brand image on
brand equity

Examining the effects of brand
loyalty, image, and quality on
brand equity

Analyzing the influence of brand
perceive quality and credibility on
consumer perceptions towards a
brand green image, green value,
and green equity

Purpose of the study

DV: brand equity

Mediator: brand personality

IV: antecedents of brand personality

DV: brand equity

IV: brand association, brand loyalty,
brand awareness, brand image

DV: brand equity

IV: brand loyalty, brand image, brand
quality

DV: green brand equity

Mediator: green brand perceived value,
brand credibility, green brand image

IV: perceived quality of brand

Variables

IV Independent variable; DV dependent variable

In the review of empirical studies, only the variables related to this study are presented

Product/service category

Author(s)/year

Table 1 continued

The results showed that brand image
significantly and positively
influenced both brand personality
and brand equity

All brand association, brand loyalty,
brand awareness, and brand image
positively and significantly
influenced brand equity

Brand image and brand loyalty has a
significant positive effect on brand
equity

Perceived quality of brand
significantly and positively
influenced the green brand image.
Likewise, the green brand image is
positively and significantly
associated with green brand equity

Major findings

978
A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

979

explained, since exploration of potential mediators would provide better insights
into how to leverage and attain organizational goals.
Second, prior studies have investigated the relationship between brand image and
brand equity in the context of a single product/service type. For example, Faircloth
et al. (2001) empirically tested the impact of brand image on brand equity in the
sweater category. Likewise, Chen (2010) examined the relationship between green
brand image and green brand equity in electronics products. Emari et al. (2012)
assessed the impact of brand image on brand equity in chocolate. However,
although the literature has suggested that brand image significantly influences brand
equity, evidence demonstrating the moderating role of product type is lacking. The
literature has sought to understand whether the strength of the relationship between
brand image and brand equity differs among different product types. Consistent with
this, previous studies (e.g., Chiang and Dholakia 2003; Fang 2012; Huang et al.
2009) have suggested that the impact of variables that influence consumer decisions
to purchase a brand may differ depending on whether the products are search goods
or experience goods. ‘‘Search goods are defined as those dominated by product
attributes for which full information can be acquired prior to purchase; experience
goods are dominated by attributes that cannot be known until purchase and use of
the product or for which information search is more costly and/or difficult than
direct product experience’’ (Klein 1998 p. 196). Consumers know that looking for
information is costly and time-consuming, and that there exist trade-offs between
the perceived costs and the advantages of additional searching (Stigler 1961). The
cost of information searches may influence consumer decisions to purchase a brand,
thereby affecting consumer-based brand equity. In this vein, Lovett et al. (2013)
called for an extension to the literature in terms of exploring whether product type
acts as a vital moderating construct. Accordingly, we use product type as a
moderator.
Third, the literature has emphasized the value of WOM in the consumer decisionmaking process (Brown et al. 2007). WOM communication is generally considered
to influence and inform consumers’ attitudes and behavioral intentions (Chevalier
and Mayzlin 2006; Xia and Bechwati 2010). Therefore, the role of WOM in
consumer behavior research comes to play. Consistent with this, many scholars have
conducted research on the direct effect of WOM on consumer-related variables
(e.g., Anwar Mir 2013; Chevalier and Mayzlin 2006; Herr et al. 1991; Jalilvand and
Samiei 2012). Yet, in spite of the importance of WOM’s moderating role, it has
largely been ignored. In this regard, while previous studies (e.g., Bambauer-Sachse
and Mangold 2011) have investigated the direct effect of WOM on consumer-based
brand equity, the moderating role of WOM has not, to our knowledge, been
examined to date. We, thus take WOM as an additional moderating variable in our
study.
We choose to focus on WOM for several reasons. First, WOM is considered an
important force in the marketplace, influencing attitudes, preferences, purchase
intention, and consumer decision making (Jalilvand and Samiei 2012; Wangenheim
2003). Accordingly, there has been a great deal of focus on WOM in the literature
on relationship marketing as a potential reaction that can result from endeavors
directed at shaping relationships with customers (Ismail and Spinelli 2012; Verhoef

123

980

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

et al. 2002). Indeed, firm profitability may be derived from the degree to which
consumers engage in WOM, because they talk about their experience (positive or
negative) with products or services with family, friends, colleagues, and others,
which can affect the purchase behaviour of potential customers (Berry et al. 1994;
Molinari et al. 2008; Zeithaml 2000), and in turn influences consumer-based brand
equity. Second, when an individual thinks about a product, specific information that
is most strongly linked to that product comes to their mind. This information comes
from different sources, among which one of the most important is WOM. In other
words, the literature has suggested that WOM is one of the sources that inform
consumers’ recall of a specific brand, whereby enhances brand awareness (Pitta and
Katsanis1995). Therefore, managers have become interested in WOM in the light of
the fact that it is frequently an essential driver of consumer behavior, such as the
adoption of a new product or the decision on which product to purchase. As a result,
WOM may even be the main indicator of the product’s success (Godes and Mayzlin
2004), leading to increased consumer-based brand equity.
Based on the above, our paper contributes to the existing literature in three ways.
First, it examines the mediating role of brand equity drivers through which brand
image may connect with consumer-based brand equity. Second, while previous
studies have focused on a single product type, we examine the relationship between
brand image and consumer-based brand equity along two prominent product types
(i.e., search goods vs. experience goods). This should provide meaningful insights
for marketers and managers through which they can understand whether the strength
of the relationship between brand image and brand equity varies between different
product types. Third, the present study extends previous works by building a
conceptual framework that incorporates the moderating role of WOM communication effects on the relationship between brand image and consumer-based brand
equity.
2.4 The effect of brand image on brand equity drivers
Brand attachment relates to consumers’ psychological perception of a brand (Belaid
and Behi 2011). In other words, brand attachment refers to consumers’ experience
of a brand. It prevents consumers from switching to other brands, increases
consumers’ forgiveness when facing negative information, and evokes consumer
loyalty to the brand (Thomson 2006). Brand image has a similar effect, as it
promotes thinking about a brand, and can increase excitement when thinking about
it (Roy and Banerjee 2007). Therefore, both brand image and brand attachment are
formed based on informational nodes linked to the brand nodes in the associative
network memory. A positive brand image could create positive feelings towards the
brand (Porter and Claycomb 1997), which, in turn, can result in greater emotional
brand attachment (Malär et al. 2011). In addition, Belaid and Behi (2011) suggested
that promoting brand image may lead to effective brand attachment. Accordingly,
an established brand with a strong image will most likely lead to an enhanced
emotional attachment to the brand. Thus, we propose that brand image has a
positive effect on brand attachment.

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

981

Brand attitude underlies consumer behavior and brand choice. Consumers with a
positive attitude toward a brand are willing to pay premium prices for the brand
(Keller 1993). Therefore, a significant aspect of the brand image that influences
consumers’ responses to prices is the overall brand attitude. Keller (1993) stated that
brand attitude is about (1) consumers thinking about a brand’s attributes and
benefits, and (2) judgment of their beliefs. It is therefore reasonable to predict that
brand image could has a direct effect on brand attitude. Porter and Claycomb (1997)
claimed that brand image could produce a positive attitude towards the brand.
Moreover, Kim (2000) argued that promoting brand image could result in creating a
strong brand attitude. Hsieh et al. (2004) also suggested that brand image should
include overall brand attitude. Specifically, a positive brand image could encompass
positive brand attitudes. Therefore, we predict that brand image has a positive effect
on brand attitude.
Brand awareness influences which brands are considered by consumers, and also
affects which brands are chosen from the consideration set. Thus, brand awareness
has a significant effect on the consumer decision-making process (Macdonald and
Sharp 2000). In fact, brand awareness is related to the probability that a brand name
comes to consumers’ minds easily (Keller 1993). Prior research has examined the
impact of brand awareness on brand choice (e.g., Macdonald and Sharp 2000), but
not many researchers have studied the predictors of brand awareness. More
specifically, extant studies (e.g., Keller 1993; Esch et al. 2006) have only considered
the effect of brand awareness on brand image, and not the reverse. This suggests that
the popularity of a certain brand (i.e., brand awareness) leads to attractiveness of the
brand (i.e. brand image). On the contrary, Padilla and Watson (2010) claimed that
brand image may also influence brand awareness. Consistent with this, Djakeli
(2012) stated that a robust brand image is an important component for building
brand awareness. Indeed, creating a positive brand image may lead consumers to
develop brand perceptions toward a specific brand through others’ reactions with
regard to the brand (Charumbira and Stotlar 2015). That is, positive actions by
others towards a specific brand (e.g., positive WOM) may influence consumers to
develop favorable associations for the brand. This may convey brand information to
other consumers, and thereby increase brand awareness (Charumbira and Stotlar
2015). In addition, Kayaman and Arasli (2007) claimed that brand image may
increase the probability of brand choice, and hence consumer brand awareness.
Therefore, this study asserts that a strong brand image will increase the likelihood
of brand identification. This, in turn, is related to consumer buying behavior,
particularly the identification of alternative choices among favorable brands that
exhibit a strong image. As a result, the brand image may have a positive effect on
brand awareness. To sum up, we propose that brand image has a positive effect on
brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand awareness. Thus, we propose the
following hypotheses:
H1

Brand image has a significant positive effect on brand attachment.

H2

Brand image has a significant positive effect on brand attitude.

H3

Brand image has a significant positive effect on brand awareness.

123

982

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

2.5 The effects of brand image and respective drivers on brand equity
The preceding hypotheses suggest a relationship between brand image and brand
equity drivers. This section aims to show how these focal brand constructs relate to
consumer-based brand equity. Brand image, which is founded in associative
network memory, is crucial to consumer decision making and consumers’
evaluation of a specific brand (Faircloth et al. 2001), and may contribute to
building strong brand equity (Holden 1992). Brand associations, which are obtained
via marketing mix activities, are important factors in building brand image. Scholars
have claimed that building brand equity is partially related to the nature of brand
associations that create the brand image (Faircloth et al. 2001). In addition, Pitta and
Katsanis (1995) suggested that a unique, favorable, and strong brand image will
remain in the consumer’s mind, thereby contributing to increased brand equity.
Scholars have proposed that brand image is a critical component of brand equity
(Keller 1993). Krishnan (1996) indicated that brands with high equity are more
likely to have a more positive brand association (brand image) than those with low
equity. In addition, Lassar et al. (1995) suggested that higher brand image is
associated with higher brand equity. Moreover, Faircloth et al. (2001) found that
brand image has a significant positive influence on brand equity. Thus, we
hypothesize:
H4

Brand image has a significant positive effect on brand equity.

Individuals with a strong attachment to the brand desire to help the organization
to succeed (Fullerton 2005). Accordingly, Park et al. (2010) claimed that attachment
to a brand is important because it influences consumers’ behavior, leading to
increased profitability and consumer lifetime value. Moreover, Thomson (2006)
suggested that consumers’ feelings that are linked to brand attachments are the basis
of strong brand relationships. Thomson et al. (2005) claimed that strong brand
attachment may relate to investment in the brand. For example, consumers may be
willing to pay a premium price to attain the brand. Thus, we can assume that brand
attachment has a positive effect on brand equity.
Faircloth et al. (2001) and Buil et al. (2009) specified that brand equity is affected
by consumers’ attitude toward a brand. In addition, Faircloth et al. (2001) stated that
the market share of two-thirds of brands will increase when consumers’ attitudes
toward these brands becomes positive. Keller (1993) also suggested that consumers
who have a strong attitude toward a brand are more willing to pay a premium price
for it. If consumers have a positive attitude toward a brand, there is a greater
likelihood that the brand will be preferred or considered for purchase. Thus, it can
be assumed that positive attitude leads to high consumer-based brand equity.
Huang and Tsai (2013) suggested that brand awareness is one of the factors that
companies with a brand orientation enjoy. Brand awareness is one of the most
important components in creating brand equity (Seno and Lukas 2007); hence, it is
reasonable to propose that a high level of consumer awareness toward a brand may
lead to high consumer-based brand equity. More specifically, brands exhibiting a
higher degree of awareness warrant consumer confidence and familiarity; thus, they
should be associated with higher brand equity. Taken together, we assume that all

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

983

three drivers of brand equity have a positive impact on brand equity. Thus, the
following hypotheses are put forth:
H5

Brand attachment has a significant positive effect on brand equity.

H6

Brand attitude has a significant positive effect on brand equity.

H7

Brand awareness has a significant positive effect on brand equity.

2.6 Moderating effect of product type
Product classification is a significant research aspect in consumer behavior studies
because consumer behavior varies with attributes of certain product types (Bei and
Widdows 2004). Accordingly, Nelson (1974) divided products into two groups
based on a simplified theory of consumers’ quest for quality products: search goods
and experience goods. Search goods are those for which consumers can determine
the level of quality prior to purchase via inspection (e.g., shoes, apparel), whereas
for experience goods, consumers cannot determine the quality prior to purchase
(e.g., shampoo, deodorant). To the best of our knowledge, previous researchers have
only examined consumer-based brand equity in relation to a specific product
category or service. For example, Kayaman and Arasli (2007) and Kim et al. (2008)
examined brand equity in the context of hospital services. Faircloth et al. (2001)
found that a positive brand image can significantly increase brand equity in
sweaters. They also indicated that brand attitude does not significantly influence
brand equity. However, among different product types, the effect of the brand image
may differ. Lovett et al. (2013) examined the characteristics of brands, and
mentioned that product type may play an important moderating role. In this study,
we focus on clothing, shoes, handbags, and wallets as search goods; and deodorant,
shampoo, clocks, and watches as experience goods. We selected these products
because they are frequently used by Malaysian consumers.
Individuals who have greater familiarity with the brand, generated through direct
or indirect brand-related experiences, tend to be more knowledgeable about the
brand and its attributes (Alba and Hutchinson 1987). King and Balasubramanian
(1994) found that when assessing search goods, consumers are more likely to
employ their own decision-making strategies compared to when they are assessing
experience goods. This is because it is difficult to assess the quality of experience
products prior to purchase, and individuals are more likely to accept product
recommendations for these products than for search goods (Senecal and Nantel
2004; Sellers-Rubio and Más-Ruiz 2015). In addition, buyers of experience products
are less likely than those of search products to engage in free-riding behavior
(Huang et al. 2009). The reason for this is that since individuals put greater effort
into assessing experience attributes, the initial cost of gaining experience
information is higher (Huang et al. 2009).
Moreover, one of the main advantages of pre-purchase searching is that it reduces
the perceived risk associated with buying a product. For search goods, consumers
are highly confident in the acquired information prior to purchase; on the contrary,
information about experience goods is subjective, and rooted in consumer

123

984

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

judgments and beliefs of individuals (Wright and Lynch 1995). Recognizing that
different types of products encompass different consumer behavioral aspects (e.g.,
product assessment, information search, perceived risk, consumer involvement)
when arriving at a purchase decision, we predict that there is a difference between
types of products in estimating consumer-based brand equity. Thus, we propose
that:
H8 Product type has significant moderating effects on the relationships between
brand image, drivers of brand equity, and brand equity.
2.7 Moderating effect of WOM
The significance of WOM in marketing is not a new phenomenon (Keller 2007). In
other words, WOM may be the oldest way of exchanging opinions on different
goods and services offered by markets (Goyette et al. 2010). According to Arndt
(1967), WOM refers to oral communication among people regarding a brand,
product, or service. WOM is one of the most influential sources of information
transferred by consumers (Duana et al. 2008), and encompasses well-documented
advantages (Hoch and Ha 1986). Research on WOM has indicated that consumers
rely on recommendations from other people in purchase decision-making; that
people are motivated to spread their opinion about a product; and that people have
different degrees of impact on their friends, colleagues, and families in WOM
communication (Trusov et al. 2009). Researchers have found that WOM has a
significant effect on consumers’ decision-making process, in terms of increasing
acceptance of a new product when WOM on that product is positive (Sheth 1971),
and switching away from a brand when they receive negative information about it
(Bone 1992). Indeed, individuals may reduce the risks associated with their
purchases by looking for information from reliable sources, such as friends or those
who have relevant expertise (Cobb-Walgren et al. 1995).
A number of studies have demonstrated that WOM communication often
significantly influences judgments on brands. For example, Engel et al. (1969) found
that individuals often rely on WOM when choosing an automotive diagnostic center.
Feldman and Spencer (1965) also indicated that people utilize WOM when choosing a
physician. Furthermore, consumers trust WOM when assessing the potential purchase
of a new product or service (Brown and Reingen 1987). Other researchers have
specified that WOM affects brand attitude (e.g., Herr et al. 1991; Anwar Mir 2013) and
brand awareness (Pitta and Katsanis 1995). Brand success relies on creating bonds
(e.g., attachment, familiarity, etc.) with customers. These customers engage in
multiple social networks, where they influence one another through WOM, shaping
attitudes and behaviors that can strengthen or weaken these bonds (Allsop et al. 2007).
Therefore, WOM has become an important benchmark for capturing consumers.
Srivastava (2009) claimed that the buildup of brand equity depends on consumers
holding the brand in their mind. WOM plays a critical role in shaping consumer
perceptions (Plummer 2007). However, WOM could have both a positive and
negative influence on consumers’ perception towards a brand (Lim and Chung
2011). Positive WOM enhances the likelihood of purchasing, whereas negative

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

985

WOM results in diffusion of complaints, and yields a detrimental effect (Xu and
Chan 2010). Thus, in the present study, we predict that WOM plays a moderating
role on the relationships among brand image, drivers of brand equity, and consumerbased brand equity. It can be inferred that the effects on the drivers of brand equity,
as well as brand equity itself, depend on whether consumers engage heavily in
WOM. Formally, we predict that:
H9 WOM has significant moderating effects on the relationships between brand
image, drivers of brand equity, and brand equity.
The conceptual framework comprising H1 to H9 is illustrated in Fig. 1. The
present study postulates that the brand concepts (i.e., brand image, brand
attachment, brand attitude, brand awareness, and consumer-based brand equity)
are interrelated and represent different aspects of an individual’s brand perception
and processing. As shown in Fig. 1, brand image positively influences brand equity
directly, as well as through brand equity drivers, suggesting that brand equity
drivers partially mediate the relationship between brand image and brand equity. A
superior brand image can be distinguished from others and is firmly positioned in
the consumers’ mind, and thereby has potential to increase the brand equity (Pitta
and Katsanis 1995).
H4: 0.33***

H1: 0.65***

Brand
Image

H2: 0.66***

H3: 0.63***

Brand
Attachment

Brand
Attitude

Brand
Awareness

H5: 0.36***

H6: 0.25**

Consumerbased Brand
Equity

H7: -0.15 (NS)

H8: Product
Type

H9: Word of
Mouth

Fig. 1 The relationships between brand image and brand equity. * p \ .05; ** p \ .01; *** p \ .001;
NS not significant

123

986

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Brand image is associated with consumer experience with the brand (Hung
2008). Correspondingly, brand attachment is formed based on consumers’
experiences with the brand, and prevents consumers from switching to other brands
even when unfavorable information is received (Thomson 2006). Therefore, a
positive brand image can increase brand equity through brand attachment.
Brand image was established from the concept of associative network memory,
and is vital for consumer brand evaluations and building brand equity (Faircloth
et al. 2001). Consumers capitalize on product cues to create beliefs about a product,
which in turn shapes their purchase behavior. In general, brand image is considered
to be made up of product cues (Cordell 1992; Thorelli et al. 1989), and consumers
shape stereotypical beliefs about products from particular brands and the features of
products (Yasin et al. 2007). Consequently, brand image has the ability to evoke
consumers’ beliefs about product features, and influences their evaluations thereof
(Srikatanyoo and Gnoth 2002). This implies that positive brand image fosters
positive brand attitude among consumers, and this eventually results in enhanced
brand equity.
A strong brand image could increase brand equity as it enables the brand to command
larger margins (Keller 1993). However, a brand that is retrieved early and recalled easily
will have a stronger impression in the consumer’s consideration set (Alba and
Chattopadhyay 1986), which in turn influences product purchase (Vieceli and Shaw
2010). A brand with a positive image that is recalled prior to other brands of the same
category may have more positive brand equity compared to competing brands.
2.8 Control variables
To investigate the effect of extrinsic factors on the relationships between the
research constructs, we incorporate several control variables into our research model
and analysis. These include gender, age, income, and price consciousness. Price
consciousness is defined as the extent to which buyers concentrate on searching and
paying a low price for a product or service (Kukar-Kinney et al. 2012).

3 Methodology
3.1 Sample and data collection
We collected data using a structured survey questionnaire. The questionnaires were
administered to students in Malaysia based on the convenience sampling method.
Respondents were initially requested to choose a consumer product and identify the
name of a brand based on a product category of their choice (i.e., search goods,
namely clothing, shoes, handbags, and wallets; and experience goods, namely
deodorant, shampoo, clocks, and watches). The statements for all multiple-item
constructs were based on a five-point Likert scale (anchored by 1 = ‘‘strongly
disagree’’ to 5 = ‘‘strongly agree’’). Participants were asked to answer the
questionnaire based on the brand they identified earlier. The participants provided
demographic information (i.e., gender, age, monthly income, and education level) in

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

987

the last section of the questionnaire. A pre-test with a small sample (n = 30) of
experts in the area and population under study was conducted. The participants were
asked to provide their opinion about the overall structure of the questionnaire and
problems relating to the clarity of the items and instructions. We adapted the items
in the questionnaire based on the feedback received from the pre-test.
According to Bentler and Chou (1987), a sample size can be as low as a ratio of
5:1 between the number of responses and items in the questionnaire. Accordingly,
we administered 352 questionnaires, assuming that some would be returned
incomplete; of these, 321 were usable. Among the participants, 117 were male
(36%) and 204 were female (64%); 115 (36%) were aged 20 or below, 166 (52%)
were between 21 and 30, 32 (10%) were between 31 and 40, and 8 (2%) were
41 years old or older. Concerning monthly income, 231 respondents (72%) had a
monthly income of 1000 RM (Ringgit Malaysia) or below (at the time of data
collection, 1 USD = 3.2 RM), 45 (14%) had a monthly income of 1001–2500 RM,
30 (9%) had a monthly income of 2501–4000 RM, and 15 (5%) had a monthly
income of 4001 RM or higher. In terms of education level, 25 participants (8%) had
a diploma or below, 193 (60%) had a bachelor’s degree, and 103 (32%) had a
master’s degree or above.
3.2 Measures
All items in the questionnaire, except for those on demographic variables and
product type, were measured based on a five-point Likert scale. The participants
were requested to indicate their opinion (anchored by 1 = ‘‘strongly disagree’’ to
5 = ‘‘strongly agree’’) to a series of statements (shown in Table 1) about the brands
they had identified. For brand image, we adapted the measurements from Martin and
Brown (1990), Aaker (1996), and Weiss et al. (1999). The items included functional
image, affective image, and reputation image. Brand attachment included four items
used by Louis and Lombart (2010). The brand attitude measures were adopted from
Spears and Singh (2004). For the brand awareness construct, we adopted measures
from Oh (2000). For brand equity, we employed three items that were used in He
and Li’s (2011) research. The measurement for WOM was adapted from Lam et al.
(2009) and Vázquez-Casielles et al. (2013). To measure price consciousness, which
served as a control variable, we adopted items from Kukar-Kinney et al. (2012).
Following Nelson (1974), products were classified into two groups, namely search
goods and experience goods. We coded ‘‘search goods’’ as 0 and ‘‘experience
goods’’ as 1 in our analysis.

4 Results
4.1 Validity and reliability
In order to refine the measures and assess the validity of the constructs,
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was used for the entire set of constructs.
Two items were removed due to low factor loadings (less than .50; see Table 2),

123

988

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Table 2 Confirmatory factor analysis: construct measurement summary
Construact and item description

Standardized factor
loadings

Brand image (a = .84, CR = .86, AVE = .51, HSIC = .48)
1. This brand has a high quality

.74

2. This brand has better characteristics than its competitors

.74

3. This brand has a personality that distinguishes itself from competitors

.69

4. This brand is a brand that does not disappoint its customers

.65

5. This brand is one of the best brands in the sector

.73

6. This brand is stable in the market.

.70

Brand attachment (a = .83, CR = .84, AVE = .57, HSIC = .55)
1. I love this brand very much and care about it

.80

2. I am connected to this brand

.67

3. I am attracted to this brand

.84

4. Thinking about this brand brings me a lot of pleasure

.69

Brand attitude (a = .89, CR = .90, AVE = .64, HSIC = .60)
1. I feel that this brand is appealing

.73

2. I feel that this brand is good

.86

3. I feel that this brand is pleasant

81

4. I feel that this brand is favorable

.81

5. I feel that this brand is likable

.77

Brand awareness (a = .88, CR = .89, AVE = .67, HSIC = .48)
1. This brand name is familiar

.78

2. This brand name is well-known.

.91

3. This brand name is visible

.67

4. This brand name is famous

.87

Word of mouth (a = .75, CR = .81, AVE = .51, HSIC = .24)
1. I share my information about this brand with people

.67

2. I seek out the advice of people before I choose this brand

.74

3. The probability of accepting advice from other people is high

.72

4. The probability of choosing this brand before receiving recommendations
is lowa
5. The probability of choosing this brand after receiving recommendations
is high

.71

Brand equity (a = .81, CR = .81, AVE = .59, HSIC = .47)
1. It makes sense to buy this brand instead of other brands, even if they are
the same

.73

2. Even if another brand has similar features, I would prefer to buy this
brand

.81

3. If there is another brand as good as this brand, I prefer to buy this brand

.76

Price consciousness (a = .72, CR = .75, AVE = .51, HSIC = .12)
1. I check the price even for inexpensive brands before buying

.50

2. I read price tags of the products I buya
3. Low price is an important consideration in my purchases

123

.83

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

989

Table 2 continued
Construact and item description

Standardized factor
loadings

4. No matter what I buy, I shop around to get the lowest price

.76

All constructs were measured with a five-point Likert scale: 1 = Strongly Disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree
CR composite reliability, AVE average variance extracted, HSIC highest squared inter-construct
correlation
a

Item was dropped during the scale purification process

which resulted in a satisfactory fit to the data. Table 2 shows a summary of CFA
results.
The results show that our measurement model fitted the data adequately:
v2 = 608.53 (p \ .001); d.f. = 352; v2/d.f. = 1.73, normed fit index (NFI) = .90,
goodness of fit index (GFI) = .90, incremental fit index (IFI) = .95, comparative fit
index (CFI) = .95, and root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) = .05.
These results show that the proposed model could be accepted (Hair et al. 2010).
To assess the validity of the constructs, we used convergent and discriminant
validity methods. As indicated in Table 1, the average variance extracted (AVE) of
each construct was higher than .50. Accordingly, the measures show adequate
convergent validity (Kamdar and Dyne 2007). Concerning discriminant validity, we
compared squared inter-construct correlations for pairs of constructs with the AVE
of each construct. As indicated in Table 2, all AVE scores were larger than the
corresponding highest squared inter-construct correlation estimates. Therefore, there
is sufficient evidence for discriminant validity (Kamdar and Dyne 2007).
To assess the internal consistency of the constructs, we used the Cronbach’s
alpha coefficient. As shown in Table 2, the Cronbach’s alpha of all constructs was
higher than .70. Additional support for the reliability of the constructs, specifically
composite reliability (CR) scores, is also shown in Table 2. All CR scores were
larger than .70. Accordingly, the constructs can be said to demonstrate adequate
internal consistency (Fornell and Larcker 1981; Nunnally 1978).
4.2 The relationship between brand image and brand equity
To examine the hypothesized relationships, we performed Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) with the maximum likelihood estimation method using the
model without moderators. Based on our CFA results, the model was tested with
standardized coefficients and other fit statistics. To assess the differential effects,
standardized coefficients as path coefficients are reported. First, the overall model fit
was examined. The Chi square (v = 412.327, degrees of freedom [d.f.] = 200) is
significant at the .001 level. The fit indices are as follows: NFI = .90, IFI = .95,
CFI = .95, RMSEA = .05. According to Hair et al. (2010), it can be concluded that
the model fitted the data reasonably well.
H1, H2, and H3 examine the effect of brand image on brand attachment, brand
attitude, and brand awareness, respectively (Table 3). As indicated in Table 3, all

123

990

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Table 3 Standard coefficient and t-value for each path
Number

Hypotheses

Standard coefficient

T-value

1

Brand image ? Brand attachment

.65***

10.58

2

Brand image ? Brand attitude

.66***

17.05

3

Brand image ? Brand awareness

.63***

13.06

4

Brand image ? Brand equity

.33***

4.05

5

Brand attachment ? Brand equity

.36***

6.05

6

Brand attitude ? Brand equity

.25**

7

Brand awareness ? Brand equity

-.15 (NS)

2.54
-2.20

Control variables
1

Gender ? Brand equity

.05 (NS)

.64

2

Age ? Brand equity

-.04 (NS)

-.64

3

Income ? Brand equity

-.03 (NS)

-.53

4

Price Consciousness ? Brand equity

.03 (NS)

.61

* p \ .05; ** p \ .01; *** p \ .001; NS not significant

three paths were highly significant (p \ .001), indicating a positive effect on brand
attachment (c = .65, t = 10.58), brand attitude (c = .66, t = 17.05), and brand
awareness (c = .63, t = 13.06). Accordingly, H1, H2, and H3 receive strong
support.
To test H4 to H7, both product image and brand equity drivers were set as
independent constructs, and brand equity was set as the dependent construct. The
results shown in Table 3 indicate that brand image had a significant positive effect
on brand equity (c = .33, t = 4.05) at the significance level of .001. Therefore, H4
is supported. Brand attachment (c = .36, t = 6.05) and brand attitude (c = .25,
t = 2.54) had significant positive effects on brand equity (p \ .001, p \ .01,
respectively). Therefore, H5 and H6 are supported. The path from brand awareness
to brand equity, however, was not significant (c = -.15, t = -2.20, p [ .1). Thus,
H7 is not supported. These results suggest that to attain stronger brand equity, firms
should concentrate on improving brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand image,
rather than intensifying brand awareness. According to Fig. 1, brand attachment and
brand attitude partially mediate the relationship between brand image and brand
equity. In specific terms, brand image positively affects brand equity through brand
attachment and brand attitude. None of the control variables (i.e., gender, age,
monthly income, and price consciousness) had a significant effect on brand equity
(Table 3).
4.3 The moderating effects of product type and WOM
One widely used procedure to test moderating effects in SEM involves splitting the
scale at a certain point and assigning the values above and below that point as two
groups (MacCallum et al. 2002; Im et al. 2008). H8 and H9 examine the moderating
effects on the relationships among brand image, drivers of brand equity, and brand
equity. Because product type is a categorical construct, we used multi-group

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

991

analysis with AMOS to test H8. We conducted the test in a two-step procedure.
First, the appropriate structural parameters were constrained to be equal across
groups, which resulted in producing an estimated covariance matrix for each group
and a total v2 value for the sets of sub-models as the section of a single structural
system. The parameter equality constraints were then eliminated, which led to
generating a second v2 value with lower degrees of freedom. The moderating effects
were tested by evaluating whether there is a statistical difference between the two v2
values. If the change in v2 value, normally a reduction, is statistically significant, a
moderator effect exists (Brockman and Morgan 2003; Im et al. 2008). These two
steps solved the issue of the difference between the two models being affected by
error variances and factor loadings (Zhang et al. 2013). Once the moderating effect
has been examined and the significant differences between the two groups
considered, the standard coefficients between the two groups should be compared
(Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002). If the change is higher than .1, this means that the
difference is at a highly significant level (Sàà). If the change is higher than .05 and
less than .1, this means that the difference is at a significant level (Sà). If the change
is less than .05, this indicates that there is no significant difference (NS). However,
if the path is at a significant level for one group and not for another, the difference is
at a significant level (Sà).
As indicated in Table 4, there were significant differences between search goods
and experience goods (Dv2 = 34.43, p \ .05). This suggests that product type could
have acted as a moderator; thus, H8 is supported. Brand image strongly influenced
brand attachment for both product types, with no significant difference. Brand
image had a significant effect on brand attitude for both product types, and its
influence was stronger for search goods than for experience goods
(csearch goods = .70 [ cexperience goods = .64). The brand image also significantly
influenced brand awareness for both product types. Although brand attachment had
a significant effect on brand equity for both product types, the effect was much
higher for experience goods than for search goods (cexperience goods = .46 [ csearch goods = .25). Brand attitude had a highly significant effect on brand equity for
both product types. However, its effect on brand equity was much higher for search
goods than for experience goods (csearch goods = .61 [ cexperience goods = .31).
Finally, brand awareness had no significant effect on brand equity for both product
types.
Because WOM is not a categorical construct, we split the groups into high and
low levels using the median split approach (Baron and Kenny 1986; MacCallum
et al. 2002) to test H9. The results (Table 4) indicate that there was a significant
difference between low and high levels of WOM (Dv2 = 40.94, p \ .05). Thus,
WOM could have acted as a moderator, and thereby H9 receives support. Brand
attachment had a significant effect on brand equity for both low and high levels of
WOM, with no significant difference. Brand image significantly affected brand
attachment for both groups of WOM; however, its effect on brand attachment for
people who engaged in the levels of WOM was much higher than for those who
engaged in high levels of WOM (clow = .69 [ c high = .50). In addition, brand
image was found to significantly influence brand attitude, with a significant
difference between the two levels of WOM. Although the brand image had a

123

123
.68***
.25*
.61***

Brand image ? Brand awareness

Brand attachment ? Brand equity

Brand attitude ? Brand equity

Brand awareness ? Brand equity

3

4

5

6

* p \ .05; ** p \ .01; *** p \ .001

NS no significant difference; Sà significant; Sàà highly significant

Multigroup analysis for WOM: Dv2 = 40.94, p \ .05

Multigroup analysis for product type: Dv = 34.43, p \ .05

2

.70***

Brand image ? Brand attitude

2

-.15

.65***

Brand image ? Brand attachment

1
12.77
8.72
2.36
3.83
-1.34

.62*** (Sà)
àà

.46*** (S )
.31*** (Sàà)
-.02 (Sàà)

10.53

.64*** (S )

à

.65*** (NS)

-.28

2.86

6.36

10.24

13.31

10.53

-.02

.32**

.44***

.65***

.69***

.69***

Low

7.69

-.10 (Sà)

.48*** (Sàà)

.40*** (NS)

.57*** (Sà)

-.21

2.48

5.23

9.05

12.24

.50*** (Sàà)
.59*** (Sàà)

Low

t-value
High

Search goods

Search goods

Experience goods

Standard coefficient

t-value

Standard coefficient
Experience goods

WOM

Product type

Hypotheses

Number

Table 4 Comparison of the coefficients between search goods and experience goods, and low and high levels of WOM

-1.06

4.05

4.77

8.48

10.73

6.06

High

992
A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

993

significant effect on brand awareness, its influence was stronger in the low level of
WOM compared to in the high level of WOM. Brand attitude significantly
influenced brand equity for both low and high levels of WOM. The effect of brand
attitude on brand equity was much higher for individuals who were highly engaged
in WOM than for those who had little engagement in WOM (chigh = .48 [ clow = .32). Brand awareness did not significantly affect brand equity for either the
low or the high level of WOM engagement.

5 Discussion
5.1 Summary
The results captured in this study show the usefulness of our conceptual model in
understanding the link between brand image and brand equity. The results indicate
that brand image has a positive effect on brand attachment, brand attitude, and brand
awareness. This is consistent with previous researchers’ suggestions (Belaid and
Behi 2011; Kayaman and Arasli 2007; Porter and Claycomb 1997). The results are
also consistent with previous findings (Faircloth et al. 2001; Wilcox et al. 2008) that
brand image appears to have a strong influence on brand equity.
The results of this study verify the mediating role of brand attachment and brand
attitude. These constructs were found to partially mediate the effect of brand image
on brand equity. According to Frazier et al. (2004), a mediator clarifies how or why
a predictor leads to its outcome construct. Our findings imply that positive
perceptions about a brand are critical, and are likely to help consumers positively
evaluate a brand, and enhance their attachment towards it. Based on our findings, we
can conclude that brand attachment and attitude are important elements relative to
brand awareness in order to generate strong brand equity.
The results confirm that the brand concepts in the present study (i.e., brand
image, brand attachment, brand attitude, brand awareness, and consumer-based
brand equity) are interrelated. Brand image boosts brand equity, and this is mediated
by brand attachment and brand attitude. Brand image, attachment, and attitude are
prerequisites of consumer-based brand equity. Therefore, developing a positive
image, strengthening brand attachment, and creating an affirmative attitude among
consumers should be synchronized to enhance consumer-based brand equity. In
addition, brand image is an antecedent of brand attachment, brand attitude, and
brand awareness.
In the present research, the moderating roles of product type and WOM on the
relationship between brand image and consumer-based brand equity were investigated. Although brand image was found to significantly influence brand
attachment for both product types, there was no significant difference between
search goods and experience goods. Moreover, we found that brand image affected
brand attitude and brand awareness across both product types, with a significant
difference between search goods and experience goods. Indeed, the effect was
higher for search goods than for experience goods. That is, promoting brand image
could result in generating a higher level of positive brand attitude and brand

123

994

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

awareness among search goods compared to experience goods. The results also
indicate that brand attachment has a significant influence on brand equity for both
product types, with a higher effect for experience goods than for search goods.
Based on our findings, the effect of brand attitude on brand equity is much stronger
for search goods than for experience goods. Our results show that brand awareness
does not significantly influence brand equity; this applies to both search and
experience goods. Some scholars (e.g., Keller 1993; Kayaman and Arasli 2007)
have previously emphasized the importance of brand awareness in generating brand
equity. Although awareness of a brand is fundamental for it to be part of consumers’
consideration set, this research suggests that it is not a key component of brand
equity. Our result is consistent with the study of Bailey and Ball (2006) and
Kayaman and Arasli (2007), who also found that brand awareness is not an essential
element to building brand equity in their respective areas. This implies that simply
having a brand name does not ensure success in the marketplace (Bailey and Ball
2006); other factors, such as developing a positive brand attitude and brand
attachment are important in fostering brand equity.
WOM appears to significantly moderate the effect of brand image on brand
attachment, brand attitude, and brand awareness. Similarly, the impact of brand
attitude on consumer-based brand equity is significantly moderated by WOM. The
results show, however, that WOM does not moderate the relationship between brand
attachment and brand equity. This is perhaps partly due to the fact that brand
attachment is formed based on individuals’ perceptions of a brand (Belaid and Behi
2011), rather than acceptance of recommendations from others. An interesting
finding is that although brand awareness does not significantly influence brand
equity, this relationship is significantly moderated by WOM.
5.2 Contributions to scholarship
Theoretically, this study contributes to the literature by offering a comprehensive
model with multiple branding constructs that examine direct and contingent
relationships. Our study contrasts with past empirical research in that we suggest
that the relationship between brand image and brand equity is context specific. We
believe that considering multiple brand constructs, coupled with product type and
WOM as moderators, provides more insightful information to understand brand
equity. In short, this study broadens the conceptualization of the impact of brand
image on brand equity.
5.3 Managerial implications
This study provides a number of important practical implications for marketers and
managerial decision-making. First, the study highlights the importance of brand
image and equity for current businesses. In today’s competitive business world, it is
difficult for companies to differentiate themselves from their competitors. Technology leaders typically view business growth through product proliferation and
innovation as a major challenge, as the present market is occupied by rivals with
very little product differentiation. Firms need to search for ways to remain

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

995

competitive in the marketplace. One way to achieve this goal is to create a positive
brand image in the consumer’s mind. Although there are numerous factors that may
affect consumers’ purchase decision-making process, brand image is doubtless
highly relevant to managers, as it significantly increases consumers’ brand
attachment, attitude, and awareness (as shown in this study). Not only are these
elements important for brand recall, but they also allow such brands to be
considered in future purchases (Wilcox et al. 2008). This, in turn, increases brand
equity.
Second, this study implies that brand image and brand equity are moderated by
product type and WOM. When managers examine the effect of brand image on
brand equity, product type and WOM should be taken into consideration. The
findings of this study suggest that firms selling search goods, such as Adidas and
Nike, should concentrate more on promoting their brand image, compared to those
selling experience goods, such as Head & Shoulders and Pantene, in order to
reinforce brand attitude and awareness. Therefore, the present study suggests that
the effect of brand image is more pertinent for products that have search properties
(e.g., color, size, and style) rather than those with experience properties (e.g., the
cleansing and lathering properties of shampoo). In other words, firms selling search
goods are more likely to increase their brand attitude and brand awareness through
building a positive brand image. In addition, in terms of brand equity drivers, brands
selling search goods, such as Adidas and Nike, should devote greater attention to
developing positive brand attitude among prospective buyers, while those selling
experience goods, such as Head & Shoulders and Pantene, should focus more on
reinforcing brand attachment in order to build strong consumer-based brand equity.
Apart from that, it is apparent that managers have low influence on WOM, but
should be aware of its impact on branding effectiveness. Our study indicates that the
effect of brand image on drivers of brand equity is much stronger when consumers
engage in a low volume of WOM. Put another way, the effect of consumers’ overall
perception of the brand on drivers of brand equity is weaker when consumers
engage in a high level of WOM. This may be partly due to the fact that consumers
also share unsatisfactory experiences with the brand when participating in high
levels of WOM (Collier 1995; Tong et al. 2013), which, in turn, has an adverse
effect on consumer behaviors and brand attitude. Conversely, the impact of brand
attitude on consumer-based brand equity is stronger when consumers engage in high
levels of WOM. Therefore, by managing brand image and WOM communications,
marketers can take advantage of drivers of brand equity (i.e., brand attachment,
brand attitude, and brand awareness in this study), and ultimately enhance the equity
of their brands. Although WOM is formally outside the control of the company,
Godes et al. (2005) suggested four strategies for them to manage WOM; that is, by
playing the role of an observer, moderator, mediator, or participant in WOM
communications. As an observer, the company simply gathers information to
understand how its customers think about it and what its rivals are doing. As a
moderator, the company goes beyond listening to encourage discussion. The
company normally realizes its moderator role by setting up a platform to allow
customers to exchange information or embrace a customer recommendation
program. As a mediator, the company takes control of WOM messages and

123

996

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

disseminates them by itself. In this sense, the company tries to control communication content and channels. Finally, the company could be more active and play
the role of a direct participant in WOM communications. This can be achieved via
social networks such as Facebook.
Third, managers should pay particular attention to building brand attachment and
attitude, as this can greatly enhance brand equity, as well as mediating the
relationship between brand image and brand equity. Indeed, for managers and
marketers, enhancing the level of attitude and attachment is critical to increasing the
effect of brand image on brand equity. Firms should also continue to elevate
positive evaluations of their brands, while at the same time safeguarding against
negative WOM.
5.4 Limitations and future research directions
As with any other research, this study has limitations. First, our study is crosssectional in nature; hence, it only deals with identifying relationships, rather than
causes. Because brand image normally requires an extended period to influence
consumers, it is possible that time may have altered our findings, especially at later
stages of the product lifecycle. Therefore, our findings should be interpreted with
caution. Future studies could address the relationship between brand image and
brand equity based on a longitudinal study for better understanding. Second, among
drivers of brand equity presented in the literature, we examined only three variables.
Thus, future research could address other brand assets, such as brand loyalty and
customer perceptions of brand ethics. Third, this study mainly concentrated on
specific moderating variables between brand image and brand equity. Future
research should extend the model by examining other possible moderators (e.g.,
product radicalness, conspicuous consumption, self-congruence, consumer interface
quality) at high and low levels. Fourth, in the present study, the participants were
students who occupied one homogeneous group with similar thinking patterns.
Future research could extend the study to other consumer segments and compare the
results with the findings of our research. Fifth, the research was conducted in
Malaysia. Since different cultures may involve different attitudes, it would be
sensible to duplicate the present framework in other countries and note the
similarity (or dissimilarity) of findings relative to our study. Sixth, the present
research employed only four search goods (i.e., clothing, shoes, handbags, and
wallets) and four experience goods (i.e., deodorant, shampoo, clocks, and watches).
Future research could replicate the study in other industries to gain more insight.
Finally, the setting for marketers and brands may have changed dramatically due to
the influence of digitalization. In particular, the understanding of WOM has shifted
against the background of social networks. Therefore, future studies should consider
social media and new technologies in WOM, as this could make significant
contributions to the field. In conclusion, this research appears to be one of the few
empirical studies investigating brand equity that conceptualizes direct and
contingent linkages in a single analysis. Given the paramount importance of
branding in today’s competitive setting, more research is needed to enable us to
understand how brand equity can further be enhanced.

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

997

References
Aaker DA (1991) Managing brand equity. The Free Press, New York NY
Aaker DA (1996) Measuring brand equity across products and markets. Calif Manag Rev 38(3):102–120
Ailawadi KL, Lehmann DR, Neslin SA (2003) Revenue premium as an outcome measure of brand equity.
J Mark 67:1–17
Akbar US, Azhar SM (2011) The drivers of brand equity : brand image, brand satisfaction and brand trust.
Sukkur Institute of Business Administration, Sukkur, pp 1–18
Alam SS, Yasin NM (2010) The antecedents of online brand trust: Malaysian evidence. J Bus Econ
Manag 11(2):210–226
Alba J, Chattopadhyay A (1986) Salience effects in brand recall. J Mark Res 23(4):363–369
Alba JW, Hutchinson JW (1987) Dimensions of consumer expertise. J Consum Res 13(4):411–454
Allsop DT, Bassett BR, Hoskins JA (2007) Word of mouth research: principles and applications. J Adv
Res 47(4):398–411
Ambler T, Bhattacharya CB, Edell J, Keller KL, Lemon KN, Mittal B (2002) Relating brand and
customer perspectives on marketing management. J Serv Res 5(1):13–25
Anwar Mir I (2013) Examination of attitudinal and intentional drivers of non-deceptive counterfeiting in
a south Asian context. J Bus Econ Manag 14(3):601–615
Arndt J (1967) Rollout product-related conversations in the diffusion of a new product. J Mark Res
4:291–295
Bailey R, Ball S (2006) An exploration of the meanings of hotel brand equity. Serv Ind J 26(1):15–38
Baker W, Hutchlnson JW, Moore D, Nedungadl P (1986) Brand familiarity and advertising: effects on the
evoked set and brand preference. Adv Consum Res 13(1):637–642
Bambauer-Sachse S, Mangold S (2011) Brand equity dilution through negative online word-of-mouth
communication. J Retail Consum Serv 18(1):38–45
Baron RM, Kenny DA (1986) The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological
research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J Pers Soc Psychol 51(6):1173–1182
Bei LT, Widdows R (2004) Consumers’ online information search behavior and the phenomenon of
search vs. experience products. J Fam Econ Issues 25(4):449–467
Belaid S, Behi AT (2011) The role of attachment in building consumer-brand relationships: an empirical
investigation in the utilitarian consumption context. J Prod Brand Manag 20(1):37–47
Bentler PM, Chou CP (1987) Practical issues in structural modeling. Sociol Methods Res 16(1):78–117
Berry LL, Parasuraman A, Zeithaml VA (1994) Improving service quality in America: lessons learned.
Acad Manag Exec 8(2):32–45
Bettman JR, Park CW (1980) Effects of prior knowledge and experience and phase of the choice process
on consumer. J Consum Res 7:234–248
Bone PF (1992) Determinants of WOM communication during product consumption. Adv Consum Res
19:579–583
Brockman BK, Morgan RM (2003) The role of existing knowledge in new product innovativeness and
performance. Decis Sci 34(2):385–419
Broniarczyk SM, Alba JW (1994) The importance of the brand in brand extension. J Mark Res
31:214–228
Brown JJ, Reingen PH (1987) Social ties and word-of-mouth referral behavior. J Consum Res
14(3):350–362
Brown J, Broderick AJ, Lee N (2007) Word of mouth communication within online communities:
conceptualizing the online social network. J Interact Mark 21(3):2–20
Bryman A, Cramer D (1999) Qualitative data analysis with SPSS release 8 for windows: a guide for
social sciences. Routledge, London
Buil I, Chernatony LD, Hem LE (2009) Brand extension strategies: perceived fit, brand type, and culture
influences. Eur J Mark 43(11/12):1300–1324
Buil I, Chernatony LD, Martı́nez E (2013) Examining the role of advertising and sales promotions in
brand equity creation. J Bus Res 66(1):115–122
Chahal H, Bala M (2012) Significant components of service brand equity in healthcare sector. Int J Health
Care Qual Assur 25(4):343–362
Charumbira LT, Stotlar DK (2015) Unpacking the integrative conceptual Framework for assessing
perceived brand equity in professional sports teams research journals. J Sports Manag 1(2):1–15

123

998

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Chattopadhyay A, Alba JW (1988) The situational in importance of recall and inference consumer
decision making. J Consum Res 15(1):1–12
Chen YS (2010) The drivers of green brand equity: green brand image, green satisfaction, and green trust.
J Bus Ethics 93(2):307–319
Chevalier JA, Mayzlin D (2006) The effect of word of mouth on sales: online book reviews. J Mark Res
43(3):345–354
Chiang K-P, Dholakia RR (2003) Factors driving consumer intention to shop online: an empirical
investigation. J Consum Psychol 13(1/2):177–183
Christodoulides G, Chernatony Ld (2010) Consumer based brand equity conceptualization and
measurement: a literature review. Int J Res Mark 52(1):43–66
Cobb-Walgren CJ, Ruble CA, Donthu N (1995) Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase intent.
J Adv 24(3):25–40
Collier DA (1995) Modelling the relationships between process quality errors and overall service process
performance. Int J Serv Ind Manag 6(4):4–19
Cordell VV (1992) Effects of consumer preferences for foreign sourced products. J Int Bus Stud
23(2):251–269
Dabholkar PA, Bagozzi RP (2002) An attitudinal model of technology-based self-service: moderating
effects of consumer traits and situational factors. J Acad Mark Sci 30(3):184–201
Djakeli K (2012) Matrix of brand awareness and a positive image as a success factor in political PR. Sci J
Humanit 1(1):31–35
Duana W, Gub B, Whinstonb AB (2008) The dynamics of online word-of-mouth and product sales—an
empirical investigation of the movie industry. J Retail 84(2):233–242
Eastman JK, Eastman KL (2011) Perceptions of status consumption and the economy. J Bus Econ Res
9(7):9–19
Emari H, Jafari A, Mogaddam M (2012) The mediatory impact of brand loyalty and brand image on
brand equity. Afr J Bus Manage 6(17):5692–5701
Engel JF, Blackwel RD, Kegerreis RJ (1969) How information is used to adopt an innovation. J Adv Res
9:3–8
Esch F, Langner T, Schmitt BH, Geus P (2006) Are brands forever? How brand knowledge and
relationships affect current and future purchases. J Prod Brand Manag 15(2):98–105
Faircloth JB, Capella LM, Alford BL (2001) The effect of brand attitude and brand image on brand
equity. J Mark Theory Pract 9(3):61–75
Fang YH (2012) Does online interactivity matter? Exploring the role of interactivity strategies in
consumer decision making. Comput Hum Behav 28(5):1790–1804
Fatema M, Azad MAK, Masum AKM (2013) Impact of brand image and brand loyalty in measuring.
Asian Bus Rev 2(1):42–46
Fedorikhin A, Park CW, Thomson M (2008) Beyond fit and attitude: the effect of emotional attachment
on consumer responses to brand extensions. J Consum Psychol 18(4):281–291
Feldman SP, Spencer MC (1965) The effect of personal influence in the selection of consumer services.
In: Proceedings of the fall conference of the american marketing association. Chicago: American
Marketing Association, pp 440–452
Fornell C, Larcker DF (1981) Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurements error. J Mark Res 18(1):39–50
Frazier PA, Barron KE, Tix AP (2004) Testing moderator and mediator effects in counseling psychology
research. J Couns Psychol 51(1):115–134
Fullerton G (2005) The impact of brand commitment on loyalty to retail service brands. Can J Adm Sci
22(2):97–110
Gardner BB, Levy SJ (1955) The product and the brand. Harvard Bus Rev 33(2):33–39
Gill MS, Dawra J (2010) Evaluating Aaker’s sources of brand equity and the mediating role of brand
image. J Target Measurement Anal Mark 18(3/4):189–198
Godes D, Mayzlin D (2004) Using online conversations to study word-of-mouth communication. Mark
Sci 23(4):545–560
Godes D, Mayzlin D, Chen Y, Das S, Dellarocas C, Pfeiffer B, Libai B et al (2005) The firm’ s
management of social interactions. Mark Lett 16(3/4):415–428
Goyette I, Ricard L, Bergeron J, Marticotte F (2010) e-WOM scale: word-of-mouth measurement scale
for e-services context. Can J Adm Sci 27(1):5–23
Graeff TR (1997) Consumption situations and the effects of brand image on consumers’ brand
evaluations. Psychol Mark 14(1):49–70

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

999

Hair JF, Black WC, Babin BJ, Anderson RE (2010) Multivariate data analysis, 7th edn. Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs
Hamzaoui-Essoussi L, Merunka D, Bartikowski B (2011) Brand origin and country of manufacture
influences on brand equity and the moderating role of brand typicality. J Bus Res 64(9):973–978
He H, Li Y (2011) Key service drivers for high-tech service brand equity: the mediating role of overall
service quality and perceived value. J Mark Manag 27(1/2):77–99
Herr PM, Karde FR, Kim J (1991) Effects of word-of-mouth and product-attribute information on
persuasion: an accessibility-diagnosticity perspective. J Consum Res 17(4):454–462
Hoch SJ, Ha YW (1986) Consumer learning: advertising and the ambiguity of product experience.
Journal of Consumer Research 13(2):221–233
Holden SJS (1992) Brand equity through brand awareness: measuring and managing brand retrieval.
Ph.D. Dissertation: University of Florida
Hsieh MH, Pan SL, Setiono R (2004) Product, corporate, and country image dimensions and purchase
behavior: a multicountry analysis. J Acad Mark Sci 32(3):251–270
Huang R, Sarigöllü E (2012) How brand awareness relates to market outcome, brand equity, and the
marketing mix. J Bus Res 65(1):92–99
Huang YT, Tsai YT (2013) Antecedents and consequences of brand-oriented companies. Eur J Mark
47(11/12):2020–2041
Huang P, Lurie NH, Mitra S (2009) Searching for experience on the web: an empirical examination of
consumer behavior for eearch and experience goods. J Mark 73(2):55–69
Hung C (2008) The Effect of brand image on public relations perceptions and customer loyalty. Int J
Manag 25(2):237–247
Im I, Kim Y, Han HJ (2008) The effects of perceived risk and technology type on users’ acceptance of
technologies. Inf Manag 45(1):1–9
Ismail AR, Spinelli G (2012) Effects of brand love, personality and image on word of mouth. J Fashion
Mark Manag 16(4):386–398
Jacoby J, Szybillo GJ, Busato-Schach J (1977) Information acquisition behavior in brand choice
situations. J Consum Res 3(4):209–216
Jaiprakash AT (2008) A conceptual research on the association between celebrity endorsement, brand
image and brand equity. Icfai Univ J Mark Manag 7(4):54–64
Jalilvand MR, Samiei N (2012) The effect of electronic word of mouth on brand image and purchase
intention: an empirical study in the automobile industry in Iran. Mark Intell Plann 30(4):460–476
Kakati RP, Choudhury S (2013) Measuring customer-based brand equity through brand building blocks
for durables. J Brand Manag 10(2):24–41
Kamdar D, Dyne LV (2007) The jont effects of personality and workplace social exchange relationships
in predicting task performance and citizenship performance. J Appl Psychol 92(5):1286–1298
Kay MJ (2006) Strong brands and corporate corporate. Eur J Mark 40(7/8):742–760
Kayaman R, Arasli H (2007) Customer based brand equity: evidence from the hotel industry. Manag Serv
Qual 17(1):92–109
Keller KL (1993) Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. J Mark
57:1–22
Keller KL (2001) Building customer-based brand equity: a blueprint for creating strong brands.
Marketing Science Institute Working paper, 1–107
Keller E (2007) Unleashing the power of word of mouth: creating brand advocacy to drive growth. J Adv
Res 47(4):448–452
Keller KL, Lehmann DR (2003) How do brands create value? Mark Manag 12:26–31
Kim HS (2000) Examination of brand personality and brand attitude within the apparel product category.
J Fash Mark Manag 4(3):243–252
Kim H, Kim W, An A (2003) The effect of consumer-based brand equity on firms’ financial performance.
J Consum Mark 20(4):335–351
Kim KH, Kim KS, Kim DY, Kim JH, Kang SH (2008) Brand equity in hospital marketing. J Bus Res
61(1):75–82
King MF, Balasubramanian SK (1994) The effects of expertise, end goal, and product type on adoption of
preference formation strategy. J Acad Mark Sci 22(2):146–159
Klein LR (1998) Evaluating the potential of interactive media through a new lens: search versus
experience goods. J Bus Res 41(3):195–203
Kreuzbauer R, Malter AJ (2005) Embodied cognition and new product design: changing product form to
ifluence brand categorization. J Prod Innov Manag 22(2):165–176

123

1000

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Krishnan H (1996) Characteristics of memory associations: a consumer-based brand equity perspective.
Int J Res Mark 13:389–405
Kukar-Kinney M, Ridgway NM, Monroe KB (2012) The role of price in the behavior and purchase
decisions of compulsive buyers. J Retail 88(1):63–71
Kumaravel V, Kandasamy C (2012) To what extent the brand image influence consumers’ purchase
decision on durable products. Rom J Mark 1:34–38
Lam D, Lee A, Mizerski R (2009) The effects of cultural values in word-of-mouth communication. J Int
Mark 17(3):55–70
Lane V, Jacobson R (1995) Stock market reactions to brand extension announcements: the effects of
brand attitude and familiarity. J Mark 59(1):63–77
Laroche M, Kim C, Zhou L (1996) Brand familiarity and confidence as determinants of purchase
intention: an empirical test in a multiple brand context. J Bus Res 37(2):115–120
Lassar W, Mittal B, Sharma A (1995) Measuring customer-based brand equity. J Consum Mark
12(4):11–19
Liao S, Cheng CC (2014) Brand equity and the exacerbating factors of product innovation failure
evaluations: a communication effect perspective. J Bus Res 67(1):2919–2925
Liao Y-K, Wu W-Y, Amaya Rivas AA, Ju TL (2017) Cognitive, experiential, and marketing factors
mediate the effect of brand personality on brand equity. Social Behav Personal 45(1):1–18
Lim BC, Chung CM (2011) The impact of word-of-mouth communication on attribute evaluation. J Bus
Res 64(1):18–23
Loken B, John DR (1993) Diluting brand beliefs: when do brand extensions have a negative impact?
J Mark 57:71–84
Louis D, Lombart C (2010) Impact of brand personality on three major relational consequences (trust,
attachment, and commitment to the brand). J Prod Brand Manag 19(2):114–130
Lovett MJ, Peres R, Shachar R (2013) On brands and word of mouth. J Mark Res 50(4):427–444
MacCallum RC, Zhang S, Preacher KJ, Rucker AD (2002) On the practice of dichotomization of
quantitative variables. Psychol Methods 7(1):19–40
Macdonald EK, Sharp BM (2000) Brand awareness effects on consumer decision making for a common,
repeat purchase product: a replication. J Bus Res 48(1):5–15
Malär L, Krohmer H, Hoyer WD, Nyffenegger B (2011) Emotional brand attachment and brand
personality: the relative importance of the actual and the ideal self. J Mark 75(4):35–52
Martin GS, Brown TJ (1990) In search of brand equity: the conceptualization and measurement of the
brand impression construct. Mark Theory Appl 2:431–438
Meyer BO (2012) Emotional and cognitive incorporation of brand equity in financial markets: a
conceptualisation of brand equity and behavioural finance. Working Paper, 1–19
Misner IR (1999) The world’s best known marketing secret: building your business with word-of-mouth
marketing, 2nd edn. Bard Press, Austin
Molinari LK, Abratt R, Dion P (2008) Satisfaction, quality and value and effects on repurchase and
positive word-of-mouth behavioral intentions in a B2B services context. J Serv Mark 22(5):363–373
Morrin M (1999) The impact of brand extensions on parent brand memory structures and retrieval
processes. J Mark Res 36:517–525
Mourad M, Ennew C, Kortam W (2011) Brand equity in higher education. Mark Intell Plann
29(4):403–420
Nedungadi P (1990) Recall and consumer consideration sets: influencing choice without altering brand
evaluations. J Consum Res 17(3):263–276
Nelson P (1974) Advertising as informtion. J Polit Econ 82(4):729–754
Ng PF, Butt MM, Khong KW, Ong FS (2014) Antecedents of green brand equity: an integrated approach.
J Bus Ethics 121(2):203–215
Nunnally JC (1978) Psychometric theory. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY
Oh H (2000) The effect of brand class, brand awareness, and price on customer value and behavioral
intentions. J Hosp Tour Res 24(2):136–162
Padilla J, Watson N (2010) A critical review of the literature on generic packaging for cigarettes. A report
for PMI. LECG Consulting Belgium, Brussels
Park CW, Jaworski BJ, Maclnnis DJ (1986) Strategic brand concept-image management. J Mark
50:135–145
Park C, MacInnis DJ, Priester J, Eisingerich AB, Iacobucci D (2010) Brand attachment and brand attitude
strength: conceptual and empirical differentiation of two critical brand equity drivers. J Mark
74:1–17

123

Brand image and equity: the mediating role of brand…

1001

Pitta DA, Katsanis LP (1995) Understanding brand equity for successful brand extension. J Consum Mark
12(4):51–64
Plummer JT (2007) Editorial: word of mouth: New advertising discipline? J Adv Res 47(4):385–386
Porter SS, Claycomb C (1997) The influence of brand recognition on retail store image. J Prod Brand
Manag 6(6):373–387
Priester JR, Nayakankuppam D, Fleming MA, Godek J (2004) Model: the influence of attitudes and
attitude strength on consideration and choice. J Consum Res 30(4):574–587
Roy D, Banerjee S (2007) CARE-ing strategy for integration of brand identity with brand image. Int J
Commer Manag 17(1):140–148
Sasmita J, Mohd Suki N (2015) Young consumers’ insights on brand equity. Int J Retail Distrib Manag
43(3):276–292
Sellers-Rubio R, Más-Ruiz FJ (2015) Economic efficiency of members of protected designations of
origin: sharing reputation indicators in the experience goods of wine and cheese. RMS 9(1):175–196
Senecal S, Nantel J (2004) The influence of online product recommendations on consumers’ online
choices. J Retail 80(2):159–169
Seno D, Lukas BA (2007) The equity effect of product endorsement by celebrities: a conceptual
framework from a co-branding perspective. Eur J Mark 41(1/2):121–134
Shabbir J, Rehman KU (2013) Impact of perceptual dimensions and behavioral dimension on brand
equity in Pakistan. Inf Manag Bus Rev 5(7):347–359
Sheth JN (1971) Word-of-mouth in low-risk innovations. J Adv Res 11(3):15–18
Smith G (2004) Brand image transfer through sponsorship: a consumer learning perspective. J Mark
Manag 20(3–4):457–474
Spears N, Singh SN (2004) Measuring attitude toward the brand and purchase intentions. J Current Issues
Res Adv 26(2):53–66
Srikatanyoo N, Gnoth J (2002) Country image and international tertiary education. J Brand Manag
10(2):139–146
Srivastava RK (2009) Measuring brand strategy–can brand equity and brand score be a tool to measure
the effectiveness of strategy? Innov Mark 5(1):26–32
Srull TK, Wyer RS (1989) Person memory and judgment. Psychol Rev 96(1):58–83
Stigler GJ (1961) The Economics of Information. J Polit Econ 69(3):213–225
Subramaniam A, Al Mamun A, Yukthamarani Permarupan P, Raihani Binti Zainol N (2014) Effects of
brand loyalty, image and quality on brand equity: a study among Bank Islam consumers in Kelantan,
Malaysia. Asian Soc Sci 10(14):67–73
Thomson M (2006) Human brands: investigating antecedents to consumers’ strong attachments to
celebrities. J Mark 70(3):104–119
Thomson M, MacInnis DJ, Park CW (2005) The ties that bind: measuring the strength of consumers’
emotional attachments to brands. J Consum Psychol 15(1):77–91
Thorelli HB, Lim JS, Ye J (1989) Relative importance of country of origin, warranty, and retail store
image on product evaluations. Int Mark Rev 6(1):35–46
Tong C, Wong A, Leung S (2013) The mediating effects of service charge transparency on the
relationship between corporate social responsibility and customer behaviour in Hong Kong’s retail
banking sector. Bus Econ Res 3(1):56–88
Trusov M, Bucklin RE, Pauwels K (2009) Effects of word-of-mouth versus traditional marketing:
findings from an internet cocial networking site. J Mark 73:90–102
Vázquez-Casielles R, Suárez-Álvarez L, Del Rı́o-Lanza AB (2013) The word of mouth dynamic: how
positive (and negative) WOM drives purchase probability: An analysis of interpersonal and noninterpersonal factors. J Adv Res 53(1):43–60
Verhoef PC, Franses PH, Hoekstra JC (2002) The effect of relational constructs on customer referrals and
number of services purchased from a multiservice provider: does age of relationship matter? J Acad
Mark Sci 30(3):202–216
Vieceli J, Shaw RN (2010) Brand salience for fast-moving consumer goods: an empirically based model.
J Mark Manag 26(13/14):1218–1238
Voester J, Ivens B, Leischnig A (2016) Partitioned pricing: review of the literature and directions for
further research. Rev Manag Sci. doi:10.1007/s11846-016-0208-x
Wang Y, Kandampully JA, Lo HP, Shi G (2006) The roles of brand equity and corporate reputation in
CRM: a Chinese study. Corp Reput Rev 9(3):179–197
Wangenheim Fv (2003) Opportunism in interpersonal exchange: when dissatisfaction is followed by
positive word-of-moutH. In: American markeing association summer conference proceedings

123

1002

A. Ansary, N. M. H. Nik Hashim

Weiss AM, Anderson E, Maclnnis DJ (1999) Reputation management as a motivation for sales structure
decisions. J Mark 63:74–89
Wilcox JB, Laverie DA, Kolyesnikova N, Duhan DF, Dodd TH (2008) Facets of brand equity and brand
survival: a longitudinal examination. Int J Wine Bus Res 20(3):202–214
Wright AA, Lynch JG (1995) Communication effects of advertising versus direct experience when both
search and experience attributes are present. J Consum Res 21(4):708–718
Xia L, Bechwati NN (2010) Word of mouse: the role of cognitive personalization in online consumer
reviews. J Interact Adv 9(1):3–13
Xu JB, Chan A (2010) A conceptual framework of hotel experience and customer-based brand equity. Int
J Contemp Hosp Manag 22(2):174–193
Yasin B (2009) The role of gender on Turkish consumers’ decision-making styles, advances in consumer
research. Asia-Pac Conf Proc 8:301–308
Yasin NM, Noor MN, Mohamad O (2007) Does image of country-of-origin matter to brand equity?
J Prod Brand Manag 16(1):38–48
Yoo B, Donthu N, Lee S (2000) An examination of selected marketing mix elements and brand equity.
J Acad Mark Sci 28(2):195–211
Zeithaml VA (2000) Service quality, profitability, and the economic worth of customers: what we know
and what we need to learn. J Acad Mark Sci 28(1):67–85
Zhang H, Ko E, Lee E (2013) Moderating effects of nationality and product category on the relationship
between innovation and customer equity in Korea and China. J Prod Innov Manag 30(1):110–122

123

