This article was downloaded by: [Marshall University]
On: 14 August 2013, At: 01:01
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

Building the Charity Brand Community
a

Derek N. Hassay & John Peloza

b

a

Marketing Area, Haskayne School of Business, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
b

Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
Published online: 12 Feb 2009.

To cite this article: Derek N. Hassay & John Peloza (2009) Building the Charity Brand Community,
Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 21:1, 24-55, DOI: 10.1080/10495140802111927
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10495140802111927

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 21:24–55, 2009
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1049-5142 print / 1540-6997 online
DOI: 10.1080/10495140802111927

Building the Charity Brand Community
DEREK N. HASSAY
Marketing Area, Haskayne School of Business, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada

JOHN PELOZA
Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada

The current article extends the concept of brand community to the
charity sector. While the charity sector has begun to embrace the
relationship marketing paradigm, brand communities represent a
unique form of relationship marketing that can have a significant
impact on nonprofits. A conceptual model of brand community
development in the charity sector is proposed, and two unique
mechanisms by which charity brand communities might develop —
the cognitive and experiential-learning mechanisms — are proposed.
Not only do these mechanisms offer unique insights into how brand
communities might develop, but they also explain how ‘‘sense of
community’’ becomes a dominant influence on supporter loyalty.
Research propositions concerning the influence of specific markers of
brand community upon charity support behavior, are also presented.
KEYWORDS brand community, relationship marketing,
nonprofit marketing, charity support behavior

INTRODUCTION
Despite the size and importance of the charity sector to any nation’s economy –
an estimated $200 billion was donated to charities in the United States alone in
2000 (Lindahl & Conley, 2002) - charities have only recently begun to embrace
the marketing concept that their for-profit counterparts have exploited for
Address correspondence to Derek Hassay, Haskayne School of Business, University of
Calgary 2500 University Drive N.W., Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 1N4. E-mail: derek.hassay@
haskayne.ucalgary.ca
24

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

25

years (e.g. Sargeant, 2001a;, 2001b). That charities have begun to develop
marketing strategies is not surprising when one considers the challenges facing
the industry and its organizations today: a decline in direct donations (Peacock,
2000; Williamson, 2003), a decline in government support (Hibbert & Horne,
1995), and continued growth in the number of charities looking for funding
each year (Liao, Foreman and Sargeant, 2001). Given the highly competitive
market facing charities, it is not surprising that the non-profit sector has become
more aggressive and creative in its efforts to educate and ultimately attract both
individual and corporate donors, volunteers, sponsors and partners. In so
doing, the sector has adopted and adapted a wide range of marketing concepts
such as: marketing orientation (Sargeant, Foreman, & Liao, 2002); segmentation (Coleman, 2002; Keyt, Yavas, & Riecken, 2002), customer relationship
marketing (Thomas, Cunningham & Williams, 2002), and loyalty (Sargeant &
Woodliffe, 2007). Indeed, much of the recent work in the marketing of
charitable organizations has focused on the application of relationship
marketing techniques to build donor commitment (Peltier, Schibrowsky &
Schultz, 2002; Vandenberg, 1998; Weir & Hibbert, 2000) as a means to increase
the lifetime value of supporters (Bennett, 2006).
More recently, the importance and role of branding in the charity sector
has received increased attention by researchers (e.g., Hankinson, 2001, 2002;
Hoeffler & Keller, 2002) and practitioners, as non-profits begin to explore the
latent potential of their own brands. However, charities have struggled with the
complexities of managing this valuable resource, and specifically of deciding
which organizations to enter into partnerships with. Moreover, charities must
also evaluate and select the form of brand relationship that they will have with
an external agency: arms length such as the decision to accept donations or
sponsorship income, or more intimate such as co-branding, joint branding or
licensing (Hoeffler & Keller, 2002, Peloza & Hassay, 2008).
This article extends previous work by exploring a form of relationship
marketing shown to lead to almost fanatical loyalty — brand communities
(Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001) — and the potential for developing brand
communities within the charitable sector. To date, the study of brand
communities has been largely limited to consumer products, such as: Jeep,
Harley-Davidson, Saab, Saturn and Apple Computer (McAlexander,
Schouten, & Koenig, 2002; Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). And while applications
of the concept to nonprofit organizations such as universities have been
studied (McAlexander, Koenig, & Schouten, 2006), the current article
represents the first known application of brand community to charitable
organizations. Indeed, we believe that successful application of the brand
community concept can provide cash-strapped charities with a unique
approach to the development and maintenance of supporter commitment.
Beyond extending the brand community concept to the charity sector,
this article makes an important contribution to the brand community
literature by introducing a conceptual model of brand community

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

26

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

development. The proposed model is based on established attitudinal (e.g.,
identification, perceived sense of community) and behavioral (e.g.,
involvement) measures and is believed to offer researchers and practitioners
valuable insights into the brand community development process. Finally,
this article demonstrates the applicability of the proposed model of brand
community development to a wide variety of products and services.
The article begins with an overview of the brand community concept. The
authors then ground the markers of brand community (Muniz & O’Guinn,
2001) within the broader body of consumer commitment literature by
conceptually linking these markers to the dominant attitudinal and behavioral
constructs within the literature. The article then explores the markers of brand
community within the charity sector, and proposes a generic model of brand
community development. The article concludes with implications for charities
looking to leverage the benefits of brand community, and a discussion of the
relevance of the proposed model to other sectors.

BRAND COMMUNITY
The idea of communities developing around consumption extends back to
Boorstin (1973) who argued that advertisers have been responsible for the
development of ‘‘consumption communities’’ since the civil war. These
consumption communities were described as groups of people with feelings
of shared well-being, shared risks, common interests and common concerns
centered on the consumption of a common object (Boorstin, 1973).
Consumption communities have also been referred to as consumption
sub-cultures (Shouten & McAlexander, 1995), brand clubs (Langer, 1997)
and most recently brand communities (Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001).
Recognizing the benefits that accrue from having a loyal customer base
(e.g., increased profits), firms have been actively seeking ways to develop and
maintain closer relationships with their customers. To this end, there has been
considerable scrutiny of products and companies that enjoy above average
levels of loyalty from their respective customers, and in some instances a
devotion that borders on brand fanaticism. Moreover, firms with a devoted
consumer following such as: Harley Davidson, Jeep, Apple Computers and
Saturn are often seen to have a highly visible ‘‘brand community’’ (Muniz &
O’Guinn, 2001) or ‘‘brand club’’ (Langer, 1997). Muniz and O’Guinn (2001)
defined the brand community as ‘‘a specialized, non-geographically bound
community, based on a structured set of social relationships among admirers of
a brand’’ (p.412). A brand community, such as the Harley Owners Group
(HOG), is a group of likeminded consumers (e.g., Harley owners) who interact
with one another in support of a particular brand (e.g., Harley Davidson
motorcycles), and is distinguished from a leisure group (e.g., motorcycle riders
club) by its single brand focus. Further, the almost fanatical loyalty of members

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

27

of brand communities distinguish these communities from other, less intensely
experienced buyer clubs such as frequent flier programs and other frequency
marketing programs.
Products supported by brand communities have been associated with
higher levels of consumer identification and involvement (Muniz & O’Guinn,
2001) and with fiercely loyal customers (Lemon, Rust, & Zeithaml, 2001). In
addition, it has been reported that manufacturers who actively manage their
brand communities have increased market share, increased sales, and
increased commitment on the part of consumers (Hoeffler & Keller, 2002;
McAlexander et al., 2002). Finally, ‘‘brandfests’’ (McAlexander et al., 2002)
such as those employed by Daimler-Chrysler’s Jeep Division (e.g., Camp
Jeep and Jeep Jamboree) have been associated with increased future
purchase intentions of non-owner participants, as well as, the actual
repurchase rates of Jeep owners (McAlexander et al., 2002).
Muniz and O’Guinn (2001) identified three markers that contribute to
the development and maintenance of brand community: consciousness of
kind, shared rituals and traditions, and a sense of moral responsibility. Each
of these markers represents a latent state formed by a variety of antecedent
processes that Muniz and O’Guinn (2001) identified as mechanisms. For
example, consciousness of kind refers to the bond that exists between
customers of a brand – a close connection that is experienced between
customers who may live at great distance from one another and who might
not have even met. This connection is commonly defined not in terms of
who is ‘‘in’’ but rather, by who is ‘‘out,’’ with community members often
viewing marginal members and members of competing brand communities
with disdain (Shouten & McAlexander, 1995).
Brand communities also feature shared rituals and traditions that are
embedded in symbols, events, celebrations and activities that are unique to
that particular brand and that serve as reminders of what the brand stands for
(McAlexander et al., 2002; Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). Thus, shared rituals and
traditions require participation or some form of behavioral involvement from
the brand community membership. For example, Muniz and O’Guinn (2001)
reported that ‘‘brand stories’’ are shared as a way to bind community
members, as well as celebrate the history of the brand. Furthermore, these
rituals and traditions reinforce group norms and values that define and
maintain the culture of the community.
Moral responsibility is viewed as a shared duty amongst the individual
members of the community; a set of norms, rules and obligations that help to
define and govern group behavior. Thus, moral responsibility is seen as a
catalyst for group cohesion and collective action. Two main drivers for moral
responsibility are: 1) the integration and retention of members and 2) a
concern for the proper consumption of the brand (Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001).
In the current article, the three markers of brand community
identified by Muniz and O’Guinn (2001) are presented as three

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

28

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

components of an iterative, reinforcing process that help to establish and
maintain brand commitment. Moreover, we argue that the charity brand
community develops by one of two unique processes; one is affectively
and attitude-driven and another that is more experiential and behaviorally-driven.
In order to facilitate the development of a generic model of brand
community it was necessary to situate the discussion of brand community
within the broader context of consumer behavior and within the extant
literature on branding and relationship marketing. In order to do so, it was
necessary to draw parallels between the markers of brand community
introduced by Muniz and O-Guinn (2001) and concepts and constructs that
have are not just well-established, but central to the study of relationships
within marketing. To this end, Table 1 draws parallels between the three
markers of brand community and three central constructs that have a rich
history in both the for-profit and nonprofit marketing literatures and for
which reliable, valid measurement instruments are already available.
Hereafter, the three constructs of identification, involvement, and perceived
sense of community (PSC) are presented jointly and interchangeably with the

TABLE 1 Brand Community Markers and Proposed Surrogate Measurement Constructs
Brand Community
Marker
Consciousness of
Kind

Definition (Muniz &
O’Guinn, 2001)

Surrogate
Measurement
Construct

‘‘The intrinsic collective Identification
sense that members feel
toward one another and
the collective sense of
difference from others
not in the community.’’
(p. 413)

Involvement
Shared Rituals and Social processes that
Traditions
reproduce/reinforce the
meaning of the community and transmit it to
others.
Moral
Responsibility

‘‘A sense of duty to the Perceived/
community as a whole, Psychological
and to individual mem- Sense of
bers of the community.’’ Community
(p. 424)

Definition

‘‘Degree to which a person defines him or herself
as having the same attributes that he or she
believes define the organization.’’ (Dutton,
Dukerich, & Harquail
1994, p.239)
‘‘The active interest in,
engagement with, and
commitment to a [group,
sport or product] exhibited by the [individual].’’
(Capella, 2002, p.31)
‘‘A feeling that members
have of belonging, a feeling that members matter
to one another and to the
group, and a shared faith
that members’ needs will
be met through their
commitment to be
together.’’ (McMillan &
Chavis, 1986, p.9)

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

29

three brand community markers of consciousness of kind, rituals and
traditions, and moral responsibility.
The study of ‘‘sense of community’’ has a rich history within
sociology and psychology as individuals with a strong sense of belonging
to the communities in which they live (i.e., neighborhoods) and work
(e.g., companies, trade unions) were found to engage in a wide variety of
behaviors supportive of these communities. And while the study of
consumption communities has grown dramatically in recent years, to date
there have only been a few attempts to develop and apply measures of the
PSC construct within a marketing context (Friedman, Abeele, & De Vos,
1992, 1993; Fraering & Minor, 2006) and none within a charity or
nonprofit sector. And while not yet widely used in marketing and
consumption contexts, it is argued that due to its importance to the study
of brand community, PSC will become an increasingly the consumer
behavior, psychology and organizational behavior literatures (Broderick
& Mueller, 1999) and have been shown to be central factors in the
development of organizational commitment (Steers, 1977). In fact, Steers
(1977) definition of organizational commitment actually includes these
two variables and thus offers conceptual support for the proposed model
of brand community developed in this article. Researchers have also
suggested that brand equity, and the positive outcomes associated with it
such as increased satisfaction, patronage and referrals are facilitated by
identification (e.g., Fisher & Wakefield, 1998; Gwinner & Swanson, 2003;
Underwood, 2003; Underwood, Bond & Baer, 2001). In an extensive
review of the involvement construct Broderick and Mueller (1999)
indicated that individuals high in involvement, despite their willingness
to expend greater energies in the search for and evaluation of information
prior to purchase, actually form attitudes that are more resistant to change,
and thus are considered to be more brand loyal. These findings offer
support for the importance of these particular constructs within the
consumer behavior literature, and for our inclusion of these particular
constructs in the proposed model of brand community.
The use of these particular constructs allows for the development of
research propositions and a model of brand community development that
are both theoretically-grounded and empirically testable. Moreover, while
the markers of brand community highlight features or aspects of a brand
community, they were not intended to capture causality, in fact Muniz and
O’Guinn (2001) distinguished these markers of brand community from the
‘‘mechanisms’’ by which brand communities developed. Finally, by
conceptualizing the development of brand community with pre-existing
constructs the authors propose a model of brand community that is
parsimonious, insofar as it purposely avoids introducing novel constructs,
and that is both approachable and instructive for both researchers and
practitioners.

30

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

A PROPOSED MODEL OF BRAND COMMUNITY

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

The previous sections provide support for the development of brand
community within the charity sector, while highlighting the synergistic,
iterative relationship amongst the three markers of brand community –
shared ritual, consciousness of kind and moral responsibility – as proposed
in Figure 1. Moreover, these constructs are hypothesized as self-reinforcing,
a product of the iterative nature of the proposed model and the unique
mechanisms (i.e., paths) by which brand community is formed. Consistent
with this iterative view Schouten and McAlexander (1995) stated that,
The individual’s movement into and through the commitment-based
status hierarchy of the HDSC [Harley- Davidson-oriented subculture of
consumption] constitutes a gradual transformation of the self … bikers
undergo an evolution of motives and a deepening of commitment as
they become more involved in the subculture. (p. 55)

And while it is acknowledged that there may be one mechanism that
can adequately explain how the majority of people become integrated or

FIGURE 1 Conceptual Model of Brand Community Development

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

31

assimilated into a brand community (i.e., through the socialization that
begins with behavioral involvement), the proposed model does not account
for the temporal relationship between the three markers of brand
community. For instance, while some community members will undoubtedly first identify with and then become involved with a brand, as in the case
of aspirational consumption (i.e., aspire to the Harley-Davidson lifestyle),
others are likely to identify with the brand only after a period of time or
series of satisfying experiences with the brand (e.g., attend a Jeep
Jamboree). Dwyer, Schurr and Oh (1987) suggested that ‘‘exploration’’ is
an important phase in relationship development, and is fragile in the sense
that it is characterized by minimal investments and even rational consideration of obligations and benefits of that particular relationship. To this end,
McAlexander et al. (2002) indicated that Jeep community members are
encouraged to bring friends and family to ‘‘Jeep 101’’ events so that they too
can witness the enthusiasm that the Jeep community has for this brand of
vehicles.
The proposed model suggests that both consciousness of kind
(identification) and shared rituals (behavioral involvement) can lead to the
development of moral responsibility (perceived sense of community) and
subsequently commitment to a brand or charity. However, we argue that
there are two unique mechanisms by which brand communities might
develop in a charity brand context. The cognitive-learning mechanism is the
first to be discussed and echoes the well established view that creating a
sense of identity amongst potential supporters is an effective fundraising
strategy (Brady, Noble, Utter, & Smith, 2002). In contrast, the second
mechanism – the behavioral learning mechanism – has received far less
attention in the literature and focuses on the means by which ‘‘nonidentifying’’ individuals can be attracted, exposed and transformed/
converted to loyal charity brand supporters.

Mechanism 1: Brand Community Development through CognitiveLearning
The cognitive learning mechanism proposes that brand community is
develops only after consumers, linked by a common bond of brand passion
(identification), increase their participation (behavioral involvement) in
brand-supportive activities (see Table 2). This view is consistent with the
TABLE 2 Mechanisms of Brand Community Development
Mechanism
Cognitive-Learning
Behavioral-Learning

Proposed Model Paths
Identification R Involvement R Perceived Sense of Community
Involvement R Perceived Sense of Community R Identification

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

32

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

Brady et al. (2002) finding that giving behavior is influenced by a donor’s
philanthropic history — a philanthropic predisposition — and that for some
giving is learned behavior and/or influenced by referent expectations. Those
who have this philanthropic predisposition know that it is important to give
and thus identify with the act of giving and the normative responsibility to
help or give back. For instance, the wealthy give not just because they can
but because they are expected to do so; having been socialized by their
parents and peers to give. Indeed, many of the largest supporters of charity
give at arm’s length through charitable foundations. Warren Buffet giving
most of his $31 billion US donation to the Gates Foundation is but one,
extreme example. The social influence strategy of United Way fundraising is
also illustrative here, as businesses pledge and give more because others in
the business community do so, not necessarily because they are committed
to the objectives and goals of the organization.
It is our contention that it is only through increased involvement that
individuals and firms move beyond mere giving, and become integrated into
the charity brand community. Brady et al. (2002) support this argument,
suggesting that charitable organizations should be encouraging regular,
consistent donations rather than attempting to secure large, one-time donations
in an attempt to develop a philanthropic disposition that may evolve into a
long-term relationship and perhaps spread to the donor’s referent group.
Peloza and Hassay (2007) developed a typology of Charity Support
Behavior (CSB) that presents a broad spectrum of high and low involvement
forms of support. In this typology Peloza and Hassay (2007) clearly delineate
activities which require little thought, are easy to do (e.g., donation) and
which are commonly motivated by reasons external to the charity (e.g., tax
benefits, get rid of the asker), from those that require greater effort, and
stronger ties to the charity (e.g., volunteering). However, what is most
compelling about this typology is that it also identifies CSBs (e.g., charity
events, volunteering) that: a) are more likely to establish social bonds
between supporters, the charity and non-supporters and, b) will be sought
by more highly identified individuals. Participation in experiential events
such as Days of Caring, fun runs, the Weekend to End Breast Cancer leads to
the development of social ties with likeminded others, ties that ultimately
lead to the development of a heightened sense of moral responsibility (PSC)
to others in the community.
Figure 1 also suggests that PSC, once developed, serves to reinforce
positive brand attitudes (identification) and leads to greater commitment to
the brand ‘‘sponsoring’’ or associated with that event or ritual. For example,
while attitudes towards the brand increase, community participants also
experience a concomitant negativity towards competing brands. In fact,
community members often use derogatory terms to describe competing
brands even indicating a willingness to forego product category participation
(e.g., motorcycles) rather than switch brands (McAlexander et al., 2002;

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

33

Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). Further support for the reinforcing role that
community participation has upon identification is offered by Algesheimer,
Dholakia and Herrmann (2005) who found that knowledgeable and
therefore arguably more involved consumers of a particular automotive
brand were found to be more identified with the brand community they
belonged to (e.g., car club) than their novice counterparts.
Additionally, McAlexander, Kim and Roberts (2003) have reported that
while brand community integration (BCI) has a positive influence on loyalty
amongst those who have been engaged in a relationship for an extended
period, satisfaction does not. This finding supports a growing body of
research that suggests that satisfaction has a short-term effect on loyalty. Put
another way satisfaction, may be perceived as a threshold construct, insofar
as individuals must be satisfied to engage in a relationship but it is
insufficient to sustain a relationship. In contrast, BCI appears to capture a
deeper connection between an individual and a brand – an affective bond
that integrates both social capital and camaraderie (Fraering & Minor, 2006).
Once established, moral responsibility (PSC) is seen to have both a direct
and an indirect – by positively influencing consciousness of kind
(identification) – influence on commitment.

Mechanism 2: Brand Community Development through ExperientialLearning
In the first mechanism, it is assumed that an individual identifies with a
charity or cause and through subsequent actions made on behalf of the
charity becomes immersed in that charity’s brand community. The
experiential learning mechanism (see Table 2) offers a different view,
suggesting that an individual’s identity with a charity develops as a result of
participation in and consumption of CSBs (Peloza & Hassay, 2007). In this
mechanism, behavioral involvement is the catalyst for brand community
development. More importantly, it is our contention that it is the social
interaction between the charity and potential and existing supporters that
occurs at brandfests (e.g., fun runs, charity events), and other forms of highinvolvement CSBs, that is ultimately responsible for brand community
development. This particular mechanism mirrors the process of ‘‘transformation’’ process witnessed within the Harley Davidson sub-culture (HDSC:
Shouten & McAlexander, 1995). Specifically, Shouten and McAlexander
(1995) identified three stages by which consumers experience the
transformational process in the HDSC: ‘‘(1) experimentation with the biker
identity, (2) identification and conformity, and (3) mastery and internalization’’ (p.55). It is argued that these three transformational stages are
analogous to the involvement, PSC and identification constructs of the
experiential learning mechanism.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

34

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

This particular mechanism is especially important to brand community
development because it accounts for new member socialization; an
important dimension of moral responsibility according to Muniz and
O’Guinn (2001). And as McAlexander et al. (2002) illustrated, some Jeep
Jamboree participants did not even own a Jeep prior to attending the event,
and yet, as a result of their involvement, became brand believers with an
express desire to purchase a Jeep. Thus, this brand community development
process follows an experiential path to attitude formation, one that is underresearched and yet arguably more representative of how identity formation
occurs.
Regardless of the mechanism by which brand community is developed,
participation in and identification with a brand community is hypothesized
to lead to higher levels of brand commitment and ultimately, behavioral
loyalty. As demonstrated by McAlexander et al. (2002) in the brand
community literature, and by Morgan and Hunt (1994) in the relationship
marketing literature, committed consumers or exchange partners indicate
greater willingness to repeat purchase and engage in pro brand support
behaviors, such as word of mouth. Therefore, brand community is seen to
have a positive effect upon continued brand involvement, which is the
intended goal of relationship marketing efforts. Furthermore, brand
community is seen to reinforce and elevate existing levels of brand
commitment both directly and indirectly through identification.

BRAND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT IN THE CHARITY SECTOR
Although brand communities have been associated with higher levels of
consumer identification and involvement (Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001), it is
believed that a certain level of product category involvement and/or
identification exists prior to community participation and is necessary before
any kind of community can be encouraged. This assertion would explain, in
part, why discussions of brand community in the literature have thus far
focused on relatively expensive, durable goods such as cars, motorcycles
and computers (e.g., McAlexander et al., 2002; Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). Not
surprisingly then, there have been few explorations of brand communities in
low involvement product categories such as routine household food
purchases (cf. Broderick & Mueller, 1999). However, this is not to suggest
that brand communities or clubs are the exclusive domain of expensive,
durable goods as demonstrated by the recent study of the Nutella
community by Cova and Pace (2006).
Another, noteworthy exception is the Swatch brand of watches and the
membership of that brand’s Swatch Collectors Club (Long & Schiffman,
1997), and its online community Swatch the Club. Although relatively
inexpensive, this particular brand of watches enjoys a very active consumer

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

35

following because of its innovative, fashion forward image and its collectible
designs. Particularly germane to the current article was the Long and
Schiffman (1997) assertion that Swatch collectors identify with other
collectors and receive social benefits from interacting with collectors,
dealers and other swatch experts.
As a result, we argue that involvement and identification are the key
drivers of brand community; two constructs that have also been shown to be
critical indicators of donor commitment to charitable causes (Rosenblatt,
Cusson, &McGown, 1986; Smith, 1980). Fisher and Ackerman (1998), for
example, argued that the decision to volunteer represents an important,
even ‘life-altering’ commitment. Similar to the outcomes associated with
‘‘communities of participation’’ (Schervish & Havens, 1997), the creation of a
charity brand community is expected to lead to increased donor and
volunteer commitment. Moreover, it is believed that a vibrant charity
community will attract new supporters to events and initiatives that
encourage involvement and allow for identification.
Product-focused brand communities form to support the use, display
and/or celebration of a tangible product, what Shouten and McAlexander
(1995) referred to as a consumption ‘‘icon.’’ In fact, Shouten and
McAlexander (1995) stated that Harley-Davidson motorcycles have become,
‘‘a religious icon around which an entire ideology of consumption is
articulated’’ (p.50). Conversely, charities as service organizations lack a focal
product or icon that is at the center of product-based brand community
research (e.g., McAlexander et al., 2002; Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). Rather,
charity communities form in support of an intangible — the charity’s central
mission or goal (i.e., to improve education, find a cure, bring happiness or to
ease suffering). In a charitable organization, the ‘‘product’’ is the act of taking
one’s time and/or money and ensuring that it is used for the purpose
intended (Guy & Patton, 1988). And yet, there are a variety of ‘‘products’’
consumed in support of charities (e.g. t-shirts, pins); products that provide a
similar type of conspicuous consumption experience as those associated
with for-profit communities such as Harley-Davidson and Saturn (Aaker,
1994; Reid, 1989). In summary, it is believed that the strong emotional
connection that individuals have with charity brands (Rothschild, 1979)
provides a fertile medium in which to explore and ultimately cultivate brand
community.
The remainder of this section explores the relevance of the three
constructs of brand community — consciousness of kind, shared ritual and
moral responsibility — within the charity sector.

Consciousness of Kind (Identification)
Underwood et al. (2001) indicated that some customers enjoy relationships
with brands that extend beyond the satisfaction of functional needs to a

36

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

strong, even zealous emotional attachment. Indeed in a later article,
Underwood (2003) argued that the consumption of brands, through either
lived or mediated experiences, not only strengthens that consumer’s
relationship with the brand, but can also enhance his/her own self-identity.
Underwood et al. (2001) presented social identity as a ‘‘mechanism for
tapping the emotional connection between the consumer and the service
brand. Similarly, Wann and Branscombe (1993) defined team identification
in terms of the level of attachment or concern held by an individual towards
a particular sports team. In fact, consistent with Muniz and O’Guinn’s (2001)
discussion of consciousness of kind, Underwood et al. (2001) commented
that:
Social identity affects individuals’ perceptions, cognitions, evaluations,
and attributions about issues and events, impacting emotions as well as
behaviors. Heightened group identification marks in-group/out-group
boundaries, facilitating the categorization of people into ‘‘us’’ vs. ‘‘them’’
and ‘‘we’’ vs. ‘‘they.’’ (p.3)

The definition of identification by Dutton, Dukerich, & Harquail (1994)
that is used in the current article (see Table 1), underscores the idea that
individuals identify with people and things with which they share similar
attributes. And according to the previous comment by Underwood et al.
(2001), attributes can be broadly construed as any common feature between
two parties. A related construct, ‘‘shared values’’ (Morgan & Hunt, 1994) was
defined as the extent to which partners have beliefs in common about the
importance of goals and behaviors. This particular construct is important to
the current discussion because Morgan and Hunt (1994) found that shared
values are an antecedent of both relationship commitment and trust.
Moreover, the importance of having and communicating shared values is
underscored in the charity sector, as most charities exist because of a single
goal-oriented focus: a cure for a medical condition or disease, the
completion of a building project, increased knowledge or a solution to a
social problem.
Researchers have highlighted identification or a sense of ‘‘we-ness,’’ as a
motivation for caring behavior (Schervish & Havens, 1997) and charities
have the potential to realize significantly higher levels of identification than
those products/service categories associated with the typical product
community. For instance, Bhattacharya (1998) suggested that paid membership in non-profit organizations is motivated by a greater sense of affiliation
and reciprocity than the clubs and organizational memberships typically
found in the private sector. Additionally, it has been suggested that active
participation in a charity community is largely motivated by altruism and a
shared belief in the goal of helping others, as well as a reliance on others in
the community to achieve that goal (see Smith, 1980 for a review).

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

37

Moreover, helping the organization increases a member’s readiness to
categorize and define him/herself as a member of that particular social group
(Bhattacharya, 1998). By increasing their support for the organization,
through active participation, supporters of a charity are by default increasing
their commitment to the donor community. In addition, it is believed that
those who are active supporters of the community are more likely to extend
their support beyond participation in sanctioned events, to direct contributions to the charity itself (e.g. donations, volunteering). Schlegelmilch, Love
and Diamantopoulos (1997), for instance, found that those who engage in
volunteer activities are more likely to increase financial commitments as
well.
Finally, disidentification has been found to be a powerful motivator for
charitable giving, whereby people define themselves in terms of what they are
against rather than what they are for. For example, fifty-eight percent of donors
say they are involved in philanthropy in order to stand up against people or
groups whose agenda they oppose (Fund Raising Management, 1999c).
Bhattacharya and Elsbach (2002), indicated that People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (PETA) benefit from the process of both identification
(i.e., I am a proponent of humane treatment of animals) and disidentification
(i.e., I am against the fur industry) in terms of generating support.
In addition, certain types of charitable organizations are associated with
higher levels of identification. For example, it has been found that reducing
the tax advantages associated with charitable giving leads to a decline in
donations to some, but not all, charities (Smith, 1980; Smith & Alcorn, 1991).
Smith (1980) argued that any increase in the real cost of giving could see gifts
to hospitals and educational institutions reduced by as much as half, whereas
donations to religious groups might only decrease slightly. Religious
charities tend to fair better in harsher economic environments due to the
high levels of identification that supporters have with these organizations
(Fund Raising Management, 1999b).
Support for charities is often generated through requests from
individuals already associated with the giver. For instance, prosocial
behavior is shown to increase when the help is solicited by someone from
within an individual’s social network (Bendapudi, Singh & Bendapudi,
1996). In addition, an individual is also more likely to help if he/she is aware
of others like him/herself who also help (Guy & Patton, 1988). In fact, the
similarity-attraction paradigm is seen to be very important to social
identification and/or kinship development amongst members of a charity
group or fundraising event (Hoeffler & Keller, 2002). Specifically, people are
more inclined to help those who they consider to be like themselves,
regardless of whether they are offering assistance to the actual person in
need or a charity intermediary.
Identification with a cause has even been shown to extend to the type
of products that supporters buy. For example, consumers have been shown

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

38

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

to actively search for and purchase products that support causes that they
identify with (Barone, Myazaki & Taylor, 2000; File & Prince, 1998). In
addition, Sen and Bhattacharya (2001) found that consumers not only select
products based on charity affiliation but that they will even pay more for
products affiliated with personally relevant charities (Sen & Bhattacharya,
2001). Conversely, shoppers have also been known to boycott or disidentify
with certain brands because of their charity affiliations (Webb & Mohr, 1998).
Webb and Mohr (1998) argued that segments of the population invest time
and effort, as well as money, to develop informed responses to corporate
cause-related marketing initiatives.
Consequently, identification underscores the notion that people who
support a cause do not necessarily identify with it, while those who identify
with a cause will support it (Bhattacharya, Rao & Glynn, 1995). Furthermore,
identification is seen to extend to the consumption of products sold by the
charity (mugs, shirts, etc.) as well as the products and services of third parties
(e.g., cause-related marketing). In fact, according to Bennett and Gabriel
(2000) these purchases provide supporters with a more visible, symbolic
statement about their identification with the organization and or cause.
Moreover, these purchases are often used as ‘‘badges’’ that allow supporters
to define themselves in public.
Undoubtedly, the best examples of consciousness of kind are exhibited
by those charities aligned with religious groups. In fact, the religious
organization might be viewed as the archetypal consumption (i.e., brand)
community. Each religious assembly, order, sect, tribe or congregation has at
its core a set of deeply rooted values that are shared by its membership.
Members, or parishioners, also hold beliefs and engage in behaviors that
foster an in-group versus out-group mindset. In fact, the practice and
participation in traditions and rituals can foster intense loyalty and devotion
because they create physical and/or emotional barriers to entry and exit. For
example, various rites of passage such as baptism, confirmation and
circumcision represent an educational and/or physical commitment that
precludes conversion (i.e., brand switching) for most members.
Albeit far less dramatic and far less sacrificial; there is empirical support
for the proposed relationship between identification and involvement. For
example, Fisher and Wakefield (1989) revealed that group identification
(e.g., with a professional sports team) had a strong positive effect on various
forms of behavioral involvement, such as participation in group activities
(e.g., game attendance), the purchase of group relevant products (e.g.,
licensed merchandise) and other group-supportive behaviors (e.g., game
behaviors). Similarly, Sheth and Parvatiyar (1995) proposed that based upon
a desire to be identified as well as to identify with a group, individuals will
adopt the behavioral norms of that group. In another study, Gwinner and
Swanson (2003) found that highly identified sports fans are also more willing
to support organizations that sponsor their sport or favourite team. For

Charity Brand

39

instance, Gwinner and Swanson (2003) cite research which suggests that
NASCAR fans are extremely loyal to companies that support this particular
race series. Subsequent studies in the sports and leisure (e.g., Laverie &
Arnett, 2000; Wann & Branscombe, 1990) and marketing literatures (e.g.,
Bristow & Sebastian, 2001) have similarly supported the existence of a
relationship between identification with a team or group and subsequent or
continued support for that group. Thus, extending these findings to the
charity sector we propose that:

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

P1: Supporters with higher levels of consciousness of kind (identification) with a charity will exhibit higher levels of participation in shared
rituals (behavioral involvement) with that charity.

Ashforth and Mael (1989) suggested that social identification occurs
when an individual perceives him/herself as psychologically intertwined
with the fate of the group and organizational identification is believed to be a
strong predictor of participation in the charity donor community. For
example, a lack of organization identification has been found to be related to
lapsed memberships in nonprofit organizations (Bhattacharya, 1998).
Similarly, Bristow and Sebastian (2001) reported that ‘‘die-hard’’ Chicago
Cubs baseball fans also scored higher on a general measure of loyalty toward
this particular team. Thus, it is proposed that identification is a good
predictor of a member’s expected tenure or length of commitment to a given
community.
Therefore, while the current article proposes that the identification has
an indirect effect upon commitment through involvement. It also has a direct
effect on commitment. In part the existence of a direct effect is predicated on
the fact that not all brands have communities and yet the benefit from
committed consumers. Thus, the proposed model of brand community
recognizes that while brand communities serve to strengthen consumer
identification with, and involvement in, brands there can be loyalty or
commitment to brands without such communities. For instance, drawing
upon research from sociology, psychology and consumer behavior, Kleine
posited that the ‘‘more a student identifies with being a marketing major, the
more committed he or she will be to enacting behaviors that lead to success
as a marketing student (p15). Here we see that identification is seen to lead
to commitment (Proposition 2) and that in turn this commitment will lead to
increased group-supportive behaviors (e.g., participating in marketing
clubs) or involvement; a relationship to be discussed in Proposition 3).
Alternatively, just as the act of supporting a charity might not result in an
individual identifying with that particular charitable organization or its
supporters; mere association or membership (i.e., being a graduate from a
particular university) in an organization is not synonymous with commitment to the organization (Bhattacharya & Elsbach, 2002) and is certainly not

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

40

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

sufficient to motivate philanthropic action. Rather, donor identification with
the organization or cause requires a more developed type of engagement
that evolves from the socialization process; socialization that occurs in the
‘‘communities of participation’’ selected by an individual (Lindahl & Conley,
2002).
Therefore, while the vast majority of the public supports some charity or
other (Sullivan, 2002), not all supporters of a given charity are prospective
members of that charity brand community, just as not every Jeep owner is a
member of its brand community. For example, some people give to charities
simply to get rid of the person asking (Hibbert & Horne, 1996). The charity
sector relies heavily ‘‘on the kindness of strangers’’ and few organizations
can afford the luxury of being exclusionary. In fact, charities are seen to be
considerably less ‘‘judgmental’’ than the typical consumption community
that has product ownership as a condition of membership (Muniz &
O’Guinn, 2001). As a result, charities experience considerable supporter
‘‘churn’’ as a result of transient or episodic support activity what might be
referred to as a kind of situational involvement (Laverie & Arnett, 2000). Akin
to brand switchers, these transient supporters lack commitment; while they
visit the community they fail to become engaged and achieve member status.
Given the funding challenges faced by charities, it is critical that they
develop and maintain increased loyalty and commitment from supporters.
Thus, attracting and maintaining supporter commitment is seen as critical for
this sector.
As a result, it is proposed that:
P2: Supporters exhibiting higher levels of consciousness of kind
(identification) with a charity will exhibit greater commitment to that
charity.

Brand Commitment
Morgan and Hunt (1994) identified commitment as a key mediating variable
on important relationship outcomes in marketing such as intent to stay and
acquiescence, a role that has been supported in a variety of different
contexts. For instance, Fullerton (2003) recently found commitment, and in
particular the affective form of commitment had a positive impact on
behavioral loyalty (e.g., advocacy intentions, willingness to pay more,
switching intentions). Inwasaki and Havitz (2004) recently reported that
psychological commitment — defined as the degree to which an individual’s
attitudes towards a brand are resistant to change — had a positive influence
on behavioral loyalty (i.e., duration or frequency of participation). In a study
that is particularly germane to the current context, Gruen, Summers, and
Acito (2000) found that commitment had a positive effect upon the

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

41

relationship activities of members in a professional association. Specifically,
Gruen et al. (2000) found that member commitment was associated with
increased participation in (e.g., meeting attendance) and coproduction of
(e.g., attracting new members) association activities.
The proposed relationship between commitment and behavioral
intentions (e.g., loyalty) is well supported in the literature (Fullerton, 2003;
Gruen et al., 2000; Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Indeed, as Fullerton (2003)
acknowledges most conceptualizations of commitment now include at least
an attitudinal and behavioral component. Affective commitment is commonly associated with liking and identification, while continuance commitment is typically viewed from a reward (e.g., availability of comparable
alternatives) or cost (e.g., switching costs) perspective (Fullerton). Whereas
affective commitment captures one’s desire to retain ties with an object (e.g.,
brand) or entity (e.g., organization), continuance commitment embodies the
notion that one cannot afford to sever the relationship or is better off
maintaining the relationship. Thus most definitions of commitment include
an element of relationship continuity as demonstrated by Morgan and Hunt
(1994) who defined relationship commitment as a desire to ‘‘maintain’’ a
relationship and Dwyer et al. (1987) who viewed commitment as a pledge of
continuity.
Consequently, it is proposed that:
P3: Supporters exhibiting higher levels of commitment to a charity will
exhibit greater participation in the shared rituals and traditions of that
charity (e.g., behavioral involvement).

Shared Rituals and Traditions (Behavioral Involvement)
Although ‘‘involvement’’ has a rich tradition in the marketing and consumer
behavior literature most authors have adopted a more passive view of the
construct than the one used here. For instance, while Zaltman and
Wallendorf (1983) defined involvement as ‘‘a motivational state of mind
(arousal) that is goal directed’’ (p.550), the current article adopts a more
experiential or behavioral view of involvement. And thus, within the current
context behavioral involvement shares much with constructs such as:
behavioral loyalty (e.g., Iwasaki & Havitz, 2004), coproduction (e.g., Gruen
et al., 2000; Sheth & Parvatiyar, 1995), customer advocacy (e.g., Fullerton,
2003), customer/organizational citizenship behavior (e.g., Lengnick-Hall,
Claycomb & Inks, 2000), customer voluntary performance (e.g., Bettencourt,
1997), group supportive behaviors (e.g., Fisher & Wakefield, 1998) and
participation (e.g., Gruen et al., 2000).
We adopt this behavioral view of involvement for a number of reasons.
First, and perhaps most importantly, the shared rituals and traditions marker

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

42

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

of brand community identified by Muniz and O’Guinn (2001) embodies
action in the form of virtual (as in the case of online communities) or face-toface interaction of consumers, or the consumer’s private interaction with the
product. Thus, this particular marker is a behavioral construct. Second,
researchers have found that the relationship between involvement (the
attitudinal construct) and action is rather tenuous, with involvement
explaining very little variation in constructs such as behavioral loyalty. For
example, Iwasaki and Havitz (2004) were able to show that enduring
involvement had no direct effect on loyalty, but rather an indirect
relationship through psychological commitment. In the aforementioned
study, Iwasaki and Havitz (2004) defined leisure involvement as people’s
beliefs and attitudes about leisure participation. Finally, it is argued that it is
the relational outcomes of brand community that are important to the firms
and organizations that attempt to build such communities. For instance,
increased patronage, increased advocacy, willingness to purchase licensed
goods and a willingness to pay more for the brand are all viewed as positive
behaviors (Capella, 2002). To this end, we adopt a view of involvement
which is consistent with Capella (2002) who defined sports fan involvement
as, ‘‘the active interest in, engagement with and commitment to a sports team
exhibited by the sports fan’’ (p.31).
Brandfests (McAlexander & Shouten, 1998; McAlexander et al., 2002)
associated with Jeep (e.g., Camp Jeep, Jeep Jamboree), Harley Davidson
(e.g., HOG rallies) and Saturn (e.g., Homecoming) are the very embodiment
of brand community. In fact, according to McAlexander et al. (2002) these
communal events have played a central role in the study of the brand
community phenomenon to this point. The importance of the brandfest to
community development was illustrated by McAlexander et al. (2002) who
found that participants were transformed by their participation in such
events. Specifically, these authors found that consumers had more favorable
perceptions of the brand and were more likely to view themselves as being
‘‘in’’ the brand community after the brandfest experience.
In their study of service brand building, Underwood et al. (2001)
commented on the importance of ‘‘lived experiences’’ (e.g., behavioral
involvement) to customer-based brand equity. Specifically, Underwood et al.
(2001) stated that participation in group events that build inter-consumer
(i.e., sports fans) associations, such as tailgate parties and booster clubs help
to foster and sustain brand associations. Moreover, Underwood et al. (2001)
argued that these experiences need not be live (e.g, face-to-face) to be lived,
citing fans can experience similar brand associations and identification via
broadcast. Involvement or participation in such group events (e.g., tailgate
parties, brandfests) then becomes an important way to share in and preserve
a collective identity (e.g., Chicago Cub Fan).
In charitable organizations with well-developed communities both
public and private rituals and traditions can be identified. Public rituals and

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

43

traditions can be seen everywhere; the wearing of poppies in early
November, the Salvation Army’s Red Kettle Campaign in stores and on
street corners at Christmas time, and the Cancer Society’s Daffodil Days are
but a few examples. Of relevance to the current article is the fact that
‘‘participation effects’’ (i.e., an individual’s involvement in religious and
voluntary group activities) have been shown to be correlated to charity
support (Jackson, Bachmeier, Wood, & Craft, 1995).
Although not exactly the same, there are striking similarities between
the kinds of events hosted by religious groups and charitable organizations
and the brandfests associated with Saturn and Jeep. In fact Underwood et al.
(2001) used the term events to describe the identification–building activities
of manufacturers such as Jeep and Harley-Davidson. Similar to these brands,
a charity brandfest will often involve people coming together to celebrate
their communal consumption of the charity ‘‘product’’ (the dispersion of
funds toward the cause). To this end, many charity brandfests are predicated
on the introduction and mingling of supporters to and beneficiaries of a
charity. There are also support groups that enable the affected individual
and/or their families to gather to share their experiences and to help those
who have recently been diagnosed with a wide variety of spiritual,
emotional and physical issues.
Consequently, event marketing is employed heavily by charities, with
many organizations using the technique as the cornerstone of their
fundraising efforts. Participants are actively involved and very committed
to these events (e.g. Multiple Sclerosis Bike-A-Thon) giving freely of their
time not only at the event, but also prior to it (i.e. organizing, seeking
pledges), a commitment that is demonstrated through continued participation each and every year the event is held. Although the event itself (e.g.,
Jerry Lewis’s Telethon for MD) may be a highly ritualized (i.e., every Labor
Day) tradition, there is also evidence of shared rituals and traditions that
occur within these events (e.g., poster child, updating the contribution tally)
and within the daily operation of the organization (e.g., meetings begun with
a prayer).
Many charities also foster traditions as they recognize distinguished
supporters such as long term volunteers or donors. In fact, Bhattacharya, Rao
and Glynn (1995) noted that differing levels of involvement and identification exist within groups of charity supporters. Essentially, there are those
who have higher ‘‘status’’ because of their degree of commitment (e.g., time,
money or tenure) to the community. The tradition and ritual surrounding the
formal recognition of volunteer and donor commitment plays a significant
role in the generation and maintenance of the charity support hierarchy. For
example, the presentation and display of pins, badges and plaques to
volunteers who have surpassed certain tenure milestones is common in
many organizations. Similarly, there is a donor hierarchy that is often
established through public displays, such as naming ceremonies, published

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

44

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

donor lists and permanent donor walls. In other contexts, supporters receive
‘‘gifts’’ (what some might view as incentives) that vary based on the ‘‘level of
support’’ (i.e., amount of donation) pledged. Supporters of public television,
for instance, receive ‘‘better’’ gifts with successively higher levels of support.
For some individuals these support hierarchies represent a type of
charity meritocracy, where each successive level of achievement serves as a
‘‘rite of passage’’ that imbues the recipient special status within the
community. Although previously described as non-judgmental, charities
are not without social structure. Indeed most have a very well established
participant pecking order similar to that found in other well-documented
brand communities (Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). While the tradition and ritual
surrounding such hierarchies and meritocracies may be an effective way of
recognizing community contributions, the practice may also be effective at
maintaining membership. It is expected that members who participate in
these rituals and receive recognition from the charities are more likely to
remain loyal and develop a greater sense of communitas.
P4: Supporters who participate in the shared rituals (behavioral
involvement) with a charity will exhibit higher levels of a moral
responsibility (perceived sense of community) to that charity and those
involved with it.

Moral Responsibility (Perceived Sense of Community)
In order to develop a sense of community with an event, cause or
organization it is necessary for the new member to first be attracted to and
then acculturated to the organization (Muniz & O’Guinn, 2001). Defined as a
shared sense of involvement with others in a group (see Table 1)
psychological sense of community (PSC) captures an interpersonal type of
attachment that extends beyond mere identification or attraction. Rather, PSC
appears to capture the notion of a normative set of beliefs or a responsibility
that members of a group have towards one another and the group.
In their study of fan behavior, Laverie and Arnett (2000) examined the
influence of ‘‘attachment’’—a construct which is conceptually similar to the
PSC construct introduced here — upon identity salience. Drawing parallels
to symbolic consumption Laverie and Arnett (2000) suggested that leisure
participation is symbolic and self-expressive and that people become
attached to those leisure activities that allow them to express a desired self.
Moreover, Laverie and Arnett (2000) commented that, ‘‘it is likely that
attachment to a leisure activity will be positively related to identity salience’’
(p. 230). Specifically, these authors found that as fans become more attached
to their team their ‘‘fan identity’’ increases. This interaction between
attraction and identification is consistent with Proposition 5.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

45

However, Laverie and Arnett (2000) also point out that while the
attachment construct has received considerable attention in the product
literature it has not often applied to other contexts, such as the attachment
people have to sports teams. However, unlike a person’s attachment to a
sports team, it is our contention that attachment does not fully capture the
nature of the relationship that a person has with an organization or group of
which they are an actual member. And it is for this reason that we have
elected to use PSC – a construct which is more consistent with the kind of
interpersonal associations that characterize brand communities.
In the charity sector then, we argue that donors and volunteers have to
be made aware of and identify with the mission, if not the organization
before they can become involved with a charity brand community. In fact,
development of a sense of responsibility and social norms within the
community are especially important in the charity sector given that there are
relatively few or no switching costs among secular charity brands. Therefore,
whereas participation in religious activities is often an integral part of an
individual’s lifestyle with support for religious charities often a formal
requirement of participation and a routine act (e.g. tithing) of many
religions. And unlike secular causes, religious charities benefit from having
the ability to overtly and not-so-subtly remind members of their obligation to
support the church’s mission. For example, the primary fundraising
initiatives of the Canadian and American Jewish communities — the
United and Combined Jewish Appeals — place considerable social pressure
upon donors. In addition, publications associated with some religious
organizations, specifically prohibits advertising from other ‘‘competing’’
religious charities (e.g., Blair, 1999). Similarly for volunteers, proper
‘‘induction’’ into the organization (i.e. acculturation of the organization’s
mission, values, etc.) can lead to increased commitment (Wilson & Pimm,
1996). Consequently, we propose that:
P5: Supporters who exhibit higher levels of moral responsibility (PSC)
toward a charity will exhibit higher levels of consciousness of kind
(identification) with that charity.

In a review of the literature, it has been found that loyalty – viewed as
synonymous with or and outcome of commitment – can be enhanced by the
type of social interactions that are associated with brand communities and
here the PSC construct. For instance Oliver (1999) has stated that ‘‘ultimate
loyalty’’ emerges when the consumer experiences a ‘‘convergence of
product, personal and social forces’’ (p. 42). These social forces are at the
heart of the brand community phenomenon and have been discussed in
services contexts in reference to experiential consumption. For instance,
Kelley, Hoffman and Carter (1999) have suggested that it is the ‘‘social
aspects’’ of the sports entertainment experience (e.g., hockey) that are

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

46

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

essential to long-term fan adoption. Moreover, Kelley et al. (1999) discussed
the importance that ‘‘community relations’’ activities have on developing
relational bonds between a team and its fans. Consistent with the proposed
model of brand community, these authors also described how ‘‘thrill
performances’’ (see Deighton, 1992) such as sporting events engage
consumers, convincing them to actively participate in the performance
(i.e., involvement). Ultimately, Kelley et al. (1999) suggest that through
involvement in the social aspects of such events that fans (e.g., a community
of supporters) begin to adopt a team.
In the charity sector it has been shown that people prefer to support the
CRM programs of companies that do not hop from one charity to the next.
For instance, Whitaker (1999) reported that fully eight out of ten people
indicating a preference for making a long-term commitment to one cause.
Furthermore, CRM efforts that are long term, sustainable and strategic are
valued most by supporters of charities (Polonsky & Wood, 2001; Till &
Nowak, 2000). The benefits associated with CRM for the recipient charity are
typically well-publicized in the promotional and public relations efforts of
both the sponsoring organization and the charity. Research shows that
‘‘doing good’’ is also good for business, and marketers have realized sales
increases as a result of CRM efforts (Bennett & Gabriel, 2000; Hoeffler &
Keller, 2002). However, when inclusion in a group (i.e., charity) is made not
by choice, but through a third-party gift (e.g., proceeds from the sale of a Big
Mac going to Ronald McDonald House), it is believed that the donor-charity
bond will not be sustained unless the donor incorporates the act of donation
into his/her sense of self (Bhattacharya, 1998). To this end, the individual
must feel some sense of belonging, identification and/or community before
he/she can be expected to actively and repeatedly participate.
P6: Supporters who exhibit higher levels of moral responsibility (PSC)
toward a charity will exhibit higher levels of commitment to the charity.

DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
For charities, the ability to gain supporter commitment is critical. Despite
having been identified as the largest source of potential support in the
coming years, today’s baby boomers have been shown to be less loyal and
more cynical toward non-profits (Fund Raising Management, 1999a) and to
support fewer charities than their parents (Fund Raising Management,
1999b). In response, brand communities represent an excellent opportunity
to develop and nurture donor and volunteer involvement and identification
that will, ultimately, elicit deeper, longer-lasting commitment from supporters and help to attract and engage new supporters as well.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

47

Moreover, this article and its proposed model of brand/charity
community development assert that the potential for building such
communities is dependent upon the social interaction of consumers and/
or supporters. An effective way to encourage social interaction is through the
development of ritual and tradition. As discussed, many charities employ
event marketing vehicles, but few consciously leverage such events to build
supporter commitment by employing ritual and tradition in their event
marketing. Given the importance of social interaction to the model proposed
in Figure 1, perhaps the most important implication for charities is the need
to leverage their existing events in such a way as to create rituals and
traditions that foster a perceived sense of community, enhance identification
and that encourages them to attend similar events in the future and heed
other calls to action (e.g., requests for volunteers, donations).
Thus charities should leverage brandfests to facilitate and encourage
member interaction, because these events represent opportunities for
members to establish and share common beliefs and experiences, while
simultaneously developing a deeper sense of responsibility toward the
group. The events can employ the same tactics used by Jeep, Saturn and
others and encourage more of a ‘‘web’’ of interaction within and between
members of the community. Similar to the way in which members of forprofit brand communities (Jeep, Saturn, etc.) were found to identify with the
brand, only after having attended a brandfest, charity brandfests provide an
opportunity to convert ‘‘participants’’ into ‘‘supporters.’’ This is important
because fun runs, concerts and other social events are likely to be attended
by large numbers of people who may/may not have previously heard of, let
alone identified with the cause or charitable organization. Indeed, it is only
through identification and involvement with a community that one can
develop anything more than a superficial attachment to it.
In the consumer goods communities discussed, it was shown that a
significant event experience often prompted non-members to purchase the
product (bought into the cause), thereby becoming full-fledged members
(supporters) of that brand’s (charity) community. Further, these charity
brandfests can themselves become ritualistic behavior. For instance while
many charities have ritualized, institutionalized annual events (e.g., Poppy
Days, Daffodil Days), they have failed to fully develop strategies for these
events that would encourage the kind of supporter-nonsupporter-charity/
cause interactions necessary to establish the sense of community discussed
within this article.
Within the charity brandfest context there are additional tactics that can
be used to encourage consciousness of kind and moral responsibility. By
gathering in one location, supporters at least temporarily join a ‘‘community,’’ and albeit of relatively short duration there are ways to encourage and
support a more deeply experienced sense of communitas. For example, the
T-shirts, hats, aprons, pins, flowers and ribbons that are either sold to or

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

48

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

provided free of charge, to the volunteers and participants at many events
serve as badges that help identify participants as ‘‘supporters.’’ In addition,
these badges bind participants to other members of the community through
a form of conspicuous consciousness of kind. These badges and also extend
beyond the event itself as demonstrated by blood donors who receive
windshield stickers for their car, and Mothers’ Against Drunk Driving
(MADD) supporters who place ribbons on their car aerials to publicly
display their support for the MADD cause.
Charities can also leverage existing relationships with supporters to
foster the development of a brand community. For example, those
supporters who are already engaged in cause-related activities and likely
identify with it, provide a nucleus for the development of a community.
Further, a set of formal/informal role expectations tend to dictate individuals’
actions once engaged in the community. For example, after agreeing to be
on a fundraising committee, committee members will typically assume the
expected roles of both giving and asking others for help (Lindahl & Conley,
2002). In addition, the development of a charity brand community can be
‘‘jump started’’ by leveraging the strength of existing communities. For
example, The United Way will approach employers, who in turn actively
recruit their employees to participate in and support the campaign. This
participation often extends well beyond the mere financial, with employersponsored teams attending and participating in special events. Not only does
the United Way program benefit from the consciousness of kind and
responsibility felt by members of a pre-existing community (i.e., work
group), but ritualistic elements of the appeal such as the consistent timing of
the campaign (e.g., Fall), specific events and the consistent use of symbols
(e.g., donation thermometers) effectively serve to further strengthen the
community.

CONCLUSION
The model presented here has extended the understanding of the concept of
brand community introduced by Muniz and O’Guinn (2001) in a number of
ways. First, the current article has tied the various markers of brand
community to constructs that have well-established, valid and reliable
measures. Second, the model presented here demonstrated the iterative
process of brand community development, and perhaps most importantly
the importance of the cognitive and experiential learning mechanisms. A
discussion of current marketing practices revealed that while charitable
organizations exhibit some aspects of brand community they are not
cultivating the sense of community amongst supporters that is necessary to
fully realize the benefits witnessed in a true brand community. However, the
need to increase overall support and a desire to develop greater loyalty

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

49

amongst current supporters, demonstrates the relevance of brand community to this sector.
Thus, the iterative model of brand community developed in this article
is as an effective tool for charities looking to maintain or enhance supporter
commitment as a means to counter current funding challenges. Charities
have an opportunity to leverage brand communities to enjoy benefits similar
to the increased loyalty and sales enjoyed by their for-profit counterparts.
The application of the brand community model to the charity sector
(arguably the most distant from those categories previously associated with
brand communities underscores the belief that the proposed model can be
extended to a wide range of high involvement product and services. Finally,
by operationalizing the concept of brand community with existing constructs
with proven validity and reliability, this article provides an important
blueprint for charities looking to gain greater commitment amongst their
supporters, while also making the brand community concept and its
elements more accessible to researchers seeking to explore and test the
brand community phenomenon. By leveraging the existing and well-defined
concepts of identification, involvement and perceived sense of community,
the model offers a parsimonious and executable set of propositions that
enables researchers interested in brand community to measure its effects.
Future researchers are encouraged to not only test and challenge the
propositions and model developed here but to extend the model to other
product and service contexts in order to establish its generalizability.

REFERENCES
Aaker, D. (1994). Building a brand: The saturn story. California Management
Review, 36(2), 114.
Algesheimer, R., Dholakia, U. M., & Herrmann A. (2005). The social influence of
brand community: Evidence from European car clubs. Journal of Marketing,
69(3), 19–34.
Ashforth, B., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy
of Management Review, 14(1), 20–39.
Barone, M., Miyazaki, A., & Taylor, K. (2000). The influence of cause-related
marketing on consumer choice: Does one good turn deserve another?’’
Academy of Marketing Science Journal, 28(2), 248–262.
Bendapudi, N., Singh S., & Bendapudi, V. (1996). Enhancing helping behavior: An
integrative framework for promotion planning. Journal of Marketing, 60(3),
33–49.
Bennett, R. (2006). Predicting the lifetime durations of donors of charities. Journal of
Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 15(1/2), 45–67.
Bennett, R., & Gabriel, H. (2000). Charity affiliation as a determinant of product
purchase decisions. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 9(4), 255–
270.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

50

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

Bettencourt, L. A. (1997). Customer voluntary performance: Customers as partners in
service delivery. Journal of Retailing, 73(3), 383–406.
Bhattacharya, C. B. (1998). When customers are members: Customer retention in
paid membership contexts. Academy of Marketing Science Journal, 26(1), 31–
44.
Bhattacharya, C. B., & Elsbach, K. (2002). Us versus Them: The roles of
organizational identification and disidentification in social marketing initiatives.
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 21(1), 26–36.
Bhattacharya, C. B., Rao, H., & Glynn, M. A. (1995). Understanding the bond of
identification: An investigation of its correlates among art museum members.
Journal of Marketing, 59(4), 46–57.
Blair, K. (1999). Primate’s fund director challenges world vision’s style of aid, ads in
journal. Anglican Journal, November, 150.
Boorstin, D. (1973). The Americans: The Democratic Experience. New York:
Random House.
Brady, M. K., Noble, C. H., Utter D. J., & Smith, G. E. (2002). How to give and
receive: An exploratory study of charitable hybrids. Psychology & Marketing,
19(11), 919–944.
Bristow, D. N., & Sebastian, R. J. (2001). Holy cow! Wait ‘til next year! A closer look
at the brand loyalty of Chicago Cubs baseball fans. The Journal of Consumer
Marketing, 18(3), 256–75.
Broderick, A. J., & Mueller, R. D. (1999). A theoretical and empirical exegesis of the
consumer involvement construct: The psychology of the food shopper. Journal
of Marketing Theory and Practice, 7(4), 97–108.
Capella, M. E. (2002). Measuring sports fans’ involvement: The fan behavior
questionnaire. Southern Business Review, 27(2), 30–36.
Coleman, B. C. (2002). Appealing to the unchurched: What attracts new members.
Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 10(1), 77–91.
Cova, B., & Pace, S. (2006). Brand community of convenience products: New forms
of customer empowerment-the case of ‘my Nutella-the community. European
Journal of Marketing, 40(9/10), 1087–1105.
Deighton, J. (1992). The consumption of performance. Journal of Consumer
Research, 19(3), 362–372.
Dutton, J. M., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. (1994). Organizational images and
member identification. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(June), 239–263.
Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer-seller relationships.
Journal of Marketing, 51(April), 11–27.
File, K., & Prince, R. (1998). Cause related marketing and corporate philanthropy in
the privately held enterprise. Journal of Business Ethics, 17(14), 1529–1539.
Fisher, R. J., & Ackerman, D. (1998). The effects of recognition and group need on
volunteerism: A social norm perspective. Journal of Consumer Research,
25(December), 262–275.
Fisher, R. J., & Wakefield, K. (1998). Factors leading to group identification: A field
study of winners and losers. Psychology and Marketing, 15(1), 23–40.
Fraering, M., & Minor, M. S. (2006). Sense of community: An exploratory study of US
consumers of financial services. International Journal of Bank Marketing,
24(5), 284–306.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

51

Friedman, M., Vanden Abeele, P., & De Vos, K. (1992). A Look at the Consumption
Community Concept through a Psychological Lens. In F. Rudmin & M. Richins
(Eds.), Meaning, Measure, and Morality of Materialism (pp. 126–127). Provo,
UT: Association for Consumer Research.
Friedman, M., Vanden Abeele, P., & De Vos, K. (1993). Boorstein’s consumption
community concept: A tale of two countries. Journal of Consumer Policy, 16,
35–60.
Fullerton, G. (2003). When does commitment lead to loyalty?’’ Journal of Service
Research, 5(4), 333–344.
Fund Raising Management (1999a). Toward 2000 and Beyond: Charitable and Social
Change Giving in the New Millennium – Part I. 30(3), 28–30.
Fund Raising Management (1999b). Toward 2000 and Beyond: Charitable and Social
Change Giving in the New Millennium – Part II. 30(4), 24–28.
Fund Raising Management (1999c). Toward 2000 and Beyond: Charitable and Social
Change Giving in the New Millennium – Part III. 30(5), 32–36.
Gruen, T. W., Summers, J. O., & Acito, F. (2000). Relationship marketing activities,
commitment, and membership behaviors in professional associations. Journal
of Marketing, 64(3), 34–49.
Gwinner, K., & Swanson, S. (2003). A model of fan identification: Antecedents
and sponsorship outcomes. The Journal of Services Marketing, 17(3), 275–
294.
Guy, B., & Patton, W. (1988). The marketing of altruistic causes: Understanding why
people help. Journal of Services Marketing, 2(1), 5–16.
Hankinson, P. (2002). The impact of brand orientation on managerial practice: A
quantitative study of the UK’s Top 500 fundraising managers. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7(1), 30–44.
Hankinson, P. (2001). Brand orientation in the charity sector: A framework for
discussion and research. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, 6(3), 231–242.
Harbaugh, W. (1998). What do donations buy? A model of philanthropy based on
prestige and warm glow. Journal of Public Economics, 67(2), 269–284.
Hibbert, S., & Horne, S. (1995). To Give or not to Give: Is that the Question? In F.
Hansen (Ed.), European Advances in Consumer Research (Vol. 2) (pp. 179–
182). Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research.
Hibbert, S., & Horne, S. (1996). Giving to charity: Questioning the donor decision
process. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 3(2), 4–13.
Hoeffler, S., & Lane Keller, K. (2002). Building brand equity through corporate
societal marketing. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 21(1), 78–89.
Iwasaki, Y., & Havitz, M. F. (2004). Examining Relationships between Leisure
Involvement, Psychological Commitment and Loyalty to a Recreation Agency.
Journal of Leisure Research, 36(1), 45–72.
Jackson, E. F., Bachmeier, M. D., Wood, J. R., & Craft, E. A. (1995). Volunteering and
charitable giving: Do religious and associational ties promote helping behavior?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 24, 59–78.
Kelley, S. W., Hoffman, K. D., & Carter, S. (1999). Franchise relocation and sport
introduction: A sports marketing case study of the Carolina Hurricanes’ fan
adoption plan. The Journal of Services Marketing, 13(6), 469–480.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

52

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

Keyt, J. C., Yavas, U., & Riecken, G. (2002). Comparing donor segments to a causebased charity: The case of the American Lung Association. Journal of Nonprofit
and Public Sector Marketing, 10(2), 117–134.
Kleine, S. S. (2002). Enhancing students’ role identity as marketing majors. Journal
of Marketing Education, 24(1), 15–23.
Langer, J. (1997). What consumers wish brand managers knew. Journal of
Advertising Research, 37(6), 60–65.
Laverie, D. A., & Arnett, D. B. (2000). Factors affecting fan attendance: The influence of
identity salience and satisfaction. Journal of Leisure Research, 32(2), 225–246.
Lemon, K. N., Rust R. T., & Zeithaml, V. A. (2001). What drives customer equity.
Marketing Management, 10(1), 20–25.
Lengnick-Hall, C. A., Claycomb, V. C., & Inks, L. W. (1997). From recipient to
contributor: Examining customer roles and experienced outcomes. European
Journal of Marketing, 34(3/4), 359–383.
Liao, M.N., Foreman, S., & Sargeant, A. (2001). Market versus societal orientation in
the nonprofit context. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 6(3), 254–268.
Lindahl, W., & Conley, A. (2002). Literature review: Philanthropic fundraising.
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 13(1), 91–112.
Long, M. M., & Shiffman, L. G. (1997). Swatch fever: An allegory for understanding
the paradox of collecting. Psychology and Marketing, 14(5), 495–509.
McAlexander, J. H., Kim, S. K., & Roberts, S. D. (2003). Loyalty: The influences of
satisfaction and brand community integration. Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 11(4), 1–11.
McAlexander, J. H., Koenig, H. F., & Schouten, J. W. (2006). Building relationships
of brand community in higher education: A strategic framework for university
advancement. International Journal of Educational Advancement, 6(2), 107–
118.
McAlexander, J. H., & Schouten, J. W. (1998). Brandfests: Servicescapes for the
Cultivation of Brand Equity. In J. F. Sherry (Ed.), Servicescapes: The Concept of
Place in Contemporary Markets (pp. 377–402). Chicago: American Marketing
Association.
McAlexander, J. H., Schouten, J. W., & Koenig, H. F. (2002). Building brand
community. Journal of Marketing, 66(1), 38–54.
McMillan, D., & Chavis, D. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory.
American Journal of Community Psychology, 14, 6–23.
Morgan, Robert and Shelby Hunt (1994). The Commitment-Trust Theory of
Relationship Marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20–38.
Muniz, A. Jr., & O’Guinn, T. (2001). Brand community. Journal of Consumer
Research, 27(4), 412–432.
Oliver, R. L. (1999), N Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on the Consumer. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Peacock, M. (2000). Charity ends with the Lottery: It ain’t what you give, it’s the way
you give it. New Economy, 7(2), 120–123.
Peloza, J., & Hassay, D. N. (2007). A typology of charity support behaviors: Towards
a holistic view of helping. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing,
17(1/2), 135–151.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

53

Peloza, J., & Hassay, D. N. (2008). Make versus buy philanthropy: Managing firmcause relationships for strategic and social benefit. Journal of Nonprofit and
Public Sector Marketing, 19(2), 69–90.
Peltier, J., Schibrowsky, J., & Schultz, D. (2002). Leveraging customer information to
develop sequential communication strategies: A case study of charitable-giving
behavior. Journal of Advertising Research, 42(4), 23–41.
Polonsky, M. J., & Wood, G. (2001). Can the overcommercialization of cause-related
marketing harm society? Journal of Macromarketing, 21(1), 8–22.
Reid, P. (1989). Well-Made In America: Lessons From Harley Davidson on Being the
Best. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rosenblatt, J. A., Cusson, A. J., & McGown, L. (1986). A Model to Explain Charitable
Donation – Health Care Consumer Behavior. In R. Lutz (Ed.), Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 13, (pp. 235–239). Provo, UT: Association for
Consumer Research.
Rothschild, M. (1979). Marketing communications in nonbusiness situations or
why it’s so hard to sell brotherhood like soap. Journal of Marketing, 43(2), 11–20.
Sargeant, A. (2001a). Using donor lifetime value to inform fundraising strategies.
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 12(1), 25–38.
Sargeant, A. (2001b). Relationship fundraising: How to keep donors loyal. Nonprofit
Management and Leadership, 12(2), 177–192.
Sargeant, A., Foreman, S., & Liao, M.-N. (2002). Operationalizing the marketing
concept in the nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector
Marketing, 10(2), 41–65.
Sargeant, A., & Woodliffe, L. (2007). Building donor loyalty: The antecedents and
role of commitment in the context of charity giving. Journal of Nonprofit and
Public Sector Marketing, 18(2), 47–68.
Schervish, P., & Havens, J. (1997). Social participation and charitable giving: A
Multivariate Analysis. Voluntas, 8(3), 235–260.
Schlegelmilch, B., Love, A., & Diamantopoulos, A. (1997). Responses to different
charity appeals: The impact of donor characteristics on the amount of
donations. European Journal of Marketing, 31(8), 548–560.
Sen, S., & Bhattacharya, C. B. (2001). Does doing good always lead to doing better?
Consumer reactions to corporate social responsibility. Journal of Marketing
Research, 38(2), 225–243.
Sheth, J. N., Parvatiyar, A. (1995). Relationship marketing in consumer markets:
Antecedents and consequences. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
23(4), 255–271.
Shouten, J. W., & McAlexander, J. H. (1995). Subcultures of consumption: An
ethnography of the new bikers. Journal of Consumer Research, 22(June), 43–61.
Smith, S. M. (1980). Giving to Charitable Organizations: A Behavioral Review and a
Framework for Increasing Commitment. In J. Olson (Ed.), Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 7, (pp. 753–756). Provo, UT: Association for
Consumer Research.
Smith, S., & Alcorn, D. (1991). Cause marketing: A new direction in the marketing of
corporate responsibility. Journal of Services Marketing, 5(4), 21–37.
Steers, R. M. (1977). Antecedents and outcomes of organizational commitment.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 22, 46–56.

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

54

D. N. Hassay and J. Peloza

Sullivan, A. (2002). Affair of the heart. Barron’s, 82(49), 28.
Thomas, J. L., Cunningham, B. J., & Krauss Williams, J. (2002). The impact of
involvement, perceived moral intensity, and satisfaction upon trust in nonprofit relational contexts: Process and outcomes. Journal of Nonprofit and
Public Sector Marketing, 10(1), 93–115.
Till, B., & Nowak, L. (2000). Toward effective use of cause-related marketing
alliances. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 9(7), 472–484.
Underwood, R. L. (2001). The communicative power of product packaging: Creating
brand identity via lived and mediated experience. Journal of Marketing Theory
and Practice, 11(1), 62–76.
Underwood, R., Bond, E., & Baer, R. (2001). Building service brands via social
identity: Lessons from the sports marketplace. Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, 9(1), 1–12.
Vandenberg, R. (1998). Treat your raffle-ticket buyers like donors. Canadian
Fundraiser, July 29.
Varadarajan, P. R. (2003). Musings on relevance and rigor of scholarly research in
marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 31(4), 368–376.
Wann, D. L., & Branscombe, N. R. (1990). Die-hard and fair-weather fans: Effects of
identification on BIRGing and CORFing tendencies. Journal of Sport and Social
Issues, 14(2), 103–117.
Wann, D. L., & Branscombe, N. R. (1993). Sports fans: Measuring degree of
identification with their team. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 24(1),
1–17.
Webb, D., & Mohr, L. (1998). A typology of consumer responses to cause-related
marketing: From skeptics to socially concerned. Journal of Public Policy &
Marketing, 17(2), 226–238.
Weir, L., & Hibbert, S. (2000). Building donor relationships: An investigation into the
use of relationship and database marketing by charity fundraisers. The Service
Industries Journal, 20(2), 114–132.
Whitaker, A. (1999). Cause marketing gaining ground. Management Review, 88(8),
8.
Williamson, R. (2003). Money supply soars, but funding is a different question. The
NonProfit Times, June 15.
Wilson, A., & Pimm, G. (1996). The tyranny of the volunteer: The care and feeding
of voluntary workforces. Management Decision, 34(4), 24–40.
Zaltman, G., & Wallendorf, M. (1983). Consumer Behaviour: Basic Findings and
Management Implications. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

CONTRIBUTORS
Derek N. Hassay is an Assistant Professor of Marketing at the Haskayne
School of Business. Derek’s research interests include relationship marketing
(B2B and B2C in both profit and non-profit sectors), marketing channels and
entrepreneurship. Specifically, Derek’s research focuses on the development
and maintenance of commitment. He has published in the Journal of
Business Ethics, Journal of Hospitality and Leisure Marketing, Journal of

Downloaded by [Marshall University] at 01:01 14 August 2013

Charity Brand

55

Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, and Psychology and Marketing and
has presented his work at numerous international conferences hosted by:
the Academy of Marketing Science, Association for Consumer Research,
American Marketing Association, and the American Psychological
Association.
John Peloza is an Assistant Professor of Marketing at Simon Fraser
University. John’s research interests are in the areas of corporate
philanthropy and social marketing with a particular interest in the marketing
of charitable and nonprofit organizations. John has published his work in the
California Management Review, Journal of Business Ethics, Journal of Pubic
Policy and Marketing and the Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector
Marketing, and has also presented at the Academy of Marketing Science,
Association for Consumer Research, and American Marketing Association
conferences.

