Towards a unified theory of brand equity:
conceptualizations, taxonomy and avenues for
future research
Nebojsa S. Davcik and Rui Vinhas da Silva
ISCTE Business School, University Institute of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, and

Joe F. Hair
Coles College of Business, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia, USA
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to look into contemporary thinking within the brand equity paradigm, with a view to establishing avenues for further
research on the drivers of brand equity formation, enabling a more in-depth understanding of the antecedents of brand equity and its determinants,
as well as the development of an improved instrument to measure brand equity. The brand equity paradigm and its importance for marketing theory
have been in the research focus for more than two decades. There is no agreement in the literature how to develop a unique measure of brand
equity, neither what are the sources, drivers or determinants.
Design/methodology/approach – The authors develop the relating conceptual study through the differentiation and integration as specific
conceptual goals. The authors present a taxonomic framework of brand equity grounded on a synthesis of contemporary approaches to the theme.
Findings – The authors identify gaps in the brand equity literature. The analysis and development of the conceptual study in this paper shall serve
as beacons for future research and provide valuable theoretical insights on the determinants of brand equity formation and the development of better
brand equity measurement tools.
Originality/value – The authors synthesized contemporary approaches in the field, identified research gaps and proposed open questions that
should be tackled, as well as provided avenues for future research. The authors argue that creation of a unifying brand equity theory should be based
on three pillars: stakeholder value, marketing assets and brand financial performance outputs.
Keywords Stakeholder orientation, Brand name, Brand switching, Measurement, Modelling, Brand equity (Consumer),
Brand equity (Financial), Brand meaning, Brand performance, Private labels (own labels)
Paper type Conceptual paper

An executive summary for managers and executive
readers can be found at the end of this issue.

consequences when catering to often conflicting exigencies of
key stakeholder constituencies.
Brand management antecedents and their ramifications
have drawn considerable attention over the past couple of
decades from both the academic and practitioner
communities. Indeed, successful brand building, ways and
mechanisms in which to attain it and its importance to
organizations have experienced extensive scrutiny in the
extant literature (e.g. Christodoulides and de Chernatony,
2010; Srinivasan et al., 2005; Park and Srinivasan, 1994; cf.
Davcik and Rundquist, 2012; Paswan et al., 2012). Moreover,
there has been a particular focus on the role of branding as a
protector of the organization in times of turbulence, typified
by constant change and volatility in the macro-environment
(King, 1991).
Conventional wisdom shows that an organization does well
when it carefully manages its portfolio of brands and invests in
them. There is, however, only limited academic literature and
scarce knowledge emanating from the practitioner world on

1. Brands, branding and their role in
contemporary societies
Modern-day living in contemporary societies would be very
different without the proliferation of brands and their
ramifications on the livelihoods of individuals. Our lives are
marked and framed with goods that we consume, their names,
symbolism and true or false promises. Branding is a pivotal
societal construct, as little remains unbranded in today’s
world. By successfully deploying brand management
knowledge and techniques to differentiate otherwise
undifferentiated goods and services of similar functional
worth, organizations are capable of fully exploiting domestic
resources and aggregate value to market offers with positive

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/1061-0421.htm
The authors are grateful to Barry Babin, Oriol Iglesias and participants of
the Academy of Marketing Branding SIG conference 2014 (Hatfield, UK)
and research seminar at ESADE Business & Law School for their valuable
insights on a previous version of the manuscript. We appreciate useful
commentaries and suggestions from the two anonymous reviewers as well
as the support from editors’. All mistakes and misunderstandings are the
authors’.

Journal of Product & Brand Management
24/1 (2015) 3–17
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/JPBM-06-2014-0639]

3
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

strategies and solutions for brand building, as well as the
determinants of brand equity. One possible explanation for
this can be traced to a very heterogeneous knowledge base
representing a broad number of industries and countries. This
implies an inherent difficulty in attaining generalizability of
findings and a corresponding challenge for achieving external
validity required to develop theory. Current brand knowledge
is also viewed as having little practical value, as well as not
providing meaningful business solutions for practitioners. A
second reason why this may be the case is the lack of a general
unifying theory of brand equity applicable across multiple
industry contexts.
Contemporary marketing theory and practice should,
therefore, seek to describe and explain how brands are
managed and used for the creation of brand equity. The
emphasis should be on the critical importance of brand equity
formation to the organization and its role as caretaker of the
varying and often conflicting interests of key stakeholder
constituencies, and in particular the interests of discerning and
sophisticated consumers. Unfortunately, despite growing
literature on the subject over the past couple of decades, a
unique and straightforward answer on the creation and
management of brand equity has not been forthcoming.
This paper critically evaluates the current body of brand
equity knowledge and its measurement approaches. We
execute the assessment based on differentiation and
integration as specific conceptual goals, following the
approaches of MacInnis (2011) and Yadav (2014). The
assessment contributes to marketing theory development
because it demonstrates how conceptual entities are different,
identifies antecedents and suggests contingencies. In doing so,
we present a synthesis of approaches to themes, a taxonomic
framework, theoretical and methodological gaps in brand
equity literature and directions for future research toward a
unified theory of brand equity. With this in mind, a short
overview of the evolution of the brand management themes is
presented next. In the following section, sources of brand
equity and the determinants of brand equity formation are
discussed from theoretical and historical perspectives. We
conclude with a call for the development of more
comprehensive methodological approaches for the study of
brand equity.

between virtuositas (functionality), raritas (scarcity) and
complacibilitas (psychological benefits), and merchants
considered all three when setting commodity prices (justum
pretium – “just”, fair price) (Ambler, 1997; Jevons, 2007).
Contemporary branding practice uses the same differences to
create unique messages for brand stakeholders.
2.1 Conceptualization of brand
Conventional marketing thinking defines a brand as an entity
that provides added value to key stakeholder constituencies
based on factors that extend beyond the functional
characteristics that are intrinsic to the goods and services that
are traded under those brand names (cf. Farquhar, 1989;
Aaker, 1991). These added intangible values differentiate a
product from its competitors, influence consumer preferences
and enhance customer satisfaction levels, often leading to
greater customer loyalty.
Early discussions on branding and its importance appear in
business literature by notable marketing scholars such as
Smith (1915) and Copeland (1923). According to these
authors, individuals will be reluctant to buy a product if there
is no recognizable and positive brand name by the
manufacturer. Later, scholars such as Gardner and Levy
(1955) expanded these concepts, noting that brands are
embedded within a complex symbolism representing a variety
of attributes and ideas, and that brand names are thus much
more than mere labels that distinguish between products
enabling consumers to tell them apart in the context of
complex buying situations. Gardner and Levy (1955) also
argued that brands encapsulate sets of ideas, feelings and
attitudes about an organization’s products, and that
consumers make product choices based on elements of these
sets they find most appealing.
The development process in the social sciences has a
tendency “to be an endless spiraling of ambiguities of
language” (Gabbott and Jevons, 2009; p. 120). Indeed,
Gabbott and Jevons (2009) contend that the term “brand” is
a highly contextualized entity susceptible to diverse
contemporary approaches and understandings, and
consequently to a never-ending theoretical development
process. Theoretical development processes in this context,
however, are generally viewed in two distinct ways. One is
from a nominal perspective, while the other is the real form.
The nominal form of something (quid nominis) is defined by
its name, but the essence of something can only be determined
when and only when we know its real form (quid rei) (Gabbott
and Jevons, 2009). Therefore, it is highly unlikely that a single
definition of brand, one that is consensual and widely
accepted, can be developed. Gabbott and Jevons (2009;
p. 121) have proposed that there will “never” be a unifying
definition of “brand”, and that it is “a constantly evolving
series of contexts or lenses through which the phenomenon is
viewed”. Thus, in the rich, context-laden environment of
contemporary organizational realities, a number of different
“brand” definitions, understandings and approaches may
co-exist and compete for acceptance.

2. Brand management challenge: conceptualizing
brand and brand equity
One of the first references to branding, or what is currently
thought of as basic brand theory (Ambler, 1997), can be
traced to the work of St. Augustine of Hippo (Aurelius
Augustinus Hipponensis) in the fifth century A.D. St.
Augustine is important to contemporary brand theory because
he was the first to make the distinction between functional
utility as a criterion for value ascription (Jevons, 2007) and
psychological benefits that constitute an integral part of
consumption experiences (Ambler, 1997), leading to the idea
of differentiation based on product intangibles. These two
concepts, the constraint of need (functional utility) and
appeals grounded on desire (benefits of ownership), are
expressed in modern conceptualizations of needs and wants
(Jevons, 2007). Similarly, the sermons of San Bernadino of
Siena (XV c. A.D.) referred to the existence of differences

2.2 Conceptualization of brand equity
A brand is not a mere name for a product. Rather, a brand is
a supplier’s guarantee that it will continuously and
4

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

consistently deliver on its promises, including promises
explicitly or implicitly made on tangible features, specific
quality thresholds and benefits and convenience to the
consumer. A brand signals to the consumer the source of the
product and should act in a manner that protects consumers
and producers from competitors who attempt to provide
identical products (cf. Copeland, 1923; Smith, 1915; Aaker,
1991; Davcik and Sharma, 2015). In other words, a brand has
to help in product differentiation when stakeholders have
asymmetric information about its quality and performance, as
well as in providing product loyalty mechanisms against new
entrants in the market (cf. Schmalensee, 1982; Davcik and
Sharma, 2015). A modern approach to branding includes a
comprehensive list of elements that overlap traditional
understandings of the brand concept and includes not only
distinguishable tangible product-related features, differentiation
by name, color or any other visible characteristics, but also
intangibles, such as utility expectations or consumer
subjectivism. Contemporary paradigms on branding issues and
scholarly thought have focused mostly on consumer attitudes,
loyalty, perceptions, etc., as well as on organizational marketing
investments in a brand.
Modern marketing theory and practices have recognized the
brand equity paradigm as a key strategic asset for
organizations. Keller and Lehmann (2006) have argued that a
brand is influential or manifests its importance at three key
levels which correspond to three distinct yet interconnected
market dimensions, or indeed three distinct markets:
customer, product and financial markets. Thus, value accrued
by these markets may be designated as brand equity. The
brand equity paradigm has been discussed extensively in
marketing literature and many researchers have offered a wide
array of definitions for the brand equity concept (Aaker, 1991;
Farquhar, 1989; Sriram et al., 2007; cf. Christodoulides and
de Chernatony, 2010), as well as different perspectives on the
factors that influence brand equity. Indeed, academic
discussion is inconclusive about the conceptual foundations,
sources, essence and measures of brand equity (Davcik,
2013). For example, there is no consensus in the literature
whether brand equity refers to the value of a brand name or
the value of a brand (Park et al., 2008) or what is the
theoretical delineation of brand equity in the multi-brand
organization – i.e. how brand equity affects the brand portfolio
strategy and firm performance. Typical consumer demand is
heterogeneous and it is prone to try different brands – i.e. is
willing to switch easily between brands. Businesses thus face
challenges managing both consumers’ switching behaviors
and their broad brand portfolios. This, in consequence, makes
their own brands compete against each other for limited
intra-firm resources and consumers. It is unclear in
contemporary branding literature how managers may utilize
the limited firm resources and branding strategy to improve
the firm performance. Furthermore, there is no consensus
either about an appropriate measurement approach: customer
based, product based, financial based, etc. (e.g. Aaker, 1991;
Keller, 1993; Simon and Sullivan, 1993). However, two brand
equity research streams are dominant in empirical research –
the customer-based and financial-based approaches. The
focus of the customer-based brand equity paradigm is the
interaction between a customer and the brand, as well as

the consequences which yield that interrelationship (e.g.
Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993; Pappu et al., 2005; cf. Cuneo et al.,
2012; Veloutsou et al., 2013). In contrast, the financial-based
brand equity paradigm uses the brand’s financial value as a
measure of success and performance (e.g. Simon and Sullivan,
1993; Ailawadi et al., 2003; cf. Isberg and Pitta, 2013; Davcik
and Sharma, 2015).
A widely used definition emanating from the marketing
literature identifies brand equity as the value added by the
brand name to a product that does not possess a brand name
(Farquhar, 1989; Keller, 1993; Sriram et al., 2007). A more
comprehensive definition of brand equity characterizes it as
the value of the brand that derives from high levels of brand
loyalty, perceived quality, name awareness and strong brand
associations, as well as assets such as trademarks, patents
and distribution channels that are associated with the brand
(Kotler and Keller, 2012; Aaker, 1991; cf. Sinclair and Keller,
2014). Aaker (1991, p. 15) also posited that brand equity is “a
set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name
and symbol that add to or subtract from the value provided by
a product or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers”.
Finally, Srinivasan et al. (2005) defined the brand equity
construct as the brand’s annual incremental contribution
when contrasted with a base product.
Ambler et al. (2002, p. 23) have suggested that brand equity
describes the asset created by a company’s marketing effort
that will “drive future cash flows from the sales of that brand”.
Furthermore, the brand equity terminology notes that a brand
is an asset that can be bought or sold for a certain price (Aaker
et al., 2004; cf. Salinas and Ambler, 2009; Sinclair and Keller,
2014; Spielmann, 2014). Marketing assets, however, should
not be mistaken for the financial expression of those specific
assets, also known as “brand valuation” (Raggio and Leone,
2009; Salinas and Ambler, 2009; cf. Ambler, 1997; Kirk et al.,
2013). This term is partially misleading because the word
“equity” has its origin in the realm of finance, but at its core,
it takes a subjective view and represents intangible cues that
are valued by the consumer. For instance, Ambler et al. (2002)
have argued that brand equity represents the customer
mindset with respect to a brand, which includes perceptions,
thoughts, experiences, attitudes, images, etc. It has been
argued in the literature that brand equity “provides goodwill
value in the face of uncertainty” (Broniarczyk and Gershoff,
2003; p. 163; cf. Shapiro, 1982) and crisis (cf. Hegner et al.,
2014; Suder and Suder, 2013; Brianna et al., 2014) as brand
equity may be taken to be a sign of the credibility of brand
associations in the marketplace (Erdem and Swait, 1998).
2.3 Brand equity: a measurement and conceptual
disarray
Brand equity should be formally measured, but searching for
a single financial performance metric is a misleading endeavor
(Ambler, 2008). Financial performance measures are
generally short-term oriented and not inclusive of intangible
brand assets, as measured by brand equity (Ambler, 2008),
and for organizations to use only this type of brand
performance assessment may jeopardize long-term business
performance (Collins and Porras, 1995). In contrast, strictly
consumer-based measures are limited by subjectivity and
availability of respondents. Additionally, these intermediate
5

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

outcomes are incapable of converting consumer value into
financial value (Davcik, 2013). In other words, brand
measurement methods must include non-financial measures,
such as brand awareness, purchase intentions and consumer
loyalty, as well as financial measures that reflect consumer
willingness to pay premium prices, market share, etc.
In a general sense, brand equity is considered as a positive
marketing outcome due to the presence of a certain brand
name associated with a particular good or service. The
assumption is that the intended marketing outcome would
differ if the same product does not carry that particular name
or even any name at all (Farquhar, 1989; Keller, 1993); that
is, if it were unbranded. This view, however, limits the flow of
future research, as consumers when encountering brands
inevitably possess knowledge of brand names, logos,
packaging or products. In these situations, as suggested by
Raggio and Leone (2007), consumers automatically generate
perceptions and associations about the brand. It is therefore
not possible for a brand to not have any brand equity. It is also
very difficult, even at the level of intellectual curiosity, to
fathom a possibility of establishing meaningful comparisons
between branded and unbranded products these days for two
reasons. First, in industrial markets, there are in effect no
unbranded products. Each product, which legally finds its way
into the marketplace, will in some way possess some form of
packaging and be called by something and thus will have a
name. Even the most basic of staples, for example, groceries in
the fruit market, will normally be traded under some
producer’s name and consumers will be buying it from a
legally established trading firm. Second, some researchers
have compared in their studies national brands with private
label brands (e.g. Ailawadi et al., 2003; Choi and Coughlan,
2006). The latter are brands that are created for the benefit of
retailers and wholesalers who bring them into the marketplace.
Market evidence suggests that private label brands typically
compete on price and they will often offer discounts.
Consumer perceived quality of these products is a function of
the track-record or history of these retailers and wholesalers,
whose names act as guarantors of quality and satisfaction with
the consumption experience (Kotler and Keller, 2012; Choi
and Coughlan, 2006). In contemporary economies, it is
difficult to compare national brands vs private label brands, as
the latter have evolved from private label brands into private
brands – they carry names that stand alone from the retailer’s
brand – which possess attributes that potential consumers can
make judgments on as for any national brand. Secondly,
several products being traded under the same category, both
branded and unbranded, co-exist on the same retailer space,
thus suggesting that brand comparisons are difficult indeed to
make. But when they are made, there is always a possibility of
an inherent bias towards branded products. The third reason
that comparisons are of little value is that private labels can be
clearly favored by the retailers to the detriment of other
branded goods. This is often manifested in the allocation of
shelf space, quantities allowed of the branded variety, pricing
issues and sales promotion initiatives and others (Kotler and
Keller, 2012).
Despite numerous conceptual and operational definitions
and models of brand equity, there is limited quantitative
research examining its constructs based on solid empirical

data (e.g. Atilgan et al., 2005; Davcik and Sharma, 2015).
Thus, to extend further research in the field, it is necessary to
consider a more comprehensive brand equity definition, as
well as to establish determinants that influence brand equity
performance. We discuss these issues in the following sections.

3. Sources of brand equity determinants
The brand equity concept can be discussed from different
perspectives, namely, that of the investor, the manufacturer,
the retailer and the consumer. Similar to stakeholder
management thinking, multiple perspectives are needed that
allow for the harmonization of the often conflicting interests of
various stakeholder groups with vested interests in the
organization. Investors are more interested in the financial
ramifications of the brand equity concept (Cobb-Walgren
et al., 1995), while manufacturers look at it from the viewpoint
of its strategic worth and potential for application (Keller,
1993) in the pursuit of targeted marketing and financial goals,
and retailers are predominantly concerned about the
marketing implications of the brand equity concept.
These observations validate the importance of investigating
the determinants of brand equity, as well as its sources from a
holistic organizational perspective. Such an approach is
justified on the grounds that it depends on whose perspective
one takes into account as to the meaning brand equity will
assume. The concept will have different meanings but also
different consequences and ramifications. Complex brand
equity research, therefore, clearly demands multiple
perspectives that in particular consider consumer wants and
needs as well as behavior. For instance, contemporary
branding literature posits that brands are social and dynamic
processes that include multiple stakeholders, as brand value is
co-created among stakeholders (Iglesias et al., 2013, Merz
et al., 2009; cf. Hult et al., 2011; Babin and James, 2010). This
view may open new theoretical perspectives and
conceptualizations in brand equity research. Furthermore, few
conceptual developments or empirical research programs have
been forthcoming in the academic literature that address the
critical importance of marketing activities in creating brand
equity, which specific activities are important, and the specific
ways they contribute to brand equity creation (e.g. Barwise,
1993; Yoo et al., 2000; Iglesias et al., 2013). Thus, despite an
overwhelming interest on behalf of researchers in brand
management theorization, and in particular with regard to the
specific coverage of the brand equity concept, the
predominant focus has thus far rested on measurement issues
of brand equity, and not on its sources or determinants.
3.1 Brand equity: contemporary concepts and
methodology
To synthesize and compile the extant literature, we analyzed
the application of the brand equity paradigm from three
distinct domains: sources of brand equity, determinants of
brand equity and applied metrics/brand equity research
approaches. This analysis is consistent with the theoretical
framework by MacInnis (2011) and Yadav (2014); more
specifically, we developed the relating conceptual study
through differentiation and integration as specific conceptual
goals. To do so, we accessed the business source complete
database to search for empirical and conceptual references
6

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

that explicitly addressed the brand equity paradigm and its
distinct domains in the title and/or abstract for the period
1990-2013. The database was filtered using the following
keywords: brand equity, sources and determinants, for which
we found 146 articles. We analyzed each of these papers in
terms of their novel theoretical contribution to the theme and
their application of distinct sources and determinants of brand
equity. Additionally, we annotated applied metrics and
analyzed different research approaches in each of these
articles. After an additional contextual analysis and excluding
the papers that only extend a common theoretical background
because they do not give a novel theoretical understanding of
the theme, we narrowed our theoretical foundations within the
brand equity paradigm, as presented in our taxonomy. Table I
summarizes the main brand equity concepts and the body of
research focusing on brand equity and its exemplars. The
taxonomy describes the various models and approaches to the
different brand equity concepts and its determinants, whether
it will be conceptualizations, established metrics or sources
and determinants of brand equity. The conceptual approach
taken to define the brand equity concept is annotated with
the letter C. Concepts that are used in the context of the
investigation of brand equity metrics are annotated with the
letter M, and studies that explore the source of brand equity
and its determinants are marked with D. The conclusions that
are presented are summaries of past studies, which in turn
point to broad questions and dilemmas around the theme of
brand equity creation and management. There are many
different research approaches and studies on brand equity
measurement in the marketing literature, but those
represented in Table I provide a novel conceptual foundation.
Figure 1 is derived from the taxonomies and concepts
discussed herein and attempts to represent key brand equity
concepts from both consumer and organizational perspectives,
while attempting to be inclusive of both the finance and
marketing domains. The consumer-marketing dimension
appears in the upper-right section of the matrix. This
dimension is predominantly driven by marketing approaches
to the explanation of brand equity formation, and derives its
empirical grounding from consumer-focused studies. The
financial– company dimension is positioned in the lower-left
part of the matrix. This dimension is driven by financial
approaches, with a focus on company actions, in the
explanation of brand equity determinants.
The extant academic literature does not provide an
appropriate measurement method which would potentially
allow for a better understanding of the sources and
determinants of the brand equity concept (Park and
Srinivasan, 1994). The academic community is therefore
advised to pay more careful attention to the development of a
more systemic view of brands and products (Shocker et al.,
1994; Iglesias et al., 2013; cf. Ambler and Styles, 1997). The
research community should pursue more comprehensive
theoretical approaches and business techniques. Further
investigation in this field is thus required, with a possible
future research agenda focusing on brand equity formation
and its effects on firm performance. The analysis involves the
perspective of both consumers and organizations, while
simultaneously eliciting a better understanding of financial

and marketing constructs and their role in the interface with
the brand equity concept.
3.2 Brand equity taxonomies
Farquhar’s (1989) research approach covers the strategic
aspects of branding and the leveraging of brand equity. The
author concludes that a brand is something that endows a
product with intangible elements, while brand equity
represents the added value that accrues to the organization,
thus rendering the development of strong brands as imperative
for organizational strategic thinking. Several questions remain
unanswered, however, including what are adequate strategies
for leveraging brand equity and what are possible
determinants of brand value. The work of Farquhar (1989)
has pre-empted future research on the strategic aspects of
brand equity formation, its antecedents and processes, ways in
which to leverage brand equity and how brands act as
aggregators of value to core product functionality. In calling
attention to the fundamental need for the development of
strong brands as an organizational imperative, avenues for
research into the exploration of adequate strategies for
leveraging brand equity are identified. Another research
avenue is a better specification of the determinants of brand
value formation, in ways that are inter-contextual and cover
both products and economic activities.
Aaker (1991) is founder of the consumer-based brand
equity approach, whose research focus is on the consumer,
rather than the organization or other stakeholder groups.
Aaker’s brand equity model stipulates that brand equity is
about the creation of value for both the organization and the
consumer (Aaker, 1991; Aaker et al., 2004). Consumer brand
loyalty reduces vulnerability to competition, leveraging
purchasing by keeping existing customers and attracting new
ones to the organization. Brand awareness reduces consumer
ambiguity and establishes familiarity with the brand, but it is
also a sign of consumer knowledge of the organization and
desirably undivided commitment to it. Often, customers have
no prior accurate knowledge of product quality parameters,
and consequently, consumer perceptions of quality stand to
directly influence purchase decisions, especially when a buyer
has no way of conducting detailed comparative analyses
(Aaker, 1991). The author proposes the notion of brand
equity and brand portfolio management being about the
ownership of values and organizations being guardians of
value systems. Both academic researchers and practitioners
need to find appropriate tools and mechanisms for
determining the sources of brand equity for organizations,
while acknowledging their immense value as organizational
assets on company balance sheets. A particular emphasis
should be put on taking good care of brand portfolios, as they
are guardians of brand value, and constitute more and more
the embodiment of the most important and most valuable
assets that companies possess, and that are inscribed as assets
in balance sheets under goodwill.
Future avenues for investigation reside on what needs to be
a sharper focus on the consumer, as well as on the underlying
assets of brand equity, and the possible ways in which
additional product features may aggregate value to underlying
brand assets. As a corollary to this thinking, further research
7

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Table I Taxonomy of brand equity: main concepts, research focuses and exemplars
Type of the brand
equity model

Taxonomy
notation

Farquhar (1989)

Marketing
management

2

Aaker (1991)

3

No.

Exemplars

Research focus

Conclusion

1

C

Strategic aspects
and leveraging
brand equity

Consumer-based brand
equity

C

Consumers

Keller (1993)

Consumer-based brand
equity: conceptual
framework

C

Consumers

4

Simon and Sullivan
(1993)

Financial market-based
approach

M

Financial aspect of
brand value

5

Kamakura and Russell
(1993)

Consumer choice

M

Consumer

6

Yoo et al. (2000)

Marketing
management

C, D

Marketing mix

Brand endows a product
Brand equity is the
added value
Development of a strong
brand is imperative
A management of brand
equity and brand
portfolio is a guardian
of the brand value
Defines underlying
assets of the brand
equity
Implications for sales,
market share and profits
A brand has a positive
customer-based brand
equity if consumers are
attached to the brand
The value of brand
equity is extracted from
the value of the firm’s
assets
Based on objective
market-based measures
and incorporates the
effects of brand
performance outputs
Not applicable on nonpublic companies
Aggregated macroapproach not applicable
on brand-level data
(individual brands)
BEq is a measure of the
intrinsic utility or value
of a brand to consumers
Positive correlation
between brand value
and market share
The interaction effect of
marketing mix on brand
equity
Sales has influence on
brand equity
Price is related to
quality; consumers use it
as a proxy for the
quality

7

Ailawadi et al. (2003)

Revenue premium

M

Financial aspect
(contribution) of
brand equity

Lack of insight into “the
consumer-based sources
of brand equity” (p. 15)
Additional brand
building investment (e.g.
advertising) in the brand
raise of the brand equity

Open questions and
dilemmas
What is a proper strategy for
leveraging brand equity?
What are determinants of
brand value?
How to identify specific
features that constitute
underlying brand assets?
How brand can serve as a
tool for long-term vs shortterm business strategy?
What are valid benchmarks?
What are the effects of
brand equity dimensions on
business strategies?
How marketers can create
value for a brand?
More refined measures of
market share and advertising
are needed to estimate
brand equity more accurate
Which factors should be
included to improve brand
equity estimations?

What are possible links of
the consumer choice to BEq
and brand value formation

Has limited marketing efforts
from a long-term perspective
of brand management
Comprehensive research on
the interaction effect of
brand equity dimensions on
brand equity is needed
The role of brand equity in
the firm’s success needs to
be investigated
What is the identification of
the benchmark brand?
What are structural
relationships in the
development process of
high-equity brands?
(continued)

8
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Table I
No.

Exemplars

Type of the brand
equity model

Taxonomy
notation

Research focus

Conclusion

8

Srinivasan et al.
(2005)

Sources of brand
equity

M, D

Consumer

9

Ambler (2008)

Financial marketing
metrics

M

Determination of
silver metrics for
performance
assessment

BEq is a measure of
annual money
incremental contribution
between branded and
non-branded products
Sources of BEq are
brand awareness,
attribute perception
biases and non-attribute
preference
Financial performance
measures are necessary,
but not sufficient in
valuing brand equity

10

Keller and Lehmann
(2003, 2006)

The brand value chain
(BVC)

C, M, D

Brand value creation

11

Raggio and Leone
(2009)

Brand value formation

C, M

Firm’s perspective

The financial
marketplace creates
strategic implications for
the brand value
The BVC measurement
approaches are based
on the customer
mindset, product and
financial market
From managerial point
of view, the BVC
suggest where and how
value is created for the
brand
The relative success or
failure of a brand
program is based on
recognizing the
uncontrollable nature of
factors that influence a
brand value creation
Brand value is analyzed
from a firm’s perspective
Brand value represents
the sale or replacement
price of a brand and
vary depending on the
owner
Customer equity is a
partial measure of brand
value, and should not
be considered as an
independent equity
construct (p. 261)

Open questions and
dilemmas
The lack of market valuation
of consumer-based measure
and appropriate measure of
the relative impact of each
source on the BEq

What is the silver metric for
brand equity?
“[. . .] should brand
valuation be limited to the
additional value of branding
compared to the profit
stream from the equivalent
unbranded product?”
(p. 417)
How much the value
reported in the performance
of a brand transforms to
shareholder value?
How much is the value
creation dependent from
established and executed
marketing program?
How is determinate the
interdependence between
factors that inhibit a brand
value creation?

Focus on brand value
formation, as seen from an
internal organizational
perspective

Notes: BEq– brand equity; C – BEq conceptualization approach; M – BEq metrics approach; D – Sources of BEq determinants

9
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Figure 1 Brand equity concepts position matrix

which managers are capable of creating value through their
own initiative and action in organizations.
Simon and Sullivan’s (1993) model of brand equity is based
on objective market-based measures that incorporate the
effects of brand performance outputs and account for the
revenue-enhancing characteristics of brand equity. Their
model has clear limitations, however, in that it is not
applicable to non-public companies and also constitutes an
aggregated macro-approach, which is not deemed suitable for
brand-level data, i.e. individual brands. Simon and Sullivan’s
(1993) work also suggests that further research should indeed
be conducted on brand equity, and how value is susceptible to
being extracted from anyone or anything within the
organization and its pool of assets. Financial market-based
approaches are therefore welcome, and further research needs
to be conducted on the financial aspects of brand equity. The
emphasis should be on the development of measures and
metrics that are based on objective market-based criteria, and
that incorporate the effects of brand performance outputs.
Aggregated macro-approaches that go beyond individual
brand-level data need to be developed. Future research also
needs to identify more refined measures of market share and
advertising, as this allows for better estimations of brand
equity.
Kamakura and Russell (1993) have proposed behaviorally
based measures of brand valuation that rely on actual
consumer decision-making and consumption choices in the
market. The authors conceptualize brand equity as a measure
of the intrinsic utility or value of a brand to consumers and
they derive brand equity measures by using a probabilistic
choice model following the classical assumptions of random
utility. The brand equity measures are estimated using several
situational factors, including price, perceived quality of
product features and recent advertising. Kamakura and
Russell’s (1993) work also leaves open ideas for further
research on consumer choice and the establishment of
possible links with brand equity formation.
Yoo et al. (2000) have investigated the relationships
between selected marketing mix elements and the creation of
brand equity. They have proposed a model whereby an
assumption is made that marketing mix elements exert
significant effects on dimensions of brand equity (Yoo et al.,
2000). The authors focus on a few key elements, particularly
on price, store image, distribution, advertising expenditure,
price promotions or special deals, all marketing mix elements
with a view to determining the relationship between these and
brand equity formation. Yoo et al.’s (2000) work points out
that areas for future research may focus on marketing
management and the notion of looking into brand equity from
the viewpoint of improving its conceptualization. They
suggest that the research perspective shall be on actively
seeking the determinants of brand equity, as well as the
interrelationship between brand equity and marketing mix
management. Research on sales and its impact on brand
equity are also recommended and the same thinking applies to
incremental studies on the relationship between price and the
quality of goods and services. Further research into how
consumers use price as a proxy for quality evaluations of goods
and services is particularly welcome.

may explore a conceptualization of brands as tools for both
short- and long-term business strategizing.
Keller (1993) has defined and proposed ways in which to
develop and measure customer-based brand equity based on
individual consumer preferences. He suggests a conceptual
model of brand equity, defined as “the differential effect of
brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of
the brand” (Keller, 1993; p. 2). Brand knowledge thus
consists of brand awareness (brand recall and recognition
performance) and brand image (associations the consumer
makes with the brand). The author argues extensively for a
customer-based brand equity approach, which can be
enhanced if a company is capable of creating a “favorable
response to pricing, distribution, advertising, and promotional
activity that is related to the brand” (Keller, 1993; p. 9), and
the same thought process applies for licensing, as it can
positively influence brand image. Customer-based equity
occurs when a consumer is already familiar with a brand and
has already developed some favorability and/or strong
associations with the brand (Keller, 1993). Further research
needs to be conducted on the idea of stakeholder emotional
involvement, and in particular that of customers, and how
these engage emotionally with the organization and its
products, the processes, the codes of conduct and the terms of
engagement that are inherent to customer emotional
involvement. There is a dire need for continuous valid inputs
into such critical knowledge as that of cultural specificities and
aesthetics, which will always vary according to geography,
space and time, irrespective of how homogeneous, cultural
and economic systems tend to become, or may turn out to be
in the future. The development of a clear understanding of the
possible dimensions of emotional attachment need to be
scrutinized further, and valid benchmarks defined. Further
research also needs to look into the role of brand equity
dimensions in the shaping of business strategy, and the ways in
10

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Ailawadi et al. (2003) suggested in a study based on
revenue-premium brand equity, that the latter is influenced by
sales, generated by the organization working on the marketing
mix while acknowledging the existence of competitor brands
that pursue similar objectives. Ailawadi et al. (2003, p. 3)
outline what they perceive as strategic implications by stating
that “equity is created [. . .] by the firm’s previously existing
strength from its corporate image, product line, R&D, and
other capabilities”. It has unfortunately been the case that the
authors have not paid enough attention to the antecedents of
brand equity and their origination, its determinants and
drivers, and we are therefore left with only limited knowledge
about their views on different marketing and strategic issues,
rather than what could instead have been an analysis of brand
equity measurements and techniques. Ailawadi et al.’s (2003)
approach to brand equity resides mostly on what the concept
signifies as a source of revenue premium for organizations.
Further research needs to be conducted on the development
of possible metrics and alternative approaches to the financial
aspects of brand equity and its meaningful contribution to
profitability.
The consequences of brand building investments (e.g.
advertising) to brand equity formation requires further
research and the same applies to research leading to a better
identification of benchmark or reference brands. Novel issues
and questions also naturally arise from the exploration of the
relationships that are present throughout the development
process of high-equity brands. Measurements that are
grounded in price/revenue premium models are intuitively
appealing. However, they can result in biased estimates of
brand equity, in that a premium approach captures only one
dimension of brand equity, and neglects its ability to mitigate
marketing costs for existing and indeed future brands
(cf. Simon and Sullivan, 1993). Revenue premium approaches
are not widely accepted as valid theoretical frameworks due to
vague identification of the benchmark brand, i.e. an
identification of the brand without equity associated with it.
The limitation of this approach lies in the fact that it expresses
only the financial side of the brand equity paradigm without
any consideration of marketing strategy. Subsequent
approaches to the theme need to be based on objective
market-based measures and incorporate the effects of brand
performance outputs. More refined measures of market share
and advertising are also needed, metrics that lead to the
identification of more accurate estimations of brand equity.
Authors like Raggio and Leone (2007) have thoroughly
disagreed with the revenue premium concept and have
suggested that there may be a potentially positive outcome for
pioneering brands if they are to establish a new brand
category. They later demonstrated that customer equity is a
measure of brand value, and should therefore not be
misinterpreted as an independent equity measure (Raggio and
Leone, 2009), but say nothing about how this is related to firm
performance. Raggio and Leone (2009) also suggest new
avenues for future research that focus on brand value
formation and separation from the brand equity construct.
Brand value represents the sale or replacement price of a
brand and depending on whoever owns the brand this value
differs. Customer equity is also a partial measure of brand
value, and thus should not be considered as an independent

equity construct (in comparison to other equity approaches).
All of these themes are open questions that deserve careful
scrutiny in future research programs, which will certainly
contribute to their much needed clarification.
Keller and Lehmann (2003, 2006) have conceptualized and
tested a model in its reduced form: marketing activities ⫽ ⬎
product – market results ⫽ ⬎ financial impact; adapted and
“localized” within brands. Keller and Lehmann’s (2003,
2006) work also suggests there is ample ground for research to
be conducted on the brand value chain (BVC) by taking a
holistic approach that is inclusive of individual brand equity
conceptualization approaches, as well as suggesting alternative
metrics and looking deeper into brand equity sources and
determinants of brand value and its creation.
The financial marketplace brings with it strategic
implications for the determination of brand value, and this
needs to be explored further in future research. BVC
measurement approaches are fundamentally based on a focus
towards the customer and the customer’s mindset, but they
also include the product, as well as financial markets, their
judgments, perceptions and valuations, and all of these
constitute realities that are forever mutating. From a
managerial viewpoint, the BVC suggests where and how value
is created for the brand, and this is critical for an organization,
as it allows for a persistent optimization of allocated resources,
thus ensuring brand value maximization. The relative success
or failure of a brand equity program is based on
acknowledging the uncontrollable nature of factors that
influence brand value creation. Other research may lead down
the path of determination of how much of brand value gets
transformed into shareholder value and how much of value
creation is dependent on established and executed marketing
programs, as well as how determinant is the interdependence
between factors that inhibit brand value creation. All of these
questions conform to worthwhile lines of future enquiry.
Srinivasan et al. (2005) suggest possible avenues for
subsequent research on sources of brand equity as seen from
the viewpoint of consumer. The authors suggested
measurement of the brand equity based on its money
incremental contribution, which is based on customer’s
incremental choice probability. Srinivasan et al. (2005) have
proposed three sources of brand equity: brand awareness,
attribute perception biases and non-attribute preference. But
several questions remain unanswered. First, the study does
not offer appropriate measurement of the relative impact of
each source on the brand equity. Second, the proposed
customer-based measure of brand equity lacks the market
valuation.
Ambler (2008), on the other hand, suggested future
research on financial marketing metrics with a view to
attaining silver metrics for the assessment of performance. In
this context, financial performance measures are necessary,
but not sufficient when valuing brand equity, and thus silver
metrics for brand equity that rely on complementary
dimensions are deemed necessary. Furthermore, a poignant
question that needs to be properly addressed in the context of
future research into the topic, relates to whether brand
valuation metrics should be limited to comparative analyses of
marginal aggregated value that is inherent to branding, when
contrasted with comparative financial outcomes that derive
11

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

from equivalent unbranded products. Future research into the
nurturing of marketing assets, as something one works on
today, with a view to building tomorrow’s brand equity is an
initial requirement for organizations seeking to build brand
equity in the context of product brands and also corporate
brands.

currently exists in the literature, we have concluded there is a
need for further research that elicits a better understanding as
to the antecedents of brand equity and its formation in
organizations. Several authors (e.g. Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993;
Kamakura and Russell, 1993; Keller and Lehmann, 2006)
applied the use of brand equity/brand values concepts, while
Raggio and Leone (2007) asserted that equity/value constructs
are related but must be separated and treated independently.
In following subsections, we first address open questions
and issues from the existing literature that remain
unanswered. We then suggest research domains toward a
general brand equity theory.

4. Conceptual conclusions and recommendations
In studying brand equity formation, we call for the
development of more comprehensive methodological
approaches. MacInnis (2011) and Yadav (2014) argue that
there are eight types of contribution in theory building, and
not one unique way. This process reflects how the
development of knowledge evolves and creates new
contingencies. In doing so, we conducted the relating
conceptual study through differentiation and integration
(Table II).
The meaning of specific conceptual goals was to
differentiate conflicting focuses and to synthesize
contemporary approaches to the brand equity concept. The
analysis suggests gaps in the literature and in practice exist in
consumer– company value creation, consumer–financial and
marketing– company domains. Our taxonomic framework (see
details in Table I) shows that several authors have followed the
brand equity conceptualization approach (e.g. Farquhar,
1989; Aaker, 1991; Keller, 1993; Yoo et al., 2000; Ambler,
2008; Keller and Lehmann, 2006); the brand equity metric
approach, as evidenced by Simon and Sullivan (1993),
Kamakura and Russell (1993), Ailawadi et al. (2003),
Srinivasan et al. (2005); and Yoo et al. (2000) and Ambler
(2008), and have tried to investigate the sources of brand
equity determinants. Having presented a typology as to what

4.1 Open questions and avenues for future research
We propose avenues for future research that derive from what
we perceive and find as gaps in the existing literature on the
basis of an analysis of the brand equity literature. These can be
articulated by recourse to the formats and suggestions
previously proposed. The interdisciplinary nature of these
topics requires that they are approached systemically and
often simultaneously, albeit with a concern for the integration
of these isolated topics into a coherent whole. Based on an
extensive literature review and taxonomy presented, we
suggest three domains for future research avenues that should
bring us toward a unifying theory of brand equity, namely:
consumer and company value perspective (i.e. stakeholder
value), managing marketing assets and financial performance.
In establishing inroads into the brand equity literature and
aligned with organizational needs and those of practitioners in
the field the following themes and issues should undergo
extensive scrutiny from the academic and practitioner
communities alike:

Table II Development of the relating conceptual study
General
conceptual goal Envisioning
Explicating
Relating
Specific
conceptual goal Identifying Revising Delineating Summarizing Differentiating
Meaning

Contribution
(methodology)
Evaluative
criteria

Facilitating
tools

Debating
Integrating

Advocating Refuting

The brand equity concept We synthesized contemporary
is divided by the
approaches in brand equity
consumer or company
literature
focus, as well as on
financial and marketing
approach
Taxonomic framework
There is a conceptual
We integrate stakeholder,
disarray in the literature financial performance and
on brand equity due to marketing assets perspective
the numerous, often
conflicting, measurement
approaches and
definitions
Analysis is based on
three different domains:
sources, determinants
and applied metrics
(research approach)

Source: MacInnis (2011)

12
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

1

2

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Consumer and company value metrics (stakeholder
value):
●
future research on brand equity as seen from an
internal stakeholder firm perspective;
●
stakeholder emotional involvement with the
organization;
●
novel ways in which branding aggregates value to
organizations and their products;
●
brand management and brand equity formation as key
to modern organizations;
●
constant focus on the consumer;
●
cultural specificities and aesthetics and variations
according to geography, space and time;
●
understanding of the possible dimensions of
emotional attachment and subsequent search for valid
benchmarks for stakeholder emotional connection
with the brand;
●
improvement of brand equity conceptualizations;
●
further research on the determinants of brand equity;
●
the role and importance of brand equity to
organizations;
●
research to be conducted on the BVC, taking a holistic
approach that is inclusive of heterogeneous brand
equity conceptualization approaches;
●
BVC measurement approaches are based on the
customer mindset, products and financial markets and
these realities change all the time;
●
alternative metrics and identification of brand equity
sources and determinants. This implies continuous
search for the determinants of brand equity and
further insights into consumer-based sources of brand
equity;
●
the role of inter-organizational relationships in
building high equity brands;
●
the relative success or failure of a brand program is
based on acknowledging the uncontrollable nature of
the multitude of factors that influence brand equity
creation and this requires further enquiry; and
●
other research may lead down the path of how much
of the value generated by positive brand performance
gets transformed into shareholder value [. . .]:
– [. . .] and how much of the value creation is
dependent on established and executed marketing
programs; and
– [. . .] and how determinate is the interdependence
between factors that inhibit brand equity creation.
Managing marketing assets:
●
strategic aspects of brand equity formation, its
antecedents and underlying processes;
●
alternative paths into the development of strong
brands in new environments;
●
focus on the underlying marketing assets of brand
equity and ways in which to identify specific features
that constitute underlying brand assets;
●
insights into taking good care of brand portfolios as
guardians of brand equity;
●
brands can serve as tools for both short-term and
long-term business strategies;
●
research into the role of brand equity and how it

3

shapes business strategy in consumer and businessto-business (B2B) environment;
●
aggregated macro-approaches that derive from
brand-level data of individual brands should be
emphasized;
●
the consequences of brand building investments (e.g.
advertising) to brand equity;
●
research on the interrelationship between brand
equity and the marketing mix;
●
the role of intra-firm competition for limited firm’s
resources in the brand equity creation;
●
leveraging the internal firm forces in delineation of
(multi-) brand portfolio and their effects on the
individual brand equity and firm performance;
●
ways in which the marketing mix contributes to the
bottom-line of brand equity formation;
●
the effects of marketing management and the
marketing effort on long-term brand equity formation;
and
●
better identification of what may constitute the
benchmark or reference brand.
Financial performance and outputs:
●
leveraging brand equity;
●
the implications for sales, market share and profits of
brand equity;
●
more financial market-based approaches to brand
equity are welcome;
●
how brand equity and/or value can be derived from
any company asset?
●
measures and metrics that are based on objective
market criteria and that incorporate the effects of
brand performance outputs;
●
the determination of silver metrics of performance
assessment. Financial performance measures are
necessary, but not sufficient in valuing brand equity,
and silver metrics for brand equity are thus seen as
desirable;
●
identification of more refined measures of market
share and advertising effectiveness allowing for better
estimations of brand equity;
●
relationship between price and the quality of goods
and services. How consumers use price as a proxy for
the quality of goods and services?
●
subsequent metrics need to be based on objective
market-based measures;
●
what factors need to be included for the improvement
of brand equity estimations?
●
brand equity as directly extracted from company
financial assets;
●
the financial marketplace creates different strategic
implications for brand equity in consumer and B2B
environment;
●
how to estimate the individual level of brand equity in
the multi-brand portfolio and contributions of intrafirm resources to the individual brand equity? and
●
determine whether brand valuation should be limited
to comparative analyses of the additional value
ascribed by branding compared to profit streams
derived from equivalent unbranded products or other
ways should be devised into looking into these issues.

13
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

4.2 Toward a general brand equity theory
The existing marketing literature suggests further research in
the consumer and company co-operation domain. These
views are in line with some contemporary approaches (e.g.
Iglesias et al., 2013; Merz et al., 2009; cf. Babin and James,
2010; Davcik and Sharma, 2015) that suggest embracing
stakeholder co-operative perspectives in the creation of brand
equity. We argue that an important pillar of brand equity
theory is stakeholder value perspectives that posit brand equity
as a social and dynamic process of brand creation among
stakeholders rather than having narrow and limited
perspectives from the consumer or company view point. This
is in line with the stakeholder marketing perspective, which
strongly suggests that value represents benefits from
stakeholder exchanges (Hult et al., 2011). Market power and
control are not with consumers or company, but among
brands’ stakeholders. A second pillar must be marketing assets
and their role in facilitating the value for stakeholders and
expected outcome of brand’s financial performance. For
instance, a firm may invest heavily in sales promotion or
advertising campaign, but if there is no value for stakeholders
the financial performance output will be very small. The third
pillar is brand financial performance outputs, such as
premium price mark-up, high market share, high return on
investments, etc. Most businesses make their financial plans
and expected performance outputs. From a market dynamic
perspective, a brand may have a high financial performance in
the current period, but without continuous investments in
marketing assets and stakeholder values, that position will be
jeopardized and in subsequent periods will be lost. As Hult
et al. (2011) point out, the organization is a dependent part of
social networks and holistic stakeholder marketing perspective
may provide achievement of performance goals through the
value for all stakeholders.
Figure 2 represents the interaction among three business
domains in the creation of brand equity. We believe that
typical business situations cover only a small interaction area
among these pillars of brand equity. The ideal situation is

when these three pillars are unified in one single voice of the
brand for all their stakeholders.
In the end, what is sought is a search for the holy grail of
branding, a general brand equity theory. The theory shall
expand on the basic notion that marketing performance is not
only about the short-term profit or net cash flows, but also
constitutes a proxy for future changes in marketing assets
and/or stakeholder values, largely grounded on intangible
dimensions of the value proposition that will sustain the
organization well into the future. Future research should seek
for a unified theory of branding, one that acknowledges that
the brand is a fundamental marketing asset and an important
financial performance driver, something one works on today,
with a view to building tomorrow’s brand equity. This (future)
theory must be of extreme organizational relevance and with
significant implications for products as well as to corporate
brand portfolios.
The next steps in theory building are:
●
Development of a brand equity research framework that is
inter-contextual and applicable across different types of
brands and sectors of economic activity, one that also
transverses time and geography. This framework must
reflect the managerial importance of the construct as well
as its nomological validity and reliability for all related
stakeholders.
●
Development and empirical testing of a research construct
that will satisfy stakeholders, seen from both a financial
and marketing asset perspective, an endeavor that is
beyond the scope of this manuscript. As a way of example,
the measurement construct will be different in
self-reporting studies in comparison to the econometric
analysis that uses panel data, but both approaches need to
reflect all three theoretical perspectives. We intentionally
do not suggest the specifics of the research as the topic
requires further work.
●
Development of a research framework that will take into
consideration a multi-level nature of firm performance and
heterogeneity of brand portfolio. Brand managers are
facing constant pressures to manage brand portfolios
strategically with a view to ensuring customer loyalty
behavior, thus preventing switching practices and avoid
being harmed by brand extensions, price wars and sales
promotion incentives. Thus, future work must show how a
firm may achieve superb performance with limited
resources and intra-firm’s mutually competing brand
equities.
●
The future work in the field needs to be focused on
construct definitions and research propositions. For
instance, the qualitative research based on three suggested
theoretical perspectives can give us important directions
on the brand equity phenomenon and empirical testing
should validate the future measurement constructs,
interrelationships and also their sources and determinants.

Figure 2 Three business domains in the creation of brand equity

5. Final thoughts
The brand equity paradigm and its importance for marketing
theory has been a research focus for more than two decades.
There is no agreement in the literature about how to develop
a unique measure of brand equity, as well as what are its
sources, drivers and determinants. The present article reflects
14
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

some of the multi-faceted nature and roles of articles found in
the literature, although its primary focus remains on issues
related to theory development by identifying gaps and
suggesting pertinent ways to augment it. In doing so, we
followed MacInnis’ (2011) framework for conceptual
contributions in marketing and developed the resulting
conceptual study through differentiation and integration as
the first step in theory development.
Our study has two limitations that may elicit further avenues
for future research. First, we focused our analysis on the brand
equity paradigm and its sources, but not on brand value
formation. In the marketing literature, the two different terms
“brand
value”
and
“brand
equity”
are
used
interchangeably[1]. This situation, in which results are
somewhat confusing, is a consequence of the missing unified
theoretical foundation that could disentangle equity from the
value concept. The majority of the literature reviewed and
used for the taxonomy analysis reflects the same tangled use of
concepts[2]. According to the prevailing brand equity
paradigm and leading brand experts (e.g. Aaker, 1991; Keller,
1993; etc.) brand equity is an outcome, usually referred as
“value”, and analyzed from the consumer or financial
perspective. So far, brand equity/brand value research has
focused on outcomes and not on what this phenomenon is.
Ailawadi et al. (2003) was a rare study that explicitly
recognized this research problem. Therefore, if brand equity/
brand value represents the brand outcome, there is an
important unanswered question: what is the unidentified
relationship between the entity (brand) and outcome (equity)
that drives (certain) brand performance? This question has
rarely been raised and has no clear answer in branding
literature. This debate is beyond the scope of our study, but
we hope that further work on a unified theory of brand equity
will move us a step forward in identifying those antecedent
relationships.
Second, a predominant research focus in the literature has
rested on measurement issues of brand equity, not on its
sources and determinants. In line with recommendations from
MacInnis (2011) and Yadav (2014) for marketing theory
development, we attempted to take a first step in filling this
research gap with a thorough analysis and integration of the
most important literature on the topic, and by indicating
themes and (open) issues for future research.

Ambler, T. (1997), “Do brands benefit consumers?”,
International Journal of Advertising, Vol. 16 No. 3,
pp. 167-198.
Ambler, T. (2008), “Marketing metrics”, in Baker, M.J. and
Hart, S.J. (Eds), The Marketing Book, 6th ed.,
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Ambler, T., Bhattacharya, C.B., Edell, J., Keller, K., Lemon,
K. and Mittal, V. (2002), “Relating brand and customer
perspectives on marketing management”, Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 13-25.
Ambler, T. and Styles, C. (1997), “Brand development versus
new product development: towards a process model of
extension decision”, Journal of Product & Brand
Management, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 13-26.
Atilgan, E., Safak, A. and Serkan, A. (2005), “Determinants
of the brand equity: a verification approach in the beverage
industry in Turkey”, Marketing Intelligence & Planning,
Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 237-248.
Babin, B.J. and James, K. (2010), “A brief retrospective and
introspective on value”, European Business Review, Vol. 22
No. 5, pp. 471-478.
Barwise, P. (1993), “Brand equity: Snark or Boojum?”,
International Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 1,
pp. 93-104.
Brianna, R., Wang, Y. and Stoner, J. (2014), “When a brand
caught fire: the role of brand equity in product-harm crisis”,
Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 23 No. 7,
pp. 532-542.
Broniarczyk, S.M. and Gershoff, A.D. (2003), “The
reciprocal effects of brand equity and trivial attributes”,
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 161-175.
Choi, S.C. and Coughlan, A. (2006), “Private label
positioning: quality versus feature differentiation from the
national brand”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 82 No. 2,
pp. 79-93.
Christodoulides, G. and de Chernatony, L. (2010),
“Consumer-based brand equity conceptualization and
measurement: a literature review”, International Journal of
Market Research, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 43-66.
Cobb-Walgren, C.J., Ruble, C.A. and Donthu, N. (1995),
“Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase intent”,
Journal of Advertising, Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. 25-40.
Collins, J.C. and Porras, J.I. (1995), Built to Last: Successful
Habits of Visionary Companies, Random House, London.
Copeland, M.T. (1923), “Relation of consumers’ buying
habits to marketing methods”, Harvard Business Review,
Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 282-289.
Cuneo, A., Lopez, P. and Yague, M.J. (2012), “Private label
brands: measuring equity across consumer segments”,
Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 21 No. 6,
pp. 428-438.
Davcik, N.S. (2013), “An empirical investigation of brand
equity: drivers and their consequences”, British Food
Journal, Vol. 115 No. 9, pp. 1342-1360.
Davcik, N.S. and Rundquist, J. (2012), “An exploratory study
of brand success: evidence from the food industry”, Journal
of International Food and Agribusiness Marketing, Vol. 24
No. 1, pp. 1-19.
Davcik, N.S. and Sharma, P. (2015), “Impact of product
differentiation, marketing investments and brand equity on

Notes
1 It is common in economic literature to use the term
“goodwill”, even though the authors refer to the brand
equity concept.
2 We are grateful to the anonymous reviewer for pointing
out this mechanism.

References
Aaker, D. (1991), Managing Brand Equity, The Free Press,
New York, NY.
Aaker, D., Kumar, V. and Day, G. (2004), Marketing
Research, 8th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.
Ailawadi, K., Lehmann, D. and Neslin, S. (2003), “Revenue
premium as an outcome measure of brand equity”, Journal
of Marketing, Vol. 67 No. 4, pp. 1-17.
15

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

pricing strategies: a brand level investigation”, European
Journal of Marketing.
Erdem, T. and Swait, J. (1998), “Brand equity as a signaling
phenomenon”, Journal of Consumer Psychology, Vol. 7 No. 2,
pp. 131-158.
Farquhar, P.H. (1989), “Managing brand equity”, Marketing
Research, Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 24-33.
Gabbott, M. and Jevons, C. (2009), “Brand community in
search of theory: an endless spiral of ambiguity”, Marketing
Theory, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 119-122.
Gardner, B. and Levy, S. (1955), “The product and the
brand”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 33-39.
Hegner, S., Beldad, A. and Kamphuis op Heghuis, S. (2014),
“How company responses and trusting relationships protect
brand equity in times of crises”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 21 No. 5, pp. 429-445.
Hult, T., Mena, J.A., Ferrell, O.C. and Ferrell, L. (2011),
“Stakeholder marketing: a definition and conceptual
framework”, Academy of Marketing Science Review, Vol. 1
No. 1, pp. 44-65.
Iglesias, O., Ind, N. and Alfaro, M. (2013), “The organic view
of the brand: a brand value co-creation model”, Journal of
Brand Management, Vol. 20 No. 8, pp. 670-688.
Isberg, S. and Pitta, D. (2013), “Using financial analysis to
assess brand equity”, Journal of Product & Brand
Management, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 65-78.
Jevons, C. (2007), “Towards an integrated definition of
‘brand’”, in de Chernatony, L. (Ed.), 2007 Thought Leaders’
International Conference on Brand Management, Birmingham
Business School, Birmingham.
Kamakura, W. and Russell, G. (1993), “Measuring brand
value with scanner data”, International Journal of Research in
Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 9-22.
Keller, K. (1993), “Conceptualizing, Measuring, and
Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 1-22.
Keller, K. and Lehmann, D. (2003), “How Do Brands Create
Value”, Marketing Management, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 26-31.
Keller, K. and Lehmann, D. (2006), “Brands and Branding:
research findings and future priorities”, Marketing Science,
Vol. 25 No. 6, pp. 740-759.
King, S. (1991), “Brand-building in the 1990s”, Journal of
Consumer Marketing, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 43-52.
Kirk, C.P., Ray, I. and Wilson, B. (2013), “The impact of
brand value on firm valuation: the moderating influence of
firm type”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 20 No. 6,
pp. 488-500.
Kotler, P. and Keller, K. (2012), Marketing Management; 14
ed., Prentice Hall International, NJ.
MacInnis, D.J. (2011), “A Framework for Conceptual
Contributions in Marketing”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 75
No. 4, pp. 136-154.
Merz, M.A., He, Y. and Vargo, S.L. (2009), “The evolving
brand logic: a service-dominant logic perspective”, Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 37 No. 3,
pp. 328-344.
Pappu, R., Pascale, G.Q. and Cooksey, R. (2005),
“Consumer-based
brand
equity:
improving
the
measurement – empirical evidence”, Journal of Product &
Brand Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 143-154.

Park, C.S. and Srinivasan, V. (1994), “A Survey-Based
Method for Measuring and Understanding Brand Equity
and Its Extendibility”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 31
No. 2, pp. 271-288.
Park, C.W., MacInnis, D.J. and Priester, J. (2008), “Brand
attachment and a strategic brand exemplar”, in Schmitt,
B.H. and David L. Rogers (Eds), Handbook on Brand and
Experience Management, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Pub.
Paswan, A., Guzman, F. and Blankson, C. (2012), “Business
to business governance structure and marketing strategy”,
Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 41 No. 6,
pp. 908-918.
Raggio, R.D. and Leone, R.P. (2007), “The theoretical
separation of brand equity and brand value: managerial
implications for strategic planning”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 14 No. 5, pp. 380-395.
Raggio, R.D. and Leone, R.P. (2009), “Chasing brand value:
fully leveraging brand equity to maximise brand value”,
Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 248-263.
Salinas, G. and Ambler, T. (2009), “A taxonomy of brand
valuation practice: methodologies and purposes”, Journal of
Brand Management, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 39-61.
Schmalensee, R. (1982), “Product Differentiation Advantages
of Pioneering Brands”, The American Economic Review,
Vol. 72 No. 3, pp. 349-365.
Shapiro, C. (1982), “Consumer Information, Product
Quality, and Seller Reputation”, Bell Journal of Economics,
Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 20-35.
Shocker, A.D., Srivastava, R.K. and Ruekert, R.W. (1994),
“Challenges and Opportunities Facing Brand Management:
an Introduction to the Special Issue”, Journal of Marketing
Research, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 149-158.
Simon, C.J. and Sullivan, M.W. (1993), “The Measurement
and Determinants of Brand Equity: a Financial Approach”,
Marketing Science, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 28-52.
Sinclair, R. and Keller, K. (2014), “A case for brands as
assets: acquired and internally developed”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 21 No. 4, pp. 286-302.
Smith, R.J. (1915), “Market distribution-discussion: J. Russell
Smith”, American Economic Review, Vol. 5 No. 1,
pp. 157-158.
Spielmann, N. (2014), “Brand equity for origin-bounded
brands”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 21 No. 3,
pp. 189-201.
Srinivasan, V., Park, C. and Chang, D. (2005), “An Approach
to the Measurement, Analysis, and Prediction of Brand
Equity and Its Sources”, Management Science, Vol. 51
No. 9, pp. 1433-1448.
Sriram, S., Subramanian, B. and Manohar, U.K. (2007),
“Monitoring the Dynamics of Brand Equity Using
Store-Level Data”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 71 No. 2,
pp. 61-78.
Suder, G. and Suder, D. (2013), “The effect of
macroeconomic threats on brand value and ranking:
insights from 10 years of fluctuations”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 20 No. 4, pp. 309-324.
Veloutsou, C., Christodoulides, G. and de Chernatony, L.
(2013), “A taxonomy of measures for consumer-based
brand equity: drawing on the views of managers in Europe”,
16

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Towards a unified theory of brand equity

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Nebojsa S. Davcik, Rui Vinhas da Silva and Joe F. Hair

Volume 24 · Number 1 · 2015 · 3–17

Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 22 No. 3,
pp. 238-248.
Yadav, M.S. (2014), “Enhancing theory development in
marketing”, Academy of Marketing Science Review, Vol. 4
No. 1, pp. 1-4.
Yoo, B., Donthu, N. and Lee, S. (2000), “An Examination of
Selected Marketing Mix Elements and Brand Equity”, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28 No. 2,
pp. 195-211.

Business Management and Economics from York
University in Toronto, Canada, an MBA from Aston
Business School and a PhD and Post-Doctorate from
Manchester Business School. He was an Associate
Professor (Senior Lecturer) at Manchester Business School
and a member of faculty since 1998. Throughout this
period, he was very actively involved in senior executive
training programs and consultancy through Manchester
Business School. These included regular appointments in
blue-chip programs. Vinhas da Silva has research interests
in the areas of national competitiveness, country branding,
corporate reputation and country-of-origin effects. Since
2010, Vinhas da Silva has authored three books on country
economic competitiveness, exports and FDI. He has
authored journal articles in the European Journal of
Marketing, Industrial Marketing Management, Psychology &
Marketing, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Journal
of Brand Management, among others. He is on the Editorial
Board of Industrial Marketing Management.

About the authors
Nebojsa S. Davcik is Assistant Professor of Marketing and
BRU Research Fellow at the ISCTE Business School
(ISCTE – IUL), Lisbon, Portugal. He received his PhD from
University of Padova, Department of Economic Sciences
“Marco Fanno”. The author’s research interests are related to
broad field of brand and marketing management concepts,
economic modeling and quantitative methods. Before he
joined the PhD program at the University of Padova, he had
worked as a market development consultant in the food
industry for small and medium enterprises. Dr Davcik serves
as the member of the Editorial Advisory Board to the Journal
of Product & Brand Management as well as the reviewer to the
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Journal of Business
Research, Journal of Business Economics and Management,
European Journal of Marketing, International Marketing
Review, Journal of Brand Management, among others. Nebojsa
S. Davcik is the corresponding author and can be contacted at:
davcik@live.com

Joe F. Hair is Professor of Marketing in the Coles College of
Business at Kennesaw State University. He has authored over
50 books, including market leaders Multivariate Data Analysis,
Prentice-Hall, 7th edition, 2010, and Principles of Marketing,
Cengage, 12th edition, 2013, used at over 600 universities
globally. He also has numerous publications in journals such
as Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of Academy of
Marketing Science, Journal of Business/Chicago, Journal of
Advertising Research, Journal of Retailing, among others. His
publications have been cited more than 100,000 times
(Google Scholar citations).

Rui Vinhas da Silva is Associate Professor at the
ISCTE-IUL (Portugal) since 2010. He has degrees in

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

17
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jpbm/article-pdf/24/1/3/1713716/jpbm-06-2014-0639.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

