Nonproﬁt branding: a bibliometric analysis
Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri, Emerson Wagner Mainardes and Cícero Caldeira Belchior
Department of Management, FUCAPE Business School, Vitoria, Brazil
Abstract
Purpose – This study aims to examine articles on nonproﬁt branding over an 18-year time span to develop an overview and better understanding of
the subject.
Design/methodology/approach – This study used the Scopus database in a search for studies that deal, regardless of the approach, with branding
in a nonproﬁt context. Subsequently, through a systematic review, a database with 84 articles was generated and 77 articles were submitted to
bibliometric analysis.
Findings – This study identiﬁed six main research areas (brand and donation, brand management, brand orientation, nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt
partnership, communication strategies and stakeholder management), which were analyzed and discussed, seeking to identify the relationship
between research in each area. In addition, this study presents the limitations of the research and thus verify that, although this body of literature is
growing, the complexity of the nonproﬁt sector offers several opportunities for future research, which are pointed out at the end of the study.
Practical implications – This study contributes to the academic literature on the topic by providing a systematization of knowledge about branding
in the nonproﬁt sector and also offers insights about nonproﬁt branding to institutions and managers in this industry.
Originality/value – This is the ﬁrst study, to the authors’ knowledge, to evaluate and quantify the progress of brand literature in the nonproﬁt
sector.
Keywords Nonproﬁt sector, Brand management, Bibliometric analysis, Not-for-proﬁt marketing, Nonproﬁt branding, Brand, Nonproﬁt
Paper type General review

1. Introduction
The nonproﬁt landscape has been changing substantially. In
the USA, approximately 1.5 million nonproﬁt organizations
were registered with the Internal Revenue Service in 2015,
representing an increase of 10.4 per cent in relation to 2005
(National Center for Charitable Statistics, 2019). As the
number of nonproﬁt organizations increases, competition is
also intensiﬁed (Hopkins et al., 2014). Alongside this,
longstanding social organizations already face other challenges,
such as a decline in direct donations (Peacock, 2000) and
weakening the government and public support and reducing
the availability of ﬁnancial resources (Hibbert and Horne,
1996). In face of these challenges, the nonproﬁt sector has been
diversifying its activities, recognizing the importance of
becoming more market-driven and using for-proﬁt marketing
concepts and values to achieve competitive advantages over
competitors (Apaydin, 2011; Ewing and Napoli, 2005). One of
these concepts is nonproﬁt branding.
Despite this, the academy has given little attention to
nonproﬁt branding (Michel and Rieunier, 2012) and for a
breakthrough in the study of branding in the nonproﬁt sector to
be achieved, we understand the relevance of examining the
current literature to develop an overview and better
understanding of the subject. For this reason, this study aims to

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: https://www.emerald.com/insight/1061-0421.htm

Journal of Product & Brand Management
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/JPBM-05-2019-2366]

analyze the literature dealing with branding in the nonproﬁt
sector, identifying:

the most frequently addressed themes over time;

the research methodologies used to conduct the analyzed
studies;

the contributions to the literature made by these articles;
and

verifying any research gaps.
In relation to branding, several marketing concepts, developed
in the corporate context, can become a powerful tool for
companies operating in the nonproﬁt sector (Baghi and
Gabrielli, 2013; Ritchie et al., 1999). Therefore, similarly to the
private sector, which developed and built brands as a way to
create and maintain a differential in an increasingly competitive
environment, nonproﬁt organizations are also more likely to
adhere to branding efforts (Apaydin, 2011; Stride and Lee,
2007). Besides differentiation, nonproﬁt branding can be
considered a strategic asset, as it builds trust and represents an
institution (corporate heritage), with a brand image which can
inﬂuence an individual’s intention to donate (Lee and Davies,
2019; Michaelidou et al., 2015b).
This research was supported by Brazilian National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq/Brazil), project 304209/2018-0,
by Foundation for Research Support of Espírito Santo (FAPES/Brazil),
projects 81870973 (50/2018), 84513772 (599/2018) and 85395650 (228/
2019), by Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT/Portugal) through
NECE (Núcleo de Estudos em Ciências Empresariais), project UID/GES/
04630/2019, and by IFTS (Instituto Fucape de Tecnologias Sociais),
project 2018-2021.
Received 6 May 2019
Revised 6 October 2019
6 December 2019
Accepted 16 December 2019

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

However, despite the growing importance of brand in the
nonproﬁt sector, and the fact that the theme is drawing the
attention and interest of leaders in this sector, branding studies
related to nonproﬁts still receive limited attention by researchers
with regard to the complex managerial issues faced by these
organizations (Modi and Sahi, 2018). We see the need for research
that can validate and amplify the results, proposals and scales
already found and developed as well as help develop new
knowledge on the subject, considering the relevance of the subject
(Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Vallaster and von Wallpach, 2018). In
addition, we found no previous study evaluating and quantifying
the progress of brand literature in the nonproﬁt sector.
The present study is justiﬁed by its contribution to the
nonproﬁt marketing literature, providing knowledge about
branding in the nonproﬁt sector to the academic community
and institutions in this industry. Thus, we consider that this
study can play a relevant role in managers’ knowledge about the
brand, given that brand awareness is gaining importance in the
third sector as it expands.

2. Literature review
After conducting a chronological analysis of nonproﬁt
marketing and branding, nonproﬁt marketing studies were
identiﬁed as being initially focused on the principles of
marketing that could be applied in the nonproﬁt sector, the
inﬂuence on increasing donations and the relationship between
the nonproﬁt organization and the donors (Weir and Hibbert,
2000; Bennett and Sargeant, 2005; Ewing and Napoli, 2005).
After these, later studies explored the differences between the
for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt sectors, from both the consumer’s and
organization’s point of view, and examined how marketing
strategies could be adapted from the for-proﬁt to the nonproﬁt
sector (Aaker et al., 2010; Apaydin, 2011).
These differences paved the way for a range of studies in
marketing concepts, mainly related to nonproﬁt branding such
as brand community (Hassay and Peloza, 2009), brand
orientation (Apaydin, 2011), brand image (Baghi and
Gabrielli, 2013), market orientation (Wymer et al., 2015) and
brand authenticity (Wymer and Akbar, 2017), so that, over
time, these themes have become prominent in the literature on
the subject. However, studies on marketing strategies and
nonproﬁt branding are not exhausted, and themes such as
donation and brand image are still catching the attention of
many researchers (Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Hommerová
and Severová, 2019; Yoo and Drumwright, 2018).
2.1 Marketing in nonproﬁt organizations
Marketing has gained acceptance among the community of
nonproﬁt professionals (Ewing and Napoli, 2005) and several
studies have focused on understanding how marketing
principles apply to this sector (Bennett and Sargeant, 2005;
Hommerová and Severová, 2019; Hou et al., 2018; Wymer and
Akbar, 2017). Also, several concepts have been adapted, such
as relationship marketing, which shows that it aids in
fundraising because the relationship is a way to differentiate
between organizations and give customers an incentive to
remain loyal (Weir and Hibbert, 2000). As well, brand
community represents the opportunity to develop greater
loyalty among donors, foster new ones and attract volunteers

(Hassay and Peloza, 2009) and market orientation, which
exposes the importance and consequences of organizations
being market-oriented (Wymer et al., 2015).
Much of the current research in nonproﬁt marketing has
focused on applying relationship marketing techniques to build
donor engagement with organizations (Arnett et al., 2003;
Sundermann, 2018; Ewing and Napoli, 2005; Hassay and
Peloza, 2009). Fundraising is another point that receives
considerable attention in the literature and is probably one of
the most researched facets of marketing and nonproﬁt
management (Bennett and Sargeant, 2005; Dvorakova and
Mackova, 2014; Hommerová and Severová, 2019; Yoo and
Drumwright, 2018). According to Bennett and Sargeant
(2005), success in fundraising is closely linked to the level of
market orientation of a nonproﬁt organization. For example,
Yoo and Drumwright (2018) veriﬁed that the use of virtual
reality in fundraising increases potential donors’ feeling of
interacting with potential beneﬁciaries. This interaction
between donors and beneﬁciaries has a positive impact on
donation intent. Other similar ﬁndings can be seen in Huang
and Ku (2016), Katz (2018) and Sevilla (2018).
In fact, there has been considerable interest lately in the
operationalization of the marketing concept and the relationship
between the market orientation construct and various nonproﬁt
performance measures (Algharabat et al., 2018; Vázquez et al.,
2002). Marketing has also contributed to knowledge related to
nonproﬁt competition, particularly in terms of how the concepts
of commercial marketing, such as brand authenticity and the
organizational brand image, can contribute to the achievement of
differentiation and competitive advantage in an uncertain market
(Baghi and Gabrielli, 2013; Khan and Ede, 2009; Randle et al.,
2013; Wymer and Akbar, 2017).
Despite these advantages, marketing techniques are rarely
used in nonproﬁt organizations (Chad et al., 2013). Several
authors suggest that more research is needed to verify and
conﬁrm the validity of their studies in the nonproﬁt sector
(Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Huang and Ku, 2016; Vallaster
and von Wallpach, 2018). In addition, substantial differences
between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations, such as the
organizational culture and the complexity of clients, indicate
the need for more research that explores marketing concepts,
especially those related to the study of the brand (Apaydin,
2011). Therefore, we propose that it is important to pay
attention not only to the marketing strategies used but also to
brand development in the nonproﬁt sector, given that the
development of strong brands is becoming crucial for the
survival of these organizations (Chapleo, 2015). Thus, it is
understood that this approach requires more in-depth research.
2.2 Nonproﬁt branding
Nonproﬁts probably have a lot to gain from adopting the
theories and branding models developed for the commercial
sector (Ewing and Napoli, 2005). An efﬁcient for-proﬁt brand
provides consumers with a guarantee of the quality of the
product or service provided, whereas in the non-commercial
sector, a strong brand provides donors with more reliability and
collateral reducing donation risks (Voeth and Herbst, 2008).
The brand offers the main point of differentiation between
competitors, and this is increasingly recognized as key to the
success of the nonproﬁt organization in inter-sectoral and intra-

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

sectoral competition (Mort et al., 2007). Stride and Lee (2007)
argued that nonproﬁt brand managers generally have to deal
with problems in coordinating communication for different
customers (such as beneﬁciaries, supporters and stakeholders)
with different needs and developing coherent communication
aligned with the organization’s mission and values. But, unlike
for-proﬁt management, nonproﬁt brand management should
adopt a more malleable approach given the importance of its
own values (Stride and Lee, 2007), reﬂecting the importance of
further studies and outlining the differences between managing
for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt brands.
Despite this, many nonproﬁt organizations still underuse the
potential of their brands (Voeth and Herbst, 2008), probably
because of some barriers suggested in the literature such as lack
of ﬁnancial resources, a short-term focus, difﬁculty
communicating with stakeholders and a lack of alignment
between the organization’s image and its identity (Evans et al.,
2012; Lee, 2013).
Yet, the literature reports a clear link between this adoption
of brand strategies, competitive advantage (Apaydin, 2011;
Venable et al., 2005) and the effective use of resources
(Chapleo, 2015). Although nonproﬁts may gain by adopting
some practices from commercial brands, several important
differences make branding challenging (Chapleo, 2015). For
example, the idea of over-commercialization, or the association
with a for-proﬁt brand, can damage rather than beneﬁt a
nonproﬁt organization in some cases (Boenigk and Schuchardt,
2015; Toole and Czarnitzki, 2010; Maier et al., 2016).
Given the relevance of the subject and the consequent
increase in studies, the role of the nonproﬁt brand has changed
signiﬁcantly in recent years. In the past, it was considered as a
fundraising and communication tool, focusing on design
elements such as name and logo. Today, the brand has evolved
to the level of a strategic asset, assuming a larger role in the
organization and holding the potential to provide internal
guidance to staff and volunteers, as well as external guidance to
stakeholders (Boenigk and Becker, 2016).
Brand image concept, for example, is relevant in
communicating the main values of an organization, because the
perception of the brand plays a role in the formation of attitudes
and actions among its stakeholders (Durgee, 2016; Huang and
Ku, 2016). Brand equity is the end result of the branding
strategy, referring to the added brand value of the brand that
results from its strength and ability to inﬂuence how the
consumer thinks, feels and acts in relation to it (Boenigk and
Becker, 2016). In this way, Boenigk and Becker (2016) deﬁne
three dimensions of nonproﬁt brand equity (nonproﬁt brand
awareness, nonproﬁt brand trust and nonproﬁt brand
commitment). They also proposed a performance index based
on these three dimensions and suggested that nonproﬁt
organizations could use it to drive their brand strategies, in this
way strengthening relationships with their stakeholders.
Because of the fragmentation of studies and scarcity of
systematic analysis relevant to brand in the nonproﬁt sector
(Chang and Chung, 2016), we perceive that a systematic
literature review (SLR) and a bibliometric analysis can present
contributions to help systematize the knowledge about the
subject. One of the purposes of this type of analysis is to use
statistical and mathematical techniques to structure
the information and generate clusters and maps so that

the relationships between the data can be highlighted and
visualized in a way that facilitates their interpretation (Börner
et al., 2003; Pritchard, 1969; Waltman et al., 2010).

3. Methods
To achieve the objectives of the study, two methodological
approaches were carried out in sequence: a SLR and a
bibliometric analysis. The source used to search for articles for
the SLR was the Scopus database, which is considered the
largest database of abstracts and references of peer-reviewed
scientiﬁc literature (Anees-ur-Rehman et al., 2016; Valenzuela
et al., 2017; Wang and Waltman, 2016). The bibliometric
analysis was performed using the articles from SLR and
generated network maps with the aim of facilitating a
visualization of the relationships between the proposed
elements (Börner et al., 2003; Waltman et al., 2010).
3.1 Systematic literature review
First, we conducted the SLR. It is argued that systematic
reviews have become the most reliable form of research review
to evaluate extensive literature bases because of the explicit and
rigorous methods used (Denyer and Tranﬁeld, 2006).
According to Cook (1997), systematic reviews include a clear
statement of the purpose of the review, are comprehensive and
retrieve relevant research, in addition to having explicit and
systematic selection criteria for searching for information, as
well as critical appraisal and synthesis of the information
selected. The objective of a systematic review is to synthesize a
large volume of information from the studies analyzed and thus
identify opportunities for future research (Cook et al., 1997;
Denyer and Tranﬁeld, 2006; McKibbon, 2006).
In the search engine, we used the terms “brand” and
“nonproﬁt” or “non-proﬁt” or “not-for-proﬁt”, so that brand
was combined using the Boolean operator AND with the other
three terms that address the nonproﬁt sector, which were
combined using Boolean operator OR. We applied the search
to the ﬁelds “article title,” “abstract,” and “keywords,” and
carried it out in August 2019. Thus, articles that did not have
the words “brand” and “nonproﬁt”, “non-proﬁt,” or “not-forproﬁt” in the title, abstract, or keywords were not included.
After this, the ﬁlters “language” (in English only) and “type of
study” (articles and reviews) were applied. To cover as many
studies of nonproﬁt branding as possible, we did not apply
ﬁlters by sector (e.g. charity, health, environmental protection,
higher education, etc.), as this would decrease the number of
articles and consequently decrease the size of the ﬁnal database
and the ﬁndings of the bibliometric analysis.
Initially, we found 293 different articles. After this ﬁrst
selection, we applied the following exclusion criteria:

The article does not include any technical information
such as author, year or abstract.

It is not fully related to the areas of business, marketing or
nonproﬁt sector.

It does not deal explicitly with branding in nonproﬁt
organizations, because, in these cases, it is not possible to
identify whether the organizations analyzed were for-proﬁt
or nonproﬁt.
So, to be sure, we only considered studies that claimed to be
studying the nonproﬁt sector. After analysis and exclusion from

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

the sample of articles that ﬁt at least one of the criteria, the ﬁnal
sample consisted of 84 papers. Only then did we summarize
each of the articles by completing the ﬁelds in the data
extraction form, which contain the basic information (author,
date of publication), in addition to the synthesis of the study
(objective of the study, methodology used, results, conclusion
and suggestions for future studies). Thus, we used a complete
list of the information later in the analysis of clusters generated
by the bibliometric techniques.
3.2 Bibliometrics
We performed the bibliometric analysis using VOSViewer
software version 1.6.10 (Van Eck and Waltman, 2010;
Waltman et al., 2010), applying the techniques of analysis of
co-occurrence of keywords (Callon et al., 1983) and
bibliographic coupling (Kessler, 1963).
Co-occurrence observes how often these terms (keywords)
appear in the sample and how close the two terms are, that is,
how often two distinct keywords appear together in different
articles. For this, all the keywords were initially examined and
those that were synonymous, such as “brand” and “brands”,
were identiﬁed and considered as the same keyword (Cobo
et al., 2011; Losiewicz et al., 2000). Thereafter, we applied
keyword co-occurrence to generate the clustering of the
keywords according to their degree of association in the
literature.
From another perspective, bibliographic coupling examines
the number of references that two articles have in common;
that is, if two articles cite a third, then the ﬁrst two are
bibliographically coupled. In addition, the more references they
share, the more similar they are Egghe and Rousseau (2002),
Kessler (1963). Therefore, we suggest that each cluster formed
by the application of the bibliographic coupling technique
forms the basis of a determined search front because that
cluster has articles that share several references (Jarneving,
2005).
The interactions formed by the application of these
techniques were illustrated in network maps (Li et al., 2016;
Marchiori and Mendes, 2018; Martínez-L
opez et al., 2018),
where each map was calculated by measuring the interaction
force between terms, taking into account the number of links
between the terms (Van Eck and Waltman, 2010; Waltman
et al., 2010). Graphically, each node represents a term, which in
this case is an article or keyword, depending on the analysis.
Therefore, each node belongs to a cluster. In addition, larger
nodes represent more relevant terms than smaller nodes, and
the closer one node is to another, the more related they are
(even if the nodes are in different clusters). Finally, the lines
show the links between nodes (Cobo et al., 2011; Sinkovics,
2016; Van Eck and Waltman, 2010).

4. Results
4.1 Keywords
For a better understanding of published studies on branding in
the nonproﬁt sector, as well as the relationship between these
studies (Marchiori and Mendes, 2018), we performed an
analysis of the co-occurrence of keywords.
For this analysis, we considered the keywords provided by
the authors, initially ﬁnding a total of 277 keywords. We then

performed an analysis of synonyms where terms such as
“nonproﬁt”, “non-proﬁt” and “not-for-proﬁt” were considered
as equal. After the correction, 232 distinct terms were found, of
which only 43 occurred two or more times. We also removed
the terms “brand”, “branding” and “nonproﬁt” or synonyms,
because the articles were initially selected by the search engine
using these keywords. In this manner, of the 40 remaining
keywords, we analyzed 38 ﬁnal keywords, because two
keywords had no connection with the others, using a resolution
of one and a minimum group size equal to four keywords
(approximately 10 per cent of the sample), culminating in the
formation of six groups, obtaining a satisfactory level of detail
(Waltman et al., 2010). The generated map is shown in
Figure 1, and each cluster is circled and numbered to facilitate
visualization.
In Group 1, the keywords “nonproﬁt marketing”,
“fundraising”, “donation”, “charity” and “brand personality”
appear together. Although the utility of brand personality has
been questioned in the literature (Romaniuk and Ehrenberg,
2012), studies such as those by Sargeant et al. (2008a, 2008b)
discuss how brand personality manifests differently in the
nonproﬁt sector than in the for-proﬁt sector, and how the
different dimensions of brand personality can affect
the intention to donate. Furthermore, authors like Venable
et al. (2005) identiﬁed that “brand personality” contributes to
the formation of “brand image”, which affects the donation
intention (Huang and Ku, 2016). Michel and Rieunier (2012)
showed that there is a positive relationship between the
dimensions that integrate nonproﬁt brand image (NBI) and the
intention to donate. The connections between brand
personality and brand image, and the intention to donate may
explain the proximity of the keyword “brand image” to Group
1, even though it belongs to Group 2.
In addition to “brand image”, Group 2 contains “volunteer”,
“engagement” and “brand heritage” as keywords. Randle et al.
(2013) conclude that, depending on brand image, nonproﬁt
organizations should adopt competitive strategies or
collaborative strategies for the recruitment of volunteers.
Furthermore, the brand image also affects volunteers’
engagement in the organization (Curran and Taheri, 2019).
Besides that, in their case study, McMullan et al. (2009)
analyze the challenge of modernizing the Canadian Armed
Forces brand image while preserving the brand values of that
organization (brand heritage), comparing with public and
nonproﬁt brands.
On the other hand, Group 3 is related to “brand
orientation”, because this is the most relevant term in the
grouping (the largest node). The keyword appears to be more
related to internal and external brand management and may be
related to the need to align internal and external brand
management activities because they can play a central role in
the success of brand building (Ewing and Napoli, 2005; Khan
and Ede, 2009). It is interesting to note that nonproﬁt brand
orientation (NBO) precedes NBI as NBO can be deﬁned as the
extent to which a nonproﬁt organization sees itself as a brand
(Hankinson, 2000).
Group 4 is related to partnerships between nonproﬁt and forproﬁt organizations, considering that keywords such as
“sponsorship”, “partnerships” and “social marketing” are
associated with this group. Although partnerships between the

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Figure 1 Keywords

nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt sectors can bring mutual beneﬁts, they
should be looked at carefully and communicated very well to
stakeholders. That is because, in some cases, partnerships can
bring damage to a nonproﬁt organization such as a loss of
credibility, an overly commercialized image and a decline of its
social mission. One way to mitigate the risk of an unsuccessful
partnership is by ensuring that the organizations involved
(nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt) hold shared organizational values
(Boenigk and Schuchardt, 2015; Herlin, 2015; Jordan, 2018).
Group 5 contains “social media” as the main keyword. It also
uses keywords such as “communication”, “public relations”
and “organizational identity”. Whereas social media can be
used to build brand image and improve the relationship
between nonproﬁt organizations and the target audience,
nonproﬁt brand managers do not fully understand how to use
this tool properly. Social media is rarely used, for example, to
disseminate information about the organization, to promote
sponsors, and to advertise volunteering opportunities, forms of
donations, online stores and events calendars (Waters et al.,
2009; Eagleman, 2013).
Finally, Group 6 is associated with terms such as
“stakeholder”, “cause-related marketing” and “co-branding”,
possibly related to the effects of social-cause-related marketing.
Studies such as Baghi and Gabrielli (2013) and
Thamaraiselvan et al. (2017) demonstrate that proper
marketing strategies, such as co-branding and celebrity
advocacy, can achieve good results for nonproﬁt organizations,
such as increasing brand credibility. On the other hand,
Vallaster and von Wallpach (2018) argue that brand strategies
are formed by several stakeholders, meaning that the strategy is
co-created by several parties involved with the organization and
therefore must be aligned among them all (Laidler-Kylander
et al., 2007).
4.2 Bibliographic coupling
To determine the main research fronts (Jarneving, 2005) and to
better understand the contributions, methodologies used and
literature gaps within the theme of branding in the nonproﬁt

sector, we used the bibliographic coupling of documents. Of
the 84 articles that formed the database, 77 were
bibliographically coupled and were the object of this analysis.
The other seven articles did not share any study of their
theoretical framework with the references of the selected
studies. Therefore, we did not bibliographically couple them
and they were removed from the analysis. In addition, a
resolution of 0.7 was established, with parameter values of 1
and 0 representing attraction and repulsion, respectively, to
achieve a satisfactory level of detail for the analyses (Waltman
et al., 2010). With this, the map generated is shown in Figures 2
and 3, where each of the six clusters found is circled for easy
visualization. Both Figures 2 and 3 present the same results,
but in Figure 3 the lines have been omitted for better
visualization.
In general, the map has clusters with balanced quantities of
articles. In fact, there is not a very signiﬁcant inequality.
However, Clusters 2 and 6 have fewer articles than others.
Whereas Cluster 1 has 21 articles, Clusters 3 and 5 have 17 and
16, respectively, and Clusters 2 and 6 have six and seven
articles, respectively.
In addition, each cluster was titled according to its main
topic, basing this ﬁnding on the analysis of its four most cited
articles according to the Scopus database. Also, each cluster
was related to the main keyword of the keyword group. The
results can be seen in Table I. The resulting clusters, with all
the articles, are in Appendix.
When analyzing the most cited works within each cluster,
Cluster 1 seems to bring together articles that sought to bring
knowledge of for-proﬁt industry branding terms such as brand
image and brand personality and adapt them to the nonproﬁt
sector, verifying their potentialities, mainly in regards to the
distinction of the brand and the impacts on donations. Cluster
2 seems to contain works that discuss the consequences of
brand management empirically. Cluster 3 contains, in its most
cited articles, studies that advocate the adoption of nonproﬁt
marketing strategies, highlighting those focused on the brand.
In general, they deal with conceptual discussions of brand

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Figure 2 Bibliographic coupling by articles

Figure 3 Bibliographic coupling by articles without lines

orientation, demonstrating the importance of well-deﬁned
strategies in the nonproﬁt sector.
Most of the works in Cluster 4 discuss issues of partnership
with for-proﬁt organizations and the effects of these
partnerships on donations and nonproﬁt brand legitimacy. Yet
the most cited works in Cluster 5 deal with the promotion and
building of the brand through social media and communication
in general. In addition, some studies discuss how social media
and other media tools are used in cause-related marketing
through partnerships between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt
organizations. Finally, Cluster 6 addresses stakeholder
management and how to build nonproﬁt brand strategies.

5. Discussion
The papers in this review date from the early 2000s to 2019.
Thus, over almost 20 years of studies, we identiﬁed that brand
concerns in the nonproﬁt sector begin to develop from an
organization’s worries about communications with its
stakeholders and about its reputation (Mitchell and Mitchell,
2001; Padanyi and Gainer, 2003). Then, the research begins to
study the adaptation of for-proﬁt brand concepts (such as brand
orientation, brand equity and brand personality) in a nonproﬁt
context, developing measurement scales of these concepts for
nonproﬁt organizations (Faircloth, 2005; Venable et al., 2005;

Ewing and Napoli, 2005; Voeth and Herbst, 2008). Going
forward, Waters et al. (2009) and Waters and Jones (2011)
studied how social media can be used to build nonproﬁt brands
and relationships with stakeholders.
The associations between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt
organizations are also reported in nonproﬁt branding literature
and the alignment between the mission and the vision of both
organizations seems to be a key factor in partnership success
(Reeves, 2013). Also, the literature has been discussing the
impacts of the brand in donations, and a brand image seems to
play an important role in this subject (Katz, 2018; Huang and
Ku, 2016; Michaelidou et al., 2019).
The results found in the keyword groups, which denote the
relationship between the themes of published studies, are in
line with the research avenues found in bibliographic coupling.
This shows that the related themes actually form the research
avenues found. However, some groups have keywords from
more than one cluster, showing that, in some themes, the
research avenues are related to each other, which is expected,
because the main subject is the same (nonproﬁt branding).
Moreover, there is a concentration of nodes in the center of
Figure 2, despite the different clusters, showing that the
research is closely related.
In the bibliographic coupling, we can perceive the formation
of six clusters named brand and donation, brand management,

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Table I Clusters of the bibliographic coupling
Main studies

Main topic

Main keyword

Venable et al. (2005)
Michel and Rieunier (2012)
Sargeant et al. (2008a)
Faircloth (2005)
Becker-Olsen and Hill (2006)
Ewing and Napoli (2005)
Vestergaard (2008)
Khan and Ede (2009)
Casidy (2014)
Lee (2013)
Miller and Merrilees (2013)
Mulyanegara (2011)
Waters and Jones (2011)
Woolf et al. (2013)
Hassay and Peloza (2009)
Herlin (2015)
Waters et al. (2009)
Eagleman (2013)
Laidler-Kylander et al. (2007)
Mort et al. (2007)
Roozen (2013)
Nolan (2015)
Wymer et al. (2016)
Vallaster and Von Wallpach (2018)

Brand strategies for donation

Donation

Brand management

Brand image

Brand orientation

Brand orientation

Nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt partnerships

Partnership

Communication strategies

Communication

Stakeholder management

Stakeholder

Cluster

No. of citations

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6

145
53
40
30
107
94
31
20
24
16
16
15
45
23
21
21
528
40
23
18
7
5
5
3

Source: Research data

brand orientation, nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt partnerships,
communication strategies and stakeholder management.
Additionally, it is possible to note how the research has been
developed over time and which topics are catching more
attention from academics nowadays.
In the analysis of the ﬁrst cluster, named brand and donation,
the articles were dedicated to studying several concepts in
branding, such as brand equity, brand personality and, in
particular, brand image, which were previously studied in the
for-proﬁt sector and have been adapted to the nonproﬁt
context. In general, articles create scales to validate their studies
and attribute the gain of organizational beneﬁts, such as
increased donation intentions and increased involvement of
volunteers, to the effective adoption of branding techniques
(Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Michel and Rieunier, 2012;
Sarrica et al., 2014). The studies gathered by this cluster were
published between 2005 and 2019. It shows that the
relationship between brand and donations has been a recurring
topic of interest in academia.
A qualitative study by Faircloth (2005) empirically extended
brand equity constructs to the nonproﬁt sector. After just over a
decade, Boenigk and Becker (2016) afﬁrmed that there is still
limited research on the concept of brand equity proﬁt. Therefore,
in their study, they provide insights into the operationalization of
brand equity and of instrumentalizing an initial measurement
index of brand equity for the industry, contributing to the
discussion on the brand value of nonproﬁts. The study of one
other brand concept, called brand personality, served as the
theoretical basis of six studies (Sargeant et al., 2008a, 2008b;

Shehu et al., 2016; Stinnett et al., 2013; Venable et al., 2005;
Voeth and Herbst, 2008), mostly qualitative.
Research such as that conducted by Venable et al. (2005),
Voeth and Herbst (2008) and Sargeant et al. (2008a, 2008b),
which has addressed the theme in the nonproﬁt sector, have
emphasized the exploration of the applicability of brand
personality in nonproﬁt organizations, investigating its
validation and structuring. On the other hand, research that is
more recent has brought other approaches related to brand
personality. Stinnett et al. (2013) devoted their study to
individuals’ perceptions of the personality of the brand,
examining how individuals attribute human characteristics to
nonproﬁts, and Shehu et al. (2016) sought to identify how the
positive inﬂuence of a nonproﬁt brand personality is adversely
affected when monetary incentives are offered to donors. The
general conclusion of the authors is that adapting the concept of
brand personality in the nonproﬁt sector should be managed
well by leaders of nonproﬁt organizations; after all, it can affect
the image of the organization (Venable et al., 2005).
Brand image was another concept addressed in Cluster 1
studies and these studies sought to relate the brand image to
donation intentions. Michel and Rieunier (2012) sought to
identify NBI components and to test their inﬂuence on
donation intentions. In addition, they developed a scale for the
NBI that was subsequently investigated in a study by
Michaelidou et al. (2015a), which aimed to present a better
theoretical understanding of the NBI. In the same year,
Michaelidou et al. (2015b) carried out research that again
clariﬁed propositions suggested by Michel and Rieunier
(2012). In all three studies, the methodology used was factor

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

analysis. Huang and Ku (2016), in turn, proposed to examine
the concept of brand image in the virtual context. By using the
scale proposed by Michel and Rieunier (2012), they concluded
that the information provided by a nonproﬁt organization’s
website could help create its brand image, again relating it to
donation intentions.
It is interesting to note that the relationship between brand
image and subjects related to donation and charity is
manifested in keyword Groups 1 and 2 (Figure 1). Although
the keywords “brand image” and “donation” do not belong to
the same keyword group, they are keyword groups located next
to each other (Figure 1), demonstrating the proximity of these
keywords to Cluster 1 (Figure 2).
Cluster 2, named brand management, links works such as
Khan and Ede (2009) and Becker-Olsen and Hill (2006).
These studies encourage managers and leaders of nonproﬁt
organizations to apply a management approach to the practice
of marketing and branding. To access NBO, Ewing and Napoli
(2005) developed a multidimensional scale. They suggested
that this scale could be used to guide brand management
activities. However, Vestergaard (2008) researched the use of
media discourse by humanitarian organizations, discussing
how an organization might use to the media to create visibility,
leveraging this visibility into an increase of recruitment to the
cause.
In the same way, Winston (2017) explored, in a case study, a
nonproﬁt organization’s placement of symbols or advertising
materials in movies and TV shows to promote the organization
and its cause. The author argued that brand is managed with
the aim of incorporating the organization’s cause, in this case,
Amnesty International, into society, creating a “human rights
culture”. Another point highlighted by the author is the
difﬁculty of tracking and measuring the inﬂuence of brand
display within cultural products (such as movies and TV
shows).
Finally, McMullan et al. (2009) related the challenges of
brand management for the Canadian Armed Forces.
According to the authors, on one hand, it is necessary to keep
the traditions and the brand values (brand heritage); on the
other hand, the organization also needs to create a brand that is
more attractive to young Canadians. Thus, it is possible to
verify the relation between Cluster 2 (brand management) and
the Group 2 keywords. Except for the study by Winston
(2017), this research avenue indicated that this theme was
more researched in the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s, when most of
the studies in this cluster were published.
The articles in Cluster 3 (brand orientation) contribute to
nonproﬁt branding research, with the main theme being the
understanding and development of the brand. Studies that are
part of this cluster indicate that, although the concept of brand
orientation began with Urde (1994), brand orientation began
to be investigated more frequently and in-depth from the
second decade of the 2000s onwards. Therefore, the cluster is
formed from qualitative works (Chapleo, 2015; Lee, 2013;
Wymer et al., 2015) and studies that used analysis techniques,
such as factor analysis, structural equation modeling and
various types of linear regressions (Casidy, 2014; Ewing and
Napoli, 2005; Liu et al., 2015, 2017; Mulyanegara, 2011). The
studies support the literature showing that brand orientation
can play a signiﬁcant role in the development of the activities

and structure of nonproﬁt organizations, in addition to
demonstrating the importance of branding for these
organizations, as presented in the theoretical model of
antecedents and consequents to brand orientation as suggested
by Apaydin (2011). Mulyanegara (2011) adapted the approach
of Ewing and Napoli (2005) when studying the perception of
brand orientation. Liu et al. (2015, 2017) deepened the
understanding of internal branding, suggesting that brand
orientation plays a key role in internal brand management.
Other strategies appear as well in the works of this cluster.
Wymer et al. (2015), for example, conducted a broader study
focused on marketing orientation, suggesting that there is a
need for more research on the subject. Curran et al. (2016)
studied the concept of brand heritage using regression by
partial least squares as the method of analysis and concluded
that brand heritage plays an important role in increasing
volunteer engagement.
Thus, the different approaches in Clusters 2 and 3 are
related, as they both discuss the advantages of applying
nonproﬁt brand strategies. Graphically, it is possible to see that
the clusters are intertwined in Figure 2. Moreover, many brand
strategies and their management are interconnected in keyword
Group 2 (Figure 1).
The fourth cluster, entitled nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt
partnerships, is comprised of articles that examine the
relationship between the nonproﬁt brand and stakeholders,
including partnerships with the for-proﬁt sector. They seek to
analyze the consequence of adopting brand practices and their
impact on the relationship of the organization with its target
audience. Studies such as the one by Hassay and Peloza (2009)
presented the concept of brand community as an opportunity
to develop and foster the involvement and identiﬁcation of
donors and volunteers. Woolf et al. (2013) continued the study
of the brand community but explored the extent to which a
charity event would be able to promote brand engagement with
its public, revealing that, in their case study, the charity event
had little effect on the participants’ relationship with the
charity. Events were also investigated in the study by Toledano
and Riches (2014), who discussed the potential of a health
promotion event to both convey social messages and impact
behavior change among the public. They concluded that
nonproﬁts should manage their communication and
intervention projects carefully.
In addition, this study addressed an inter-sectoral
relationship, as did several other pieces of research present in
the cluster (Boenigk and Schuchardt, 2015; Herlin, 2015;
Reeves, 2013). As a rule, these studies examined the potential
and consequences of adopting strategies such as brand
partnerships and cause-related marketing. The results suggest
organizational beneﬁts accrue from adopting such practices,
emphasizing the need for a strategic adjustment between the
sectors. Lastly, Park et al. (2004) studied alignment in
advertising and showed a positive reaction in terms of attitude
towards the nonproﬁt organization and donation intention.
The ﬁfth cluster, entitled communication strategies,
comprises articles that relate brand strategies of nonproﬁts with
the communication process and also the use of social media.
Laidler-Kylander et al. (2007), studying the strategies present
in the construction and evaluation of nonproﬁt brands,
concluded that brand plays several critical roles in the

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

organization, especially in communication with the various
stakeholders, as well as playing a key role in fundraising. In
addition, they stressed the importance of effective brand
communication, pointing out that such communication can be
a challenge for leaders of nonproﬁt organizations. Torres
(2010) and Bebko et al. (2014) took a similar approach when
examining nonproﬁt branding and communication strategies,
concluding that communication efforts are becoming
increasingly important because they play a central role in the
positioning and perception of the organization among multiple
publics and in the intentions of the donor.
With regard to social media, some studies focused on the
virtual environment. In general, these articles contribute to
understanding how nonproﬁt organizations use social media to
reach their goals (Burton et al., 2017; Goldkind, 2015; Waters
et al., 2009). Waters et al. (2009) and Burton et al. (2017)
stated that these organizations recognize the potential of social
media resources but are not using them to their full potential.
The study by Burton et al. (2017) stepped up the exploration of
the interaction of the nonproﬁt organization with its partners,
evaluating reciprocity within the virtual context and
recommending that the partnership should be strategically
managed to maximize the beneﬁts of the relationship. Cooke
(2010) in turn, explored the tendency toward increased
interaction between corporations and non-proﬁt organizations,
but outside the virtual context. Liu (2012) focused on
communication management and showed that nonproﬁts are
adapting social media tools, providing better brand recognition.
Lastly, Goldkind (2015) suggested that the literature on the use
of social media in nonproﬁt organizations is still unsatisfactory.
The importance of social media is reinforced by the work of
Waters et al. (2009), the most cited article in our sample. The
article is around 10 years old (which helps it to have more
citations than more recent works), but despite that, when we
analyzed it more closely in the Scopus database, the largest
number of citations occurred in 2016. Therefore, the social
media theme is not only relevant for nonproﬁt organizations in
communicating with stakeholders; it is also a contemporary
issue.
Regarding the relation between the clusters, works such as
Palakshappa et al. (2010) and Park et al. (2004) highlight a link
between Cluster 4, which deals with nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt
partnerships, and Cluster 5, which deals with communication
strategies. Besides that, keyword Groups 4 and 5 (Figure 1),
which have “partnership” and “communication” as their main
keywords, respectively, also indicate this relation. These groups
appear side by side in Figure 1 and have intersection points,
showing that the subjects are interconnected in the literature.
Just as Clusters 4 and 5 are related through keywords, the
development of these clusters’ subjects also seems to be
interconnected. The studies that are in these clusters date back
to the early 2000s (Park et al., 2004; Mort et al., 2007) to the
time of this research, and the relationship created by
partnerships formed by for-proﬁts and nonproﬁts seems to
advance to discussion of corporate social responsibility and
partner companies’ communication alignment, especially via
social media, which mutually beneﬁts and strengthens brands
on both sides of the partnership (Algharabat et al., 2018;
Burton et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018; Thamaraiselvan et al.,
2017).

Finally, Cluster 6, named stakeholder management, is
formed by works that follow the literature on stakeholder
involvement in processes and structures of nonproﬁt
organizations. For example, Vallaster and von Wallpach (2018)
investigated, in a case study, how stakeholders engage with and
co-create the brand strategy, recognizing that stakeholders have
a strong impact on the co-creation process of the brand strategy
and proposing new ways of managing a brand in non-proﬁt
contexts. According to Chad (2015), brands communicate
with various stakeholders, which suggests that organizations
that deliver communication effectively will likely have effective
corporate rebranding. Wymer et al. (2016) also related the use
of brand concepts to organizational gains, but, in this case, they
studied the concept of brand strength. Wymer et al. (2016)
considered how this concept relates to the degree to which the
organization is favorably perceived by a target group and
presented it as an antecedent to the favorable behavioral
intentions and intentions regarding the brands of these
organizations. This subject seems to be catching the attention
of the academy more recently because most of the papers in this
cluster vary from 2015 to 2018.
Another link is the relation between Clusters 5 and 6,
highlighting the central role of aligning communication between
stakeholders in nonproﬁt organizations (Laidler-Kylander et al.,
2007). This relationship can also be seen graphically in the
intersection of Keyword Groups 5 and 6 (Figure 1) and the
proximity of the keywords “communication” (Group 5) and
“stakeholder” (Group 6).
In all clusters, there are several contributions to the study of
nonproﬁt brands. However, there is still a need for new
research to conﬁrm the perceptions proposed in some studies
(Curran et al., 2016; Vallaster and von Wallpach, 2018), in
addition to expanding research for a variety of nonproﬁt
sectors, examining multiple organizations, and conducting
such research in other cultures (Algharabat et al., 2018; Burton
et al., 2017). Beyond these limitations, we have identiﬁed gaps
that can be further explored by researchers in the ﬁeld,
reﬂecting on practical results for nonproﬁt organizations.

6. Future research agenda
Because of the development of the theory, many researchers
have applied qualitative methods; thus, future research can
further explore these ﬁndings as well as test the proposed
models through quantitative methods. Also, small nonproﬁt
organizations are a relatively understudied area, including in
developing economies, where, given their economic condition,
there is a great need for social organizations, perhaps even more
so than in developed countries (Ernst et al., 2015; Sheth,
2011). As an example of research gaps, Garg et al. (2019)
proposed a metric for brand effectiveness that encompasses the
concepts of brand image, brand identity and brand
performance. They based their ﬁndings on a sample of
nonproﬁt organizations from northern India, but they did not
explore the barriers to implementation of this approach in
nonproﬁt organizations.
Brieﬂy, because of the dispersion and fragmentation of
research on nonproﬁt branding, especially as it is considered a
recent subject, it is not possible to identify theoretical areas of
greater interest, and, based on the six clusters analysis, we

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Table II Research opportunities
Main topic

Future research

Brand and
donation

Examine the effects of rewards or motivations on intention to donate time, money and/or goods (Michaelidou et al., 2015b; Shehu
et al., 2016)
Analyze how individuals make choices about donations under the inﬂuence of different factors, such as reliability and familiarity,
and in different contexts (Katz, 2018)
In addition, the use of marketing research can be studied in a nonproﬁt context
Regarding the works that deal with speciﬁc strategies and brand concepts in the nonproﬁt sector, future studies could explore the
complexity of rebranding implementation (Lee, 2013) as well as investigating the consequences in practice (Plewa et al., 2011). It
would also be relevant to explore those organizations that failed to adopt this strategy (Lee and Bourne, 2017). In addition, it would
be interesting to explore employee involvement in the rebranding process (Chad, 2015)
Because of the success of different nonproﬁt brand strategies, which other brand strategies could be applied to the nonproﬁt sector?
Does the strategy require an adaptation from the for-proﬁt sector?
In general, it is necessary to carry out research that looks at how brand management can improve the general marketing strategy of
the nonproﬁt organization (Mort et al., 2007; Baghi and Gabrielli, 2013)
Also, it would be interesting to ﬁnd out which types of nonproﬁt organizations use brand strategies effectively
Brand orientation, and more precisely the barriers to implementation, seems to be slightly veriﬁed. However, this strategy can be
considered an antecedent of many other strategies, such as brand engagement and brand equity (Wong and Merrilees, 2005; Zhang
et al., 2016), which could be further researched. Liu et al. (2015) suggest developing an integrated internal branding model as well
as exploring the effects of brand orientation culture in nonproﬁt organizations
In relation to the nonproﬁt’s brand strength, it can be veriﬁed whether it is antecedent to the desired results of marketing (Wymer
et al., 2016)
Also, future research could discuss the validity of brand concepts in the nonproﬁt context
A challenge in partnerships between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations seems to be the use of indicators to quantify the gains
and returns on both sides. This seems to be more difﬁcult in small and less well-known nonproﬁt organizations. Having said that, we
suggested research that seeks to understand the motivations of these partnerships and how the brand impacts this partnership
process
For-proﬁt organizations have been increasingly concerned about social responsibility and sustainability. One suggestion is that this
concern can positively inﬂuence the partnership relations between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations, increasing the interest of
for-proﬁt organizations in looking for partnerships
It might be interesting to look how closely corporate foundations share brand image with their corporate brothers. For instance, how
does the brand image of the ﬁrm foundation differ from ﬁrm itself
In the virtual context, there is a need to investigate the antecedents and consequents of the implementation of social media at the
nonproﬁt organizational level (Goldkind, 2015) as well as the creation of new online branding communications (Chapleo, 2015)
Studies can further investigate how the information provided by the website contributes to the nonproﬁt’s brand image (Huang and
Ku, 2016). In addition, it is recommended that studies and their propositions be tested on different social media platforms (Burton
et al., 2017; Algharabat et al., 2018)
It is important to investigate the emphasis on advertising campaigns, mainly to create a brand image. That is, does the
communication in nonproﬁt organizations aim to raise awareness of the cause or to increase donations? Is it better to use an
appealing tone linked to the problem that the nonproﬁt organization seeks to minimize or to show the reality beneﬁted by that
nonproﬁt organization? (Vestergaard, 2008)
More research on the use of brand promotion channels, such as social media, and advertisements on various vehicles, can be useful
for brand development in nonproﬁt organizations, a strategy that can contribute signiﬁcantly to the performance of this type of
organization
A challenge is how to deliver effective communication that can support the nonproﬁt brand through social media marketing, online
marketing and traditional marketing (Chapleo, 2015)
It should be noted how social media is currently used in nonproﬁt organizations to disseminate information about the organization,
to promote sponsors and to advertise volunteering opportunities, forms of donations, online stores and events calendars
The main nonproﬁt organizations` stakeholders used to be the donors and beneﬁciaries. However, it would be interesting to
investigate the relation between these groups of stakeholders, for example, to verify whether testimonials or actions that materialize
the beneﬁts achieved by the nonproﬁt organization for the beneﬁciaries can improve the intention to donate time, money and/or
goods (Yoo and Drumwright, 2018)
It would be interesting to investigate, based on ﬁnancial measures, the impact of the use of brand strategies on stakeholders to
create empirical and quantiﬁable evidence of the beneﬁts pointed out in the literature, especially ﬁnancial (such as marketing share,
ROI), which is an important argument to many stakeholders. Indeed, performance indicators seem to be little explored in nonproﬁt
organizations, although they are widely used in for-proﬁt sectors

Brand
management

Brand
orientation

Nonproﬁt and
for-proﬁt
partnerships

Communication
strategies

Stakeholder
management

Source: Own elaboration

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

observed a range of opportunities to conduct more research,
but we did not observe any subject that may be considered
exhausted. As an example, although the relationship between
brand and donations has been widely explored over time, there
are still gaps such as how the different external factors inﬂuence
the intention to donate, and the motivations that lead to
different types of donation such as time, goods and money
(Katz, 2018; Michaelidou et al., 2015b; Shehu et al., 2016).
Even the brand management cluster, which gathers fewer
current studies, also brings research opportunities such as the
barriers and consequences of rebranding in nonproﬁt
organizations (Lee, 2013; Plewa et al., 2011). In addition to the
limitations of clusters, it would even be interesting to note
which types of organizations (such as arts, culture, human
rights, education, research, environmental, animal, health,
human services, international issues, foreign affairs, public
issues, societal beneﬁt, religious and mutual/membership
beneﬁt) are further studied or which derive more beneﬁts
within the theme of nonproﬁt branding. In short, the identiﬁed
possibilities to nonproﬁt branding research based on each
cluster were summarized in Table II.
Several studies have very speciﬁc limitations, such as
geographic and cultural ones (Algharabat et al., 2018; Bebko
et al., 2014; Herlin, 2015; Huang and Ku, 2016; Katz, 2018;
Liu et al., 2017; Maier, 2016; Michaelidou et al., 2015a; Shehu
et al., 2016) because most articles focus on the USA, the UK,
Canada and Australia. In view of the above, it would be
interesting to understand the relevant differences and
preferences of studies in the USA and UK, for example.
Another obstacle in carrying out several works was the
impossibility of generalizing the results proposed because they
have a limited sample and are restricted to certain nonproﬁt
contexts (Casidy, 2014; Chad, 2015; Durgee, 2016; Herlin,
2015; Huang and Ku, 2016; Maier, 2016; Michaelidou et al.,
2015a, 2015b; Plewa et al., 2011; Shehu et al., 2016). Also,
several authors have suggested verifying the validation of their
results, such as the proposed scales (Vallaster and von
Wallpach, 2018; Boenigk and Becker, 2016; Curran et al.,
2016; Wymer et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2014; Apaydin, 2011;
Hassay and Peloza, 2009).

7. Conclusion
In conclusion, the size and complexity of the nonproﬁt sector
result in studies that are unlikely to be representative of all
nonproﬁts (Lee and Bourne, 2017). Thus, as a main theoretical
contribution, the study identiﬁed six research avenues in
nonproﬁt branding that emerge from our data, named brand
and donation, brand management, brand orientation,
nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt partnerships, communication
strategies and stakeholder management. The development of
each research avenue was analyzed, and a future research
agenda was proposed.
Beyond the theoretical contributions, each cluster also brings
practical contributions as the brand concepts (such as brand
image and brand personality) and how it can affect donations
(positively or not); the importance of brand management to
persuade people to join the cause; the evidence that brand
orientation can support the development of activities and
structure of nonproﬁt organizations; brand practices to support

and build mutually beneﬁcial partnerships between nonproﬁt
and for-proﬁt companies; the impacts of communication, with
a special focus on social media and stakeholder in building
nonproﬁt brands.
We had noticed that, despite the peculiarities of each
research avenue, it is necessary to take into account the existing
cultural diversiﬁcation among countries, in addition to the
difference between the various nonproﬁt sectors, which have
many different causes and sizes. Also, the research is
concentrated in a few countries, as previously mentioned,
which results in a range of opportunities. Finally, we realize that
the researches could be more aligned with the practical
decisions of nonproﬁt managers by giving more attention to
indicators that highlight the gains generated by investing in
nonproﬁt branding strategies.

References


The articles preceded by asterisks were used to compose the database
of this study.

Aaker, J., Vohs, K.D. and Mogilner, C. (2010), “Nonproﬁts
are seen as warm and for-proﬁts as competent: ﬁrm
stereotypes matter”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 37
No. 2, pp. 224-237.

Algharabat, R., Rana, N.P., Dwivedi, Y.K., Alalwan, A.A. and
Qasem, Z. (2018), “The effect of telepresence, social
presence and involvement on consumer brand engagement:
an empirical study of non-proﬁt organizations”, Journal of
Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 40, pp. 139-149.
Anees-Ur-Rehman, M., Wong, H.Y. and Hossain, M. (2016),
“The progression of brand orientation literature in twenty
years: a systematic literature review”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 23 No. 6, pp. 612-630.

Apaydin, F. (2011), “A proposed model of antecedents and
outcomes of brand orientation for nonproﬁt sector”, Asian
Social Science, Vol. 7 No. 9, p. 194.
Arnett, D.B., German, S.D. and Hunt, S.D. (2003), “The
identity salience model of relationship marketing success: the
case of nonproﬁt marketing”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 67
No. 2, pp. 89-105.

Baghi, I. and Gabrielli, V. (2013), “Co-branded cause-related
marketing campaigns: the importance of linking two strong
brands”, International Review on Public and Nonproﬁt
Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 13-29.

Bebko, C., Sciulli, L.M. and Bhagat, P. (2014), “Using eye
tracking to assess the impact of advertising appeals on donor
behavior”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector Marketing,
Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 354-371.

Becker-Olsen, K.L. and Hill, R.P. (2006), “The impact of
sponsor ﬁt on brand equity: the case of nonproﬁt service
providers”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 73-83.
Bennett, R. and Sargeant, A. (2005), “The nonproﬁt marketing
landscape: guest editors’ introduction to a special section”,
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 797-805.

Boenigk, S. and Becker, A. (2016), “Toward the importance
of nonproﬁt brand equity: results from a study of German
nonproﬁt organizations”, Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 181-198.

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.


Boenigk, S. and Schuchardt, V. (2015), “Nonproﬁt
collaboration with luxury brands: positive and negative
effects for cause-related marketing”, Nonproﬁt and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly, Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 708-733.
Börner, K., Chen, C. and Boyack, K.W. (2003), “Visualizing
knowledge domains”, Annual Review of Information Science
and Technology, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 179-255.

Burton, S., Soboleva, A., Daellenbach, K., Basil, D.Z.,
Beckman, T. and Deshpande, S. (2017), “Helping those
who help us: co-branded and co-created twitter promotion in
CSR partnerships”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 24
No. 4, pp. 322-333.
Callon, M., Courtial, J.P., Turner, W.A. and Bauin, S. (1983),
“From translations to problematic networks: an introduction
to co-word analysis”, Social Science Information), Vol. 22
No. 2, pp. 191-235.

Casidy, R. (2014), “Linking brand orientation with service
quality, satisfaction, and positive word-of-mouth: evidence
from the higher education sector”, Journal of Nonproﬁt &
Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 142-161.

Chad, P. (2015), “Utilising a change management perspective
to examine the implementation of corporate rebranding in a
non-proﬁt SME”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 22
No. 7, pp. 569-587.
Chad, P., Motion, J. and Kyriazis, E. (2013), “A praxis
framework for implementing market orientation into
charities”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector Marketing,
Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 28-55.
Chang, W.J. and Chung, Y.C. (2016), “A review of brand
research (1990–2010): classiﬁcation, application and
development trajectory”, International Journal of Services
Technology and Management, Vol. 22 Nos 1/2, pp. 74-105.

Chapleo, C. (2015), “Brand ‘infrastructure’ in nonproﬁt
organizations: challenges to successful brand building?”,
Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 199209.
Cobo, M.J., L
opez-Herrera, A.G., Herrera-Viedma, E. and
Herrera, F. (2011), “Science mapping software tools: review,
analysis, and cooperative study among tools”, Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, Vol.
62 No. 7, pp. 1382-1402.
Cook, D. (1997), “Systematic reviews: the case for rigorous
methods and rigorous reporting”, Canadian Journal of
Anaesthesia, Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 350-353.
Cook, D.J., Mulrow, C.D. and Haynes, R.B. (1997),
“Systematic reviews: synthesis of best evidence for clinical
decisions”, Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 126 No. 5,
pp. 376-380.

Cooke, D. (2010), “Building social capital through corporate
social investment”, Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Business
Administration, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 71-87.

Curran, R. and Taheri, B. (2019), “Enhancing volunteer
experiences: using communitas to improve engagement and
commitment”, The Service Industries Journal, doi: 10.1080/
02642069.2019.1602609.

Curran, R., Taheri, B., MacIntosh, R. and O’Gorman, K.
(2016), “Nonproﬁt brand heritage: its ability to inﬂuence
volunteer retention, engagement, and satisfaction”, Nonproﬁt
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 45 No. 6, pp. 1234-1257.

Denyer, D. and Tranﬁeld, D. (2006), “Using qualitative
research synthesis to build an actionable knowledge base”,
Management Decision, Vol. 44 No. 2, pp. 213-227.

Doma
nski, J. (2011), “The analysis and synthesis of strategic
management research in the third sector from early 2000
through to mid-2009”, Foundations of Management, Vol. 3
No. 2, pp. 27-40.

Durgee, J.F. (2016), “Exploring what nonproﬁt branding can
learn from contemporary art”, International Journal of
Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 21 No. 2,
pp. 73-81.

Dvorakova, L. and Mackova, M. (2014), “Fundraising and its
realization in community services providing”, Erjyjvixybq
xacjgbc-{{I, Vols 9/10 No. 1, pp. 89-93.

Eagleman, A.N. (2013), “Acceptance, motivations, and usage
of social media as a marketing communications tool amongst
employees of sport national governing bodies”, Sport
Management Review, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 488-497.
Egghe, L. and Rousseau, R. (2002), “Co-citation, bibliographic
coupling and a characterization of lattice citation networks”,
Scientometrics, Vol. 55 No. 3, pp. 349-361.
Ernst, H., Kahle, H.N., Dubiel, A., Prabhu, J. and
Subramaniam, M. (2015), “The antecedents and
consequences of affordable value innovations for emerging
markets”, Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 32
No. 1, pp. 65-79.
Evans, J., Bridson, K. and Rentschler, R. (2012), “Drivers,
impediments and manifestations of brand orientation: an
international museum study”, European Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 46 Nos 11/12, pp. 1457-1475.

Ewing, M.T. and Napoli, J. (2005), “Developing and validating
a multidimensional nonproﬁt brand orientation scale”, Journal
of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 841-853.

Faircloth, J.B. (2005), “Factors inﬂuencing nonproﬁt
resource provider support decisions: applying the brand
equity concept to nonproﬁts”, Journal of Marketing Theory
and Practice, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 1-15.

Garg, E., Swami, S. and Malhotra, S.K. (2019), “Branding
effectiveness measurement in non-proﬁt environment”,
Journal of Advances in Management Research, Vol. 16 No. 1,
pp. 4-22.

Goldkind, L. (2015), “Social media and social service: are
nonproﬁts plugged in to the digital age?”, Human Service
Organizations: Management, Leadership and Governance,
Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 380-396.

Halbert, J.C. and McDowell, W.S. (2013), “Sustaining local
radio journalism: a case study of the WLRN/Miami herald
strategic alliance”, Journal of Radio & Audio Media, Vol. 20
No. 1, pp. 17-34.
Hankinson, P. (2000), “Brand orientation in charity
organisations: qualitative research into key charity sectors”,
International Journal of Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 207-219.

Hankinson, P., Lomax, W. and Hand, C. (2007), “The time
factor in re-branding organizations: its effects on staff
knowledge, attitudes and behaviour in UK charities”, Journal
of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 236-246.

Hassay, D.N. and Peloza, J. (2009), “Building the charity
brand community”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector
Marketing, Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 24-55.

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.


Herlin, H. (2015), “Better safe than sorry: nonproﬁt
organizational legitimacy and cross-sector partnerships”,
Business & Society, Vol. 54 No. 6, pp. 822-858.
Hibbert, S. and Horne, S. (1996), “Giving to charity:
questioning the donor decision process”, Journal of Consumer
Marketing, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 4-13.
Hommerová, D. and Severová, L. (2019), “Fundraising of
nonproﬁt organizations: speciﬁcs and new possibilities”,
Journal of Social Service Research, Vol. 45 No. 2, pp. 181-192.
Hopkins, C.D., Shanahan, K.J. and Raymond, M.A. (2014),
“The moderating role of religiosity on nonproﬁt
advertising”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 67 No. 2,
pp. 23-31.
Hou, J., Zhang, C. and King, R.A. (2018), “Measuring trust
damage in nonproﬁt marketing: the role of cognitive and
emotional perceptions”, International Review on Public and
Nonproﬁt Marketing, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 25-47.

Huang, S.L. and Ku, H.H. (2016), “Brand image
management for nonproﬁt organizations: exploring the
relationships between websites, brand images and
donations”, Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, Vol. 17
No. 1, pp. 80-96.
Jarneving, B. (2005), “A comparison of two bibliometric
methods for mapping of the research front”, Scientometrics,
Vol. 65 No. 2, pp. 245-263.

Jordan, E.G. (2018), “Corporate partners and charities: a
movember perspective on strategic brand alignment,
fostering mutually beneﬁcial goals, and outcomes in nonproﬁt sponsorship”, Journal of Brand Strategy, Vol. 7 No. 1,
pp. 6-12.

Katz, H. (2018), “The impact of familiarity and perceived
trustworthiness and inﬂuence on donations to nonproﬁts: an
unaided recall study”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector
Marketing, Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 187-199.
Kessler, M.M. (1963), “Bibliographic coupling between
scientiﬁc papers”, American Documentation, Vol. 14 No. 1,
pp. 10-25.

Khan, H. and Ede, D. (2009), “How do not-for-proﬁt SMEs
attempt to develop a strong brand in an increasingly
saturated market?”, Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
Development, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 335-354.

Kleinschafer, J., Morrison, M. and Dowell, D. (2018), “The
importance of the service encounter in inﬂuencing identity
salience and volunteering behavior in the cultural sector”,
International Review on Public and Nonproﬁt Marketing,
Vol. 15 No. 4, pp. 455-474.

Laidler-Kylander, N., Quelch, J.A. and Simonin, B.L. (2007),
“Building and valuing global brands in the nonproﬁt sector”,
Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership, Vol. 17 No. 3,
pp. 253-277.

Lee, Z. (2013), “Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations:
exploring tensions in the nonproﬁt sector”, Journal of
Marketing Management, Vol. 29 Nos 9/10, pp. 1124-1142.

Lee, Z. and Bourne, H. (2017), “Managing dual identities in
nonproﬁt rebranding: an exploratory study”, Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 794-816.
Lee, Z. and Davies, I. (2019), “Navigating relative invariance:
perspectives on corporate heritage identity and
organizational heritage identity in an evolving nonproﬁt

institution”, Journal of Business Research, doi: 10.1016/j.
jbusres.2019.05.038.

Lee, A.H., Wall, G. and Kovacs, J.F. (2015), “Creative food
clusters and rural development through place branding:
culinary tourism initiatives in Stratford and Muskoka, Ontario,
Canada”, Journal of Rural Studies, Vol. 39, pp. 133-144.
Li, H., An, H., Wang, Y., Huang, J. and Gao, X. (2016),
“Evolutionary features of academic articles co-keyword
network and keywords co-occurrence network: based on
two-mode afﬁliation network”, Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and Its Applications, Vol. 450, pp. 657-669.

Lithopoulos, A., Dacin, P.A., Berry, T.R., Faulkner, G.,
O’Reilly, N., Rhodes, R.E., Spence, J.C., Tremblay, M.S.,
Vanderloo, L.M. and Latimer-Cheung, A.E. (2018),
“Examining the Participaction brand using the brand
equity pyramid”, Journal of Social Marketing, Vol. 8 No. 4,
pp. 378-396.

Liu, B.F. (2012), “Toward a better understanding of
nonproﬁt communication management”, Journal of
Communication Management, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 388-404.

Liu, G., Eng, T.Y. and Sekhon, Y.K. (2014), “Managing
branding and legitimacy: a study of charity retail sector”,
Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 43 No. 4,
pp. 629-651.

Liu, G., Ko, W.W. and Chapleo, C. (2017), “Managing
employee attention and internal branding”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 79, pp. 1-11.

Liu, G., Chapleo, C., Ko, W.W. and Ngugi, I.K. (2015),
“The role of internal branding in nonproﬁt brand
management: an empirical investigation”, Nonproﬁt and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 44 No. 2, pp. 319-339.

Lloyd, S. and Woodside, A.G. (2015), “Advancing paradox
resolution theory for interpreting non-proﬁt, commercial,
entrepreneurial strategies”, Journal of Strategic Marketing,
Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 3-18.
Losiewicz, P., Oard, D.W. and Kostoff, R.N. (2000), “Textual
data mining to support science and technology
management”, Journal of Intelligent Information Systems,
Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 99-119.

Lwin, M. and Phau, I. (2014), “An exploratory study of
existential guilt appeals in charitable advertisements”,
Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 30 Nos 13/14,
pp. 1467-1485.
McKibbon, A. (2006), “Systematic reviews and librarians”,
Library Trends, Vol. 55 No. 1, pp. 202-215.

McMullan, K., Rehal, P., Read, K., Luo, J., Huating Wu, A.,
Pitt, L. and Campbell, C. (2009), “Selling the Canadian
forces’ brand to Canada’s youth”, Marketing Intelligence &
Planning, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 474-485.

Maier, C.T. (2016), “Beyond branding: van riel and fombrun’s
corporate communication theory in the human services
sector”, Qualitative Research Reports in Communication, Vol. 17
No. 1, pp. 27-35.
Maier, F., Meyer, M. and Steinbereithner, M. (2016),
“Nonproﬁt organizations becoming business-like: a
systematic review”, Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 64-86.
Marchiori, D. and Mendes, L. (2018), “Knowledge
management and total quality management: foundations,
intellectual structures, insights regarding evolution of the

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

literature”, Total Quality Management & Business Excellence,
pp. 1-35.
Martínez-L
opez, F.J., Merig
o, J.M., Valenzuela-Fernández, L.
and Nicolás, C. (2018), “Fifty years of the European journal
of marketing: a bibliometric analysis”, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 52 Nos 1/2, pp. 439-468.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M. and Cadogan, J.W. (2015a),
“An evaluation of nonproﬁt brand image: towards a better
conceptualization and measurement”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 68 No. 8, pp. 1657-1666.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M. and Siamagka, N.T. (2015b),
“Consumers’ intention to donate to two children’s charity
brands: a comparison of Barnardo’s and BBC children in
need”, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 24
No. 2, pp. 134-146.

Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M., Kadic-Maglajlic, S.,
Budhathoki, T. and Sarkar, S. (2019), “Does non-proﬁt
brand image mean the same across cultures? An exploratory
evaluation of non-proﬁt brand image in three countries”,
International Marketing Review, Vol. 36 No. 6, pp. 979-995.

Michel, G. and Rieunier, S. (2012), “Nonproﬁt brand image
and typicality inﬂuences on charitable giving”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 65 No. 5, pp. 701-707.

Miller, D. and Merrilees, B. (2013), “Rebuilding community
corporate brands: a total stakeholder involvement
approach”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 66 No. 2,
pp. 172-179.

Mitchell, M.A. and Mitchell, S.J. (2001), “Consumer
experience tourism: a powerful tool for food and beverage
producers”, Journal of Food Products Marketing, Vol. 6 No. 3,
pp. 1-16.
Modi, P. and Sahi, G.K. (2018), “Toward a greater
understanding of the market orientation and internal market
orientation relationship”, Journal of Strategic Marketing,
Vol. 26 No. 6, pp. 532-549.

Mort, G.S., Weerawardena, J. and Williamson, B. (2007),
“Branding in the non-proﬁt context: the case of surf life
saving Australia”, Australasian Marketing Journal (Amj),
Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 108-119.

Mulyanegara, R.C. (2011), “The relationship between market
orientation, brand orientation and perceived beneﬁts in the
non-proﬁt sector: a customer-perceived paradigm”, Journal
of Strategic Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 5, pp. 429-441.
National Center for Charitable Statistics (2019), “The
nonproﬁt sector in brief”, available at: https://nccs.urban.
org/publication/nonproﬁt-sector-brief-2018 (accessed 7
February 2019).

Nguyen, C., Romaniuk, J., Faulkner, M. and Cohen, J.
(2018), “Does an expanded brand user base of co-branded
advertising help ad-memorability?”, International Journal of
Market Research, Vol. 60 No. 4, pp. 366-379.

Nolan, L. (2015), “The impact of executive personal branding
on non-proﬁt perception and communications”, Public
Relations Review, Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 288-292.

Padanyi, P. and Gainer, B. (2003), “Peer reputation in the
nonproﬁt sector: its role in nonproﬁt sector management”,
Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 252-265.

Palakshappa, N., Bulmer, S., Eweje, G. and Kitchen, P.
(2010), “Integrated strategic partnerships between business
and not-for-proﬁt organisations: a case study from

New Zealand”, Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 16
No. 4, pp. 255-268.

Park, S.Y., Hitchon, J.B. and Yun, G.W. (2004), “The
effects of brand familiarity in alignment advertising”,
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 81
No. 4, pp. 750-765.
Peacock, M. (2000), “Charity ends with lottery: it ain’t what
you give, it’s the way that you give it”, New Economy, Vol. 7
No. 2, pp. 120-123.

Plewa, C., Lu, V. and Veale, R. (2011), “The impact of
rebranding on club member relationships”, Asia Paciﬁc Journal
of Marketing and Logistics, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 222-242.
Pritchard, A. (1969), “Statistical bibliography or bibliometrics”,
Journal of Documentation, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 348-349.

Randle, M., Leisch, F. and Dolnicar, S. (2013), “Competition
or collaboration? The effect of non-proﬁt brand image on
volunteer recruitment strategy”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 20 No. 8, pp. 689-704.

Reeves, M. (2013), “Brand partnerships as joint ventures: a
comparison of two partnerships in the small non-proﬁt
arena”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 20 No. 3,
pp. 241-254.
Ritchie, R.J., Swami, S. and Weinberg, C.B. (1999), “A brand
new world for nonproﬁts”, International Journal of Nonproﬁt
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 26-42.

Rodgers, J.L. and Jackson, M.W. (2012), “Are we who we
think we are: evaluating brand promise at a liberal-arts
institution”, Innovative Higher Education, Vol. 37 No. 2,
pp. 153-166.
Romaniuk, J. and Ehrenberg, A. (2012), “Do brands lack
personality?”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 333-339.

Roozen, I. (2013), “The impact of emotional appeal and the
media context on the effectiveness of commercials for notfor-proﬁt and for-proﬁt brands”, Journal of Marketing
Communications, Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 198-214.

Sargeant, A., Ford, J.B. and Hudson, J. (2008a), “Charity
brand personality: the relationship with giving behavior”,
Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 37 No. 3,
pp. 468-491.

Sargeant, A., Hudson, J. and West, D.C. (2008b),
“Conceptualizing brand values in the charity sector: the
relationship between sector, cause and organization”, The
Service Industries Journal, Vol. 28 No. 5, pp. 615-632.

Sarrica, M., Michelon, G., Bobbio, A. and Ligorio, S. (2014),
“Employer branding in nonproﬁt organizations: an
exploration of factors that are related to attractiveness,
identiﬁcation with the organization, and promotion: the case
of emergency”, TPM: Testing, Psychometrics, Methodology in
Applied Psychology, Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 3-20.

Sevilla, E. (2018), “Best practices for aligning university
brands with fundraising campaigns”, Journal of Brand
Strategy, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 69-83.
Sheth, J.N. (2011), “Impact of emerging markets on
marketing: rethinking existing perspectives and practices”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 75 No. 4, pp. 166-182.

Shehu, E., Becker, J.U., Langmaack, A.C. and Clement, M.
(2016), “The brand personality of nonproﬁt organizations
and the inﬂuence of monetary incentives”, Journal of Business
Ethics, Vol. 138 No. 3, pp. 589-600.

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Sinkovics, N. (2016), “Enhancing the foundations for
theorising through bibliometric mapping”, International
Marketing Review, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 327-350.

Stinnett, R.C., Hardy, E.E. and Waters, R.D. (2013), “Who
are we? The impacts of anthropomorphism and the
humanization of nonproﬁts on brand personality”,
International Review on Public and Nonproﬁt Marketing,
Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 31-48.
Stride, H. and Lee, S. (2007), “No logo? No way: branding in
the non-proﬁt sector”, Journal of Marketing Management,
Vol. 23 Nos 1/2, pp. 107-122.
Sundermann, L.M. (2018), “Share experiences: receiving
word of mouth and its effect on relationships with donors”,
Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 322-333.

Thamaraiselvan, N., Arasu, B.S. and Inbaraj, J.D. (2017),
“Role of celebrity in cause related marketing”, International
Review on Public and Nonproﬁt Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 3,
pp 341-357.

Toledano, M. and Riches, M. (2014), “Brand alliance and
event management for social causes: evidence from New
Zealand”, Public Relations Review, Vol. 40 No. 5, pp. 807-814.
Toole, A.A. and Czarnitzki, D. (2010), “Commercializing
science: is there a university ‘brain drain’ from academic
entrepreneurship?”, Management Science, Vol. 56 No. 9,
pp. 1599-1614.

Torres, A.M. (2010), “International committee of the red
cross: emblems of humanity”, Marketing Intelligence &
Planning, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 223-235.
Urde, M. (1994), “Brand orientation–a strategy for survival”,
Journal of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 18-32.
Valenzuela, L.M., Merigo, J.M., Johnston, W.J., Nicolas, C.
and Jaramillo, J.F. (2017), “Thirty years of the journal of
business and industrial marketing: a bibliometric analysis”,
Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, Vol. 32 No. 1,
pp. 1-17.

Vallaster, C. and von Wallpach, S. (2018), “Brand strategy cocreation in a nonproﬁt context: a strategy-as-practice
approach”, Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 47
No. 5, pp. 984-1006.
Van Eck, N. and Waltman, L. (2010), “Software survey:
VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric mapping”,
Scientometrics, Vol. 84 No. 2, pp. 523-538.
Vázquez, R., Álvarez, L.I. and Leticia Santos, M. (2002),
“Market orientation and social services in private non-proﬁt
organisations”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 36
Nos 9/10, pp. 1022-1046.

Venable, B.T., Rose, G.M., Bush, V.D. and Gilbert, F.W.
(2005), “The role of brand personality in charitable giving:
an assessment and validation”, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 295-312.

Vestergaard, A. (2008), “Humanitarian branding and the
media: the case of Amnesty international”, Journal of
Language and Politics, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 471-493.

Voeth, M. and Herbst, U. (2008), “The concept of brand
personality as an instrument for advanced non-proﬁt
branding – an empirical analysis”, Journal of Nonproﬁt &
Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 71-97.
Waltman, L., Van Eck, N.J. and Noyons, E.C. (2010), “A
uniﬁed approach to mapping and clustering of

bibliometric networks”, Journal of Informetrics, Vol. 4 No.
4, pp. 629-635.
Wang, Q. and Waltman, L. (2016), “Large-scale analysis of the
accuracy of the journal classiﬁcation systems of web of
science and scopus”, Journal of Informetrics, Vol. 10 No. 2,
pp. 347-364.

Waters, R.D. and Jones, P.M. (2011), “Using video to
build an organization’s identity and brand: a content
analysis of nonproﬁt organizations’ YouTube videos”,
Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 23
No. 3, pp. 248-268.

Waters, R.D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A. and Lucas, J. (2009),
“Engaging stakeholders through social networking: how
nonproﬁt organizations are using facebook”, Public Relations
Review, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 102-106.
Weir, L. and Hibbert, S. (2000), “Building donor
relationships: an investigation into the use of relationship and
database marketing by charity fundraisers”, The Service
Industries Journal, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 114-132.

Winston, C. (2017), “Nonproﬁt product placement: human
rights advocacy in ﬁlm and television”, Atlantic Journal of
Communication, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 17-32.
Wong, H.Y. and Merrilees, B. (2005), “A brand orientation
typology for SMEs: a case research approach”, Journal
of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 14 No. 3,
pp. 155-162.

Woolf, J., Heere, B. and Walker, M. (2013), “Do charity sport
events function as ‘brandfests’ in the development of brand
community?”, Journal of Sport Management, Vol. 27 No. 2,
pp. 95-107.

Wymer, W. and Akbar, M.M. (2017), “Brand authenticity, its
conceptualization, and its relevance to nonproﬁt marketing”,
International Review on Public and Nonproﬁt Marketing,
Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 359-374.

Wymer, W., Boenigk, S. and Möhlmann, M. (2015), “The
conceptualization of nonproﬁt marketing orientation: a
critical reﬂection and contributions toward closing the
practice–theory gap”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector
Marketing, Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 117-134.

Wymer, W., Gross, H.P. and Helmig, B. (2016),
“Nonproﬁt brand strength: what is it? How is it measured?
What are its outcomes?”, VOLUNTAS: International
Journal of Voluntary and Nonproﬁt Organizations, Vol. 27
No. 3, pp. 1448-1471.
Yoo, S.C. and Drumwright, M. (2018), “Nonproﬁt
fundraising with virtual reality”, Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 11-27.
Zhang, J., Jiang, Y., Shabbir, R. and Zhu, M. (2016), “How
brand orientation impacts B2B service brand equity? An
empirical study among Chinese ﬁrms”, Journal of Business &
Industrial Marketing, Vol. 31 No. 1, pp. 83-98.

Further reading


Henley, T.K. (2001), “Integrated marketing communications
for local nonproﬁt organizations: messages in nonproﬁt
communications”, Journal of Nonproﬁt & Public Sector
Marketing, Vol. 9 Nos 1/2, pp. 179-184.
Kotler, P. and Levy, S.J. (1969), “Broadening the concept of
marketing”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 10-15.

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Lindahl, W.E. and Conley, A.T. (2002), “Literature review:
philanthropic fundraising”, Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 91-112.

Mosel, C. (2018), “The art of ‘philanthroship’: blending nonproﬁt and corporate goals for outside-the-box partnerships
beneﬁtting brand and community”, Journal of Brand
Strategy, Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 154-162.
Napoli, J. (2006), “The impact of nonproﬁt brand orientation
on organisational performance”, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 22 Nos 7/8, pp. 673-694.
Noble, C.H., Sinha, R.K. and Kumar, A. (2002), “Market
orientation and alternative strategic orientations: a
longitudinal assessment of performance implications”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 66 No. 4, pp. 25-39.

Pietroburgo, J. and Wernet, S.P. (2004), “Joining forces,
fortunes, and futures: restructuring and adaptation in
nonproﬁt hospice organizations”, Nonproﬁt Management and
Leadership, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 117-137.
Theodorou, R. and Tsoubrakakou, A. (2016), “658.8:
marketing for academic libraries”, Qualitative and
Quantitative Methods in Libraries, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 61-70.
Valentine, D.B. and Powers, R.T. (2006), “The development of
a promotion plan to improve public awareness for a non-proﬁt
agency”, Social Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 51-57.
Wymer, W. (2015), “Nonproﬁt brand strength’s moderational
role”, Ekonomski Vjesnik: Review of Contemporary
Entrepreneurship, Business, and Economic Issues, Vol. 28 No. S,
pp. 155-166.

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Appendix
Table AI Articles per cluster (sorted by quantity of articles)

No.

Authors

Title

1
2
3
4

Venable et al. (2005)
Michel and Rieunier (2012)
Sargeant et al. (2008a)
Faircloth (2005)

5

Voeth and Herbst (2008)

6

Sargeant et al. (2008b)

7

Lee et al. (2015)

8

Hankinson et al. (2007)

9

Huang and Ku (2016)

10

Stinnett et al.(2013)

11

Michaelidou et al. (2015a)

12
13

Lwin and Phau (2014)
Shehu et al. (2016)

14

Michaelidou et al. (2015b)

15
16

Plewa et al. (2011)
Boenigk and Becker (2016)

17

Sarrica et al. (2014)

18

Katz (2018)

19

Kleinschafer et al. (2018)

20
21

Lithopoulos et al. (2018)
Michaelidou et al. (2019)

22

Casidy (2014)

23
24
25

Lee (2013)
Miller and Merrilees (2013)
Mulyanegara (2011)

26

Curran et al. (2016)

27
28

Liu et al. (2017)
Wymer et al. (2015)

29
30

Liu et al. (2015)
Chapleo (2015)

The role of brand personality in charitable giving: an assessment and validation
Nonproﬁt brand image and typicality inﬂuences on charitable giving
Charity brand personality: the relationship with giving behavior
Factors inﬂuencing nonproﬁt resource provider support decisions: applying the brand
equity concept to nonproﬁts
The concept of brand personality as an instrument for advanced non-proﬁt branding –
an empirical analysis
Conceptualizing brand values in the charity sector: the relationship between sector,
cause and organization
Creative food clusters and rural development through place branding: culinary tourism
initiatives in Stratford and Muskoka, Ontario, Canada
The time factor in re-branding organizations: its effects on staff knowledge, attitudes
and behaviour in UK charities
Brand image management for nonproﬁt organizations: exploring the relationships
between websites, brand images and donations
Who are we? The impacts of anthropomorphism and the humanization of nonproﬁts on
brand personality
An evaluation of nonproﬁt brand image: towards a better conceptualization and
measurement
An exploratory study of existential guilt appeals in charitable advertisements
The brand personality of nonproﬁt organizations and the inﬂuence of monetary
incentives
Consumers’ intention to donate to two children’s charity brands: a comparison of
Barnardo’s and BBC Children in Need
The impact of rebranding on club member relationships
Toward the importance of nonproﬁt brand equity: results from a study of German
nonproﬁt organizations
Employer branding in nonproﬁt organizations. an exploration of factors that are related
to attractiveness, identiﬁcation with the organization, and promotion: the case of
emergency
The impact of familiarity and perceived trustworthiness and inﬂuence on donations to
nonproﬁts: an unaided recall study
The importance of the service encounter in inﬂuencing identity salience and
volunteering behavior in the cultural sector
Examining the ParticipACTION brand using the brand equity pyramid
Does non-proﬁt brand image mean the same across cultures? an exploratory evaluation
of non-proﬁt brand image in three countries
Linking brand orientation with service quality, satisfaction, and positive word-of-mouth:
evidence from the higher education sector
Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations: exploring tensions in the nonproﬁt sector
Rebuilding community corporate brands: a total stakeholder involvement approach
The relationship between market orientation, brand orientation and perceived beneﬁts
in the non-proﬁt sector: a customer-perceived paradigm
Nonproﬁt brand heritage: its ability to inﬂuence volunteer retention, engagement, and
satisfaction
Managing employee attention and internal branding
The conceptualization of nonproﬁt marketing orientation: a critical reﬂection and
contributions toward closing the practice–theory gap
The role of internal branding in nonproﬁt brand management: an empirical investigation
Brand ‘infrastructure’ in nonproﬁt organizations: challenges to successful brand
building?

Cluster
1

No. of
citations
145
53
40
30
24
22
16
10
10
8
7
6
6
5
5
3
1

0
0
0
0
3

24
16
16
15
11
10
10
7
6
(continued)

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Table AI
No.

Authors

Title

31
32

Liu et al. (2014)
Apaydin (2011)

33
34
35

Lee and Bourne (2017)
Rodgers and Jackson (2012)
Curran and Taheri (2019)

36

Maier (2016)

37
38
39

Wymer and Akbar (2017)
Garg et al. (2019)
Waters et al. (2009)

40

Eagleman (2013)

41
42
43
44
45
46
47

Laidler-Kylander et al. (2007)
Mort et al. (2007)
Goldkind (2015)
Bebko et al. (2014)
Liu (2012)
Cooke (2010)
Randle et al. (2013)

48

Burton et al. (2017)

49

Baghi and Gabrielli (2013)

50
51

Thamaraiselvan et al. (2017)
Palakshappa et al. (2010)

52
53

Torres (2010)
Domanski (2011)

54
55

Nguyen et al. (2018)
Waters and Jones (2011)

56

Woolf et al. (2013)

57
58
59

Hassay and Peloza (2009)
Herlin (2015)
Algharabat et al. (2018)

60

Boenigk and Schuchardt (2015)

61
62
63

Park et al. (2004)
Toledano and Riches (2014)
Lloyd and Woodside (2015)

64

Reeves (2013)

65

Roozen (2013)

Managing branding and legitimacy: a study of charity retail sector
A proposed model of antecedents and outcomes of brand orientation for nonproﬁt
sector
Managing dual identities in nonproﬁt rebranding: an exploratory study
Are we who we think we are: evaluating brand promise at a liberal-arts institution
Enhancing volunteer experiences: using communitas to improve engagement and
commitment
Beyond branding: Van Riel and Fombrun’s corporate communication theory in the
human services sector
Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance to nonproﬁt marketing
Branding effectiveness measurement in non-proﬁt environment
Engaging stakeholders through social networking: how nonproﬁt organizations are
using Facebook
Acceptance, motivations, and usage of social media as a marketing communications
tool amongst employees of sport national governing bodies
Building and valuing global brands in the nonproﬁt sector
Branding in the non-proﬁt context: the case of Surf Life Saving Australia
Social media and social service: are nonproﬁts plugged in to the digital age?
Using eye tracking to assess the impact of advertising appeals on donor behavior
Toward a better understanding of nonproﬁt communication management
Building social capital through corporate social investment
Competition or collaboration? The effect of non-proﬁt brand image on volunteer
recruitment strategy
Helping those who help us: co-branded and co-created twitter promotion in CSR
partnerships
Co-branded cause-related marketing campaigns: the importance of linking two strong
brands
Role of celebrity in cause related marketing
Integrated strategic partnerships between business and not-for-proﬁt organisations: a
case study from New Zealand
International Committee of the Red Cross: emblems of humanity
The analysis and synthesis of strategic management research in the third sector from
early 2000 through to mid-2009
Does an expanded brand user base of co-branded advertising help ad-memorability?
Using video to build an organization’s identity and brand: a content analysis of
nonproﬁt organizations’ YouTube videos
Do charity sport events function as “brandfests” in the development of brand
community?
Building the charity brand community
Better safe than sorry: nonproﬁt organizational legitimacy and cross-sector partnerships
The effect of telepresence, social presence and involvement on consumer brand
engagement: an empirical study of non-proﬁt organizations
Nonproﬁt collaboration with luxury brands: positive and negative effects for causerelated marketing
The effects of brand familiarity in alignment advertising
Brand alliance and event management for social causes: evidence from New Zealand
Advancing paradox resolution theory for interpreting non-proﬁt, commercial,
entrepreneurial strategies
Brand partnerships as joint ventures: a comparison of two partnerships in the small nonproﬁt arena
The impact of emotional appeal and the media context on the effectiveness of
commercials for not-for-proﬁt and for-proﬁt brands

Cluster

No. of
citations
5
4
2
2
1
1

5

1
0
528
40
23
18
12
9
7
6
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

4

0
45
23
21
21
11
7
7
3
2
0

6

7
(continued)

Nonproﬁt branding

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri et al.

Table AI
No.

Authors

Title

66

Nolan (2015)

67
68
69

Wymer et al. (2016)
Vallaster and Von Wallpach (2018)
Chad (2015)

70
71

Durgee (2016)
Halbert and Mcdowell (2013)

72
73
74
75

Becker-Olsen and Hill (2006)
Ewing and Napoli (2005)
Vestergaard (2008)
Khan and Ede (2009)

76
77

Mcmullan et al. (2009)
Winston (2017)

The impact of executive personal branding on non-proﬁt perception and
communications
Nonproﬁt brand strength: What is it? How is it measured? What are its outcomes?
Brand strategy co-creation in a nonproﬁt context: a strategy-as-practice approach
Utilising a change management perspective to examine the implementation of
corporate rebranding in a non-proﬁt SME
Exploring what nonproﬁt branding can learn from contemporary art
Sustaining local radio journalism: a case study of the WLRN/Miami Herald strategic
alliance
The impact of sponsor ﬁt on brand equity: the case of nonproﬁt service providers
Developing and validating a multidimensional nonproﬁt brand orientation scale
The case of Amnesty International
How do not-for-proﬁt SMEs attempt to develop a strong brand in an increasingly
saturated market?
Selling the Canadian Forces’ brand to Canada’s youth
Nonproﬁt product placement: human rights advocacy in ﬁlm and television

Source: Research data

Corresponding author
Emerson Wagner Mainardes can be contacted at: emerson@
fucape.br

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Cluster

No. of
citations
5
5
3
1
0
0

2

107
94
31
20
2
2

