The intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality: a
critical literature review
Nayla Khan, Diletta Acuti, Linda Lemarie, Giampaolo Viglia

To cite this version:
Nayla Khan, Diletta Acuti, Linda Lemarie, Giampaolo Viglia. The intention-behaviour gap in sustainable
hospitality: a critical literature review. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 2024,
36 (5), pp.1627-1646. ⟨10.1108/IJCHM-06-2023-0840⟩. ⟨hal-04532135⟩

HAL Id: hal-04532135
https://audencia.hal.science/hal-04532135v1
Submitted on 18 Apr 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 - Attribution - Non-commercial use - ShareAlike International License

The intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality: a critical literature
review
Nayla Khan and Diletta Acuti
Department of Strategy, Marketing and Innovation, University of Portsmouth,
Portsmouth, UK

Linda Lemarie
Department of Marketing, Audencia Business School, Nantes, France, and

Giampaolo Viglia
Portsmouth Business School, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK and
Faculty of Social Science and Law, Valencian International University,
Valencia, Spain

Abstract
Purpose. The intention of consumers to behave sustainably is not a reliable predictor of
sustainable hospitality choices. This intention-behaviour gap represents one of the biggest
challenges for marketers and environment-friendly businesses. To address this issue, this study
draws upon the intention-behaviour gap. This study reviews the literature on sustainable
hospitality i) to identify the limitations in the existing literature, ii) to evaluate the extent to
which the intention-behaviour gap is embedded in the hospitality literature, and iii) to provide
practical guidance on how to move research forward in the field of sustainable hospitality.
Methodology. We adopted a five-step process to review and analyse 71 scientific articles
published in 14 Hospitality Journals. We developed a descriptive overview of the literature
showing the publications in this field over the years, the sustainability practices implemented
by companies and consumers, and the setting of the studies. Finally, we conducted a critical
analysis of research in sustainable hospitality adopting the intention-behaviour gap lens.
Findings. Leveraging our descriptive overview and critical analysis, we offer four directions
for future research aimed at addressing the existing limitations in the literature. We encourage
scholars to expand the scope of the research setting, investigate diverse sustainability practices,
integrate existing knowledge on the intention-behaviour gap into sustainable hospitality
research, and combine traditional research methods with emerging technologies.
Implications. This study exposes the theoretical challenge of applying conventional behaviour
theories to sustainable hospitality, prompting a call for framework re-evaluation. It offers
practical insights, empowering researchers, marketers, and policymakers to navigate and
mitigate the intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality.
Originality. The originality of this paper is underscored by its distinctive focus on the unique
intention-behaviour gap within sustainable hospitality, coupled with a compelling call to reevaluate traditional behavioural frameworks. It provides a roadmap for future research in
sustainable hospitality, benefiting researchers, policymakers, and marketers in promoting
sustainable initiatives.
Keywords: Intention-behaviour gap, critical literature review, sustainable consumption,
hospitality
1

1. Introduction
In recent years, elevated consumer awareness of environmental issues has driven the hospitality
industry to embrace sustainable practices. Yadav et al. (2019) note an increase in sustainability
efforts within hospitality in the last decade. Sharma et al. (2023) anticipate sustainability as a
key trend to shape the hospitality industry’s future. However, defining what sustainability
means in hospitality is a challenge due to the diversity of the sector’s activities (Oriade et al.,
2021). As Sloan et al. (2013, p.1) aptly state, “a clear understanding of the issues surrounding
climate change, global warming, air and water pollution, ozone depletion, deforestation, the
loss of biodiversity and global poverty is essential for every future manager in the hospitality
industry.” This statement provides the basis for the notion of sustainability in hospitality:
considering the impact of hospitality activities on nature and society. From a consumer
perspective, considering sustainability entails the adoption of innovative strategies that promote
waste reduction, recycling, energy efficiency, ethical sourcing, community engagement, and
the preservation of cultural heritage, and demonstrating an overall environmental responsibility
(Oriade et al., 2021). These definitions align on the concept of shared responsibility between
hospitality businesses and consumers for the impact of their actions. In this study, we
encompass sustainable hospitality by emphasising responsible practices adopted by both
hospitality businesses and consumers. The objective is to mitigate adverse environmental and
societal effects, promote ethical practices, and contribute to long-term well-being of society.
Acknowledging the sustainability trend and the evolving hospitality sector, many research
studies examine the effects of sustainable development from a consumer perspective. However,
it must be recognized that the results of this body of research are confusing. For example, Jones
et al. (2016) argue that sustainability investments enhance competitiveness and efficiency for
hospitality businesses. Yu et al. (2017) find that prioritising sustainability in hospitality brands
boosts booking intentions. However, data shows that the actual use of sustainable services
within the hospitality sector remains relatively low (Sadiq et al., 2022). Similarly, a
Booking.com (2022) survey with over 30,000 respondents reveals widespread support for
sustainable travel (81%), and a preference for eco-friendly accommodations (78%). However,
data show that green certified hotels do not perform financially better than their uncertified
competitors (Chi et al., 2022). These inconsistencies can be explained by a well-known
phenomenon in the sustainable domain: the gap between consumer intention and actual
consumer behaviour (Viglia and Acuti, 2023).
This intention-behaviour gap poses significant challenges for marketers, environment-friendly
businesses, and non-profit organisations, given that consumer intentions frequently fail to
translate into actual behaviour. It is more true in the hospitality sector, where a change in
consumers’ usual context undermines behavioural continuity. For instance, individuals who
practice recycling at home may forego recycling while on vacation (Oliver et al., 2019). When
moving from home to vacation, strong intentions expressed by tourists to buy local food may
not translate into actual behaviour (Birch and Memery, 2020). Even consumers concerned about
the environment often do not choose sustainable restaurants (Nimri et al., 2021). Consequently,
the prototype of the ideal green consumer is not as widespread as assumed in the literature. To
understand sustainable hospitality, we need to take a different approach to typical consumer
behaviour and distinguish between behaviour on vacation and behaviour at home.
2

Previous research in hospitality often used conventional human behaviour theories. It includes
theory of planned behaviour (Chatterjee and Barbhuiya, 2021; Chin et al., 2018; Dedeoğlu et
al., 2022; Patwary et al., 2022; Teng et al., 2015; Yadav et al., 2019) and norm activation theory
(Burhanudin et al., 2022; Han et al., 2016; Teng et al., 2023). These theories emphasise the
influence of attitudes, values, and beliefs on sustainable behaviour. With the theory of planned
behaviour (TPB) being the most frequently utilized, it underscores that people’s actions depend
on their intentions. Similarly, the theory of reasoned action (TRA) emphasises attitudes and
subjective norms in shaping intentions yet lacks the element of perceived behavioural control.
However, these theories exhibit limitations in the hospitality context (MacInnes et al., 2022).
Trying to promote pro-environmental attitudes, does not always improve sustainable
behaviours such as reusing towels at hotels (Dolnicar et al., 2017). This observation challenges
the predictability of these theories. While these theories have merits and have facilitated
numerous studies, they fail to fully capture the complexities of multiple contextual variables
affecting sustainable behaviour (Agag et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2019). However, within
sustainability, intentions may influence consumer behaviour only under favourable conditions.
It highlights the need for context-specific adaptations given the altered consumer behaviour on
vacation. In studying the sustainable intention-behaviour gap in shopping, Munro et al. (2023)
also encourage scholars to transition from linear TPB to dynamic system-based models,
integrating feedback loops and facilitating learning from diverse stakeholders.
In the field of hospitality, in particular, and given this issue, it is surprising to note that most of
the existing studies rely on surveys and self-reported measures. The validity of these studies
has been questioned, with concerns raised about the potential presence of social desirability
bias, which may reinforce the gap between declared intention and real consumer behaviour
(Karlsson and Dolnicar, 2016). Overestimation bias and lack of rigorous methods are also
identified as issues (ElHaffar et al., 2020). Bangsa and Schlegelmilch (2020) emphasise the
direct impact of methodological bias when measuring self-reported behaviour as an indicator
of actual behaviour. To bridge intention-behaviour gap in hospitality, it is crucial to discuss
methodological issues and emphasise measuring actual behaviour in natural settings. Contrary
to best practices recommendations, existing studies on consumer behaviour in sustainable
hospitality primarily consider consumer intentions as a reliable indicator of subsequent
behaviour (Lin et al., 2022; Ulker-Demirel and Ciftci, 2020). To overcome this issue, it is
crucial to delve into the shift from what consumers intend to what they actually do. Among
other methodological shortcomings in relevant research, there is an emphasis on hotel
establishments at the expense of other sectors (Hall et al., 2016; Nisa et al., 2017). What holds
true for hotels may not necessarily apply to, for example, restaurants, and this limitation is
overlooked.
Prior research papers focused on the intention-behaviour gap. However, they are either limited
to a specific research setting, focus on a particular theoretical perspective like the TPB (Lin and
Roberts, 2020; Ulker-Demirel and Ciftci, 2020), or do not take methodological issues into
account (Hall et al., 2016; Joshi and Rahman, 2015). More importantly, these previous studies
aimed to synthesize research on the gap between intention and behaviour, which is not our
objective here. We recognize this gap, aiming to offer a critical perspective on sustainability
research within hospitality. Considering these gaps, we want to paint a more accurate picture
3

of sustainability research in hospitality. We aim to address the following questions in this
critical literature review:
RQ1. What critical gaps and limitations exist within the current literature on sustainable
hospitality?
RQ2. To what extent do research outcomes regarding sustainable consumption intentions and
behaviour align across various studies and research methods?
RQ3. How can researchers collect reliable data in sustainable hospitality?
The first research question serves to pinpoint gaps in current knowledge, enabling researchers
to identify areas which require further investigation and enhancing understanding of sustainable
hospitality. The second research question evaluates consistency between consumer intentions
and actual behaviours across numerous studies and research methods, guiding decision-making
in sustainable hospitality. The final research question seek to provide valuable insights into
methodological practices, aiding researchers in designing rigorous studies, enhancing data
accuracy, and elevating the overall research in sustainable hospitality. In doing so, we bring a
critical perspective to what has been done previously. This literature review provides directions
for future research and assists policymakers and marketers in developing effective sustainable
hospitality marketing campaigns. It also contributes to the stream of research focused towards
achieving the United Nations SDGs by identifying a pathway to mitigate the intentionbehaviour gap within hospitality (Sharma et al., 2023).
2.

Methodology

This research employs a critical literature review to uncover common characteristics and
notable limitations in the existing literature on sustainable consumption in the hospitality
industry. We adopted the five-step process to conduct the literature review systematically:
formulating questions; identifying relevant studies; study selecting and evaluating studies;
conducting analysis; and reporting results (Denyer and Tranfield, 2009). For keyword
identification, we relied on the keywords relevant to sustainable consumption in hospitality
journals. In this study, we deliberately chose to not include the terms “intention-behaviour gap”
or “attitude-behaviour gap” in the search keywords. This decision was influenced by the
recognition of a prevailing trend in the previous reviews. These review studies integrated
keywords related to the intention-behaviour gap in their search strategy (ElHaffar et al., 2020;
Joshi and Rahman, 2015) to only review papers that examine this gap. Unlike previous reviews
focusing solely on the intention-behaviour gap, our approach delves into how this gap is
embedded in the current literature on sustainable hospitality. This allows a comprehensive
evaluation of the literature, enhancing insight into challenges and opportunities in sustainable
hospitality.
Once the authors achieved an agreement on the keywords to employ, we input two classes of
keywords. These were identified by checking the keywords adopted in recent literature reviews
on related topics (e.g., Acuti et al., 2022) and relying on an initial sample of 15 papers on
sustainable consumption in hospitality. The final 18 keywords related to sustainability were:
“sustainab* OR ethic* OR responsib* OR green OR environmental consciousness OR recyc*
4

OR reused OR environmental claims OR eco‐friendly OR human rights OR fair trade OR triple‐
bottom line OR diversity OR inclusion OR child labor OR sweatshop OR climate friendly
behavior OR pro-environmental behavior.” The final 6 keywords related to the consumer
perspective were: “consumer* OR customer*” OR “traveller*” OR “traveler*” OR “tourist*”
OR “vacationer*”. With these keywords, we searched within abstracts. Additionally, we
identified 18 hospitality journals from AJG Guide (Chartered Association of Business Schools
Academic Journal Guide 2021). We exclusively focused on hospitality journals to maintain a
targeted scope in exploring sustainable practices within hospitality businesses. However, our
acknowledgement of the interconnected nature of hospitality and tourism is reflected in our
analysis of hospitality journal articles that encompass tourism-related aspects. Consistently with
other review papers (Blevins et al., 2022), we selected articles from these journals published in
the last 10 years (i.e., January 2013 to October 2023) to ensure that research is current and
relevant. Table I in the Appendix outlines the 18 hospitality journals and their respective
number of reviewed articles.
After including articles written only in English and removing duplicate results, the final number
of articles was 277. For the screening of these articles, we developed the following three key
inclusion criteria: a) industry: hospitality b) focus: sustainable consumption c) subject:
consumer perspective. Simultaneously, the exclusion criteria were a) industry: generic
businesses b) focus: general consumption c) subject: other stakeholders’ perspective. Aligned
with the industry related criterion and in accordance with the scope of this review, we included
only papers focusing on hospitality whilst we excluded papers related to other industries (e.g.,
retailing). With respect to the focus, we selected studies investigating sustainable consumption,
excluding those exploring consumption behaviours more in general (e.g., consumer behaviour
in the digital environment). Finally, we only considered papers that took the consumer point of
view and excluded research addressing sustainability related to other stakeholders as core
subjects (e.g., employees). In the initial screening phase, we reviewed the titles and abstracts to
gauge articles’ relevance to the inclusion criteria. Subsequently, we conducted a more detailed
examination of the selected papers to determine their alignment with the inclusion/exclusion
criteria. This resulted in the final set of 71 articles published in 14 hospitality journals. Our
sample consists of 65 empirical articles, 3 conceptual papers, and 3 review papers. Figure 1
illustrates a structured visual summary of the article identification and screening process. The
final papers that we reviewed have been flagged with an asterisk (*) at the end of each of their
respective citations in the references list (Pinto, 2019).
Following Donthu et al.’s (2021) recommendation to review the literature when the topic is
specific and the number of articles is in the low hundreds, the lead author systematically read,
analysed, and coded the articles. We opted for manual coding as the nature of articles
necessitated careful reading and identification of pertinent categories (Wang and Chugh, 2014).
The analysis involved recognizing articles’ key research attributes and categorising them into
both predefined codes and deductive themes derived from the research data. Continuous
discussion among the authors facilitated this process.
First, we extracted the descriptive categories of the papers (i.e., title, authors, journal, year of
publication, abstract). Second, the coding categorisation that led our descriptive analysis
focused on the sustainability practice investigated in the paper and the research setting
5

(including sector and geographical area). The thematic areas were then further organised into
sub-categories following common patterns in the papers. The examination of sustainability
practices reveals that the papers delve into recycling and reuse, water and energy efficiency,
organic/local food consumption, promotion of green practices, and application of green
marketing tools. The research settings under scrutiny range from accommodations, tourism,
cruises, camping, tours, to events. The geographical focus varies, encompassing Asia,
Australia, Europe, the USA, multiple locations, and other countries. Finally, the critical
discussion of the intention-behaviour gap in the hospitality literature is built on two key
dimensions: the consumer intentions and consumer behaviours investigated by the literature.
The combination of descriptive and critical analyses led the formulation of a research agenda
for future studies. The discussion of the analysis ensues.

Figure 1. Article identification and screening process. Source: Authors own creation.

3.

Overview of the literature on sustainable hospitality

Over the last ten years, the number of research articles focusing on consumer intentions and
consumer behaviour in sustainable hospitality has increased (see Figure 2). However, the
growth is not drastic. The maximum number of articles published within one year is 12,
indicating limited overall research in this area. Within this set of studies, we observe that the
sustainability practices investigated, and the setting of the studies bring some limitations to the
literature.

6

Figure 2. Frequency and year of publication of the reviewed articles. Source: Authors own
creation.
3.1. Sustainability practices
Previous research investigating sustainability practices focuses on two aspects: consumers
adopting sustainable practices and sustainable practices within hospitality businesses.
Regarding consumer adoption, 3 articles emphasise individual determinants influencing
sustainable behaviour, i.e., nature-relatedness (Burhanudin et al., 2022), green mindfulness
(Dharmesti et al., 2020) and sustainability values (Sirakaya-Turk et al., 2014). Additionally, 1
article focuses on the role of consumers’ beliefs, attitudes, social norms, and perceived costs
affecting intentions to use bottled water (Chatterjee and Barbhuiya, 2021). From a marketing
perspective, 2 articles explore the impact of adopting sustainability marketing tools by
examining consumers’ willingness to pay more for eco-labelled tours (Lissner and Mayer
2020), and consumer perception of green marketing tools adopted by hotels (Chan, 2013).
From a hospitality business perspective, most studies examine the sustainable practices in hotels
in general. In our sample, 4 articles examine the role of sustainable practices in accommodations
without specifying them. Considering the most investigated sustainable practices, 4 articles
focus on recycling policies, followed by 3 articles examining towel/linen reuse policies in
accommodations, particularly hotels. Additionally, 4 articles highlight energy and water
conservation practices in hotel settings. Likewise, 1 article explores different sustainable
practices in camping, including locally-produced food consumption and energy/water-saving
measures. Lastly, 1 article explores the use of green marketing tools in rural tourism (Chin et
al., 2018). There may be overlap as some studies examine multiple sustainable practices.
Finally, we observe that most articles (36) focus on the environmental dimension of
sustainability, while 24 articles explore more than one sustainability dimension. However, 11
articles make reference to ‘sustainability’ in hospitality without specifying whether they explore
environmental or social practices. Notably, none of the studies exclusively focus on social or
economic sustainability practices.

7

3.2.
Research setting in the reviewed studies
The physical or social setting in which the research is conducted highly impacts the research
findings and interpretation. We analysed the final set of 71 articles to identify common research
settings in the existing literature: tourism (35), accommodation (27), tours (4), events (2),
cruises (2), and camping (1). Most of the articles in sustainable hospitality concentrate on
general tourism and accommodation. In tourism, 35 research studies cover various aspects, like
local food consumption, rural, volunteer, destination, and heritage tourism. Concerning the
accommodation setting, 20 out of 27 studies focus on hotels and 4 studies explore peer-to-peer
accommodation choices. Among these 27 studies, 2 delve into both accommodation and food,
while the remaining 1 study investigates consumers’ choice of accommodation during COVID19. Although accommodation and tourism are central to hospitality, consumer behaviours in
other settings such as local food consumption (Dedeoğlu et al., 2022) and cruise trips can also
affect the environment significantly (Han et al., 2016). Consistent with the viewpoint of Sadiq
et al. (2022), the geographical setting of the reviewed studies is imbalanced. Our sample
includes studies in Asia (22), Europe (15), the USA (8), Australia (5), multiple locations (7),
and other countries (5). 3 studies do not specify their location. Also, the location does not apply
to conceptual and review papers. Simultaneously, the research focus is mostly on the urban
areas with little attention paid to rural areas.
4. The intention behaviour gap in the sustainable hospitality literature
Considering our literature review, we now critically examine the complexities and implications
of sustainable behaviour in hospitality. Additionally, we analyse to what extent the intentionbehaviour gap is embedded in sustainable hospitality literature. Precisely, we want to raise two
main critical considerations.
4.1.

Research findings on sustainable consumption in hospitality are inconsistent.

Existing literature in this domain reveals mixed findings on the determinants shaping consumer
behaviour, with environmental concern emerging as a key factor. Patwary et al. (2022) indicate
a positive correlation among environmental knowledge, concern, and the intention to stay at
green hotels, mediated by eco-centric attitudes. Huang and Liu (2017) find that high
environmental concern results in high revisit intention among foreign tourists in sustainable
tourism. Kang and Nicholls (2021) confirm that environmentally concerned individuals express
willingness to pay higher for eco-friendly hotels. Conversely, Njite and Schaffer’s (2017)
mixed-method study reveals that consumers with elevated environmental concerns may not
prioritise green attributes when selecting hotels. This contradiction within the literature
underscores the complex connection between environmental concern and sustainable
behaviour. Indeed, the relationship between intention-behaviour is not always straightforward,
and it may depend on some contextual factors.
External cues like environmental labels, eco-certifications, and green marketing also influence
consumer behaviour. Lissner and Mayer (2020) find that 65% of surveyed tourists express
willingness to pay higher for tours with eco-labels. Sirakaya-Turk et al. (2014) highlight
consumers actively seeking green certifications before booking hotels. Berezan et al. (2014)
report contradictory results, where consumers express that they are willing to pay higher for
8

green hotels but also preferring discounts as incentives. This gap between sustainability and
cost preference may be attributed to factors like awareness, economic constraints, trust issues,
marketing strategies, and behavioural biases.
Research exploring the link between consumers’ values, subjective norms, and sustainable
behaviour presents some contradictions. Han et al. (2019) integrated norm activation model and
model of goal-directed behaviour to emphasise that personal norms indirectly boost sustainable
intentions in cruise tourism. Balaji et al. (2022) indicate a positive link between personal values
and peer-to-peer accommodation selection. Teng et al. (2015) leveraged the TPB, revealing that
subjective norm, attitudes, perceived behavioural control, and altruism collectively enhance
intention to visit green hotels. Yadav et al. (2019) indicate no direct impact of subjective norms
on green hotel choice, but their absence affects the decision. Conversely, Dedeoğlu et al. (2022)
applied TPB to conclude that subjective norms are insignificant in local food consumption
intentions. Personal values are multidimensional and may be influenced by individual
differences and situational factors. However, these studies relied on surveys, and the
inconsistencies in findings may stem from self-reported measures and methodological issues.
Lastly, consumer demographics’ impact in sustainable hospitality studies yields mixed
findings. Berezan et al. (2014) find similar satisfaction levels across different age and education
groups. While Pekovic (2021) suggests a stronger link between satisfaction and green motives
in older tourists. Lopez-Guzman and Santa-Cruz’s (2016) examination of sustainable festival
tourism depicts participants over 40 with university degrees as enthusiasts. Conversely,
Mokhtari et al. (2019) report higher self-reported sustainable behaviour in 15 to 30-year-olds
in geo-tourism. Despite valuable insights, the inconsistencies in findings prompt us to question
the broader reliability and applicability of these results.
These mixed results stem from methodological weaknesses, which may be linked to
measurement issues, but also to practical difficulties in measuring actual behaviour. The
primary issue is the lack of critical discourse on the intention-behaviour gap in sustainable
hospitality, coupled with an over-reliance on consumer intentions to predict behaviour. It holds
significant implications, as exemplified by instances where individuals express intentions to
partake in sustainable practices. However, consumer behaviour may not align with these
intentions in the holiday or entertainment context, demanding a distinct approach. The
methodological weaknesses and evolutions in the literature are developed hereafter.
Despite the contradictory findings, the literature scarcely acknowledges the intention-behaviour
gap. 58 out of 71 reviewed articles do not mention the intention-behaviour gap (See Figure 3).
Only a small number of studies address the issue, with 5 articles mentioning the gap, but 4 out
of these 5 articles not defining it. They merely acknowledge the discrepancy between intentions
and actions during travel. Additionally, 6 articles provide detailed explanations for this gap in
the hospitality industry. Notably, only 2 out of the 71 articles try to overcome this gap. These 2
articles highlight the significance of environmental and health concerns among green hotel
customers and emphasise tourists’ individual transformation, respectively (Sadiq et al., 2022;
Seeler et al., 2021).

9

Figure 3. Breakdown of the intention-behaviour gap research in the sustainable hospitality
literature. Source: Authors own creation.
4.2.

Most studies examine consumer intentions and adopt self-reported measures.

Out of 71 studies, 56 investigate consumer intentions or self-reported behaviour. 7 studies do
not measure intentions or behaviours (comprising reviews, conceptual papers, and one study on
ecotourism policy). Among 8 studies examining actual consumer behaviour, a notable trend
emerges. 5 studies solely rely on big data analytics to evaluate online customer reviews. The
remaining 3 out of these 8 studies adopt mixed methods to measure both actual consumer
behaviour and intentions. We argue that exclusively focusing on measuring consumer
intentions or self-reported behaviour may constitute a research limitation. This might explain
the inconsistent findings and the intention-behaviour gap. While understanding consumer
intentions is important to grasp their desire to perform a certain action, it is equally crucial to
measure their translation into real behaviour.
Another limitation identified in our analysis is the use of self-reported measures. 42 out of 71
reviewed studies use surveys for data collection. In our sample, 12 studies use a mixed method
approach, with 9 of them using self-reported measures. Most of these studies combine surveys
with interviews, while the remaining also use workshops and collect descriptive consumer
responses. However, both surveys and interviews are susceptible to response and social
desirability bias (Karlsson and Dolnicar, 2016). In our sample, only 2 studies perform
experiments and fieldwork, but these also investigate consumer intentions. Given the
circumstances, the relationship between intentions (measured through self-reported behaviour)
and actual sustainable behaviour in the hospitality industry is imperfect. Despite survey and
interview results indicating pro-environmental intentions and values, these frequently do not
translate into sustainable behaviour, especially during vacations (Sirakaya-Turk et al., 2014).
Many studies acknowledge this limitation of relying on stated consumer intentions or recalled
past behaviour (Chatterjee and Barbhuiya, 2021; Kang and Nicholls 2021; Lissner and Mayer
2020). However, the literature rarely investigates actual consumer behaviour in sustainable
hospitality, constituting a notable limitation (Sirakaya-Turk et al., 2014).

10

Despite these methodological limitations, recent literature is approaching new methodologies
for more reliable and generalisable findings. Notably, 7 out of 8 studies measuring actual
behaviour utilize online review content. In our sample, user-generated content analysis is used
for identifying sustainability dimensions in hospitality from a consumer perspective. For
instance, Brochado and Brochado (2019) and Brochado et al. (2021) reveal key dimensions in
glamping (glamorous camping) and sustainable tours. Mariani and Borghi (2021) examine the
influence of environmentally focused online reviews on electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM).
Other studies also investigate glacier tourism (Abrahams et al., 2022) and eco-tourism
experiences (Ruhanen, 2019). From a methodological perspective, Brochado and Brochado
(2019) argue that consumer-generated content analysis is emerging as a survey alternative.
Given that online reviews impact decisions, their reliability is questionable due to social
influence bias (Cicognani et al., 2022) and potentially incentivized positive reviews. Despite
these challenges, online content analysis offers insights into real-time consumer trends in
sustainable hospitality (Mariani and Borghi, 2021).
5. Four directions for future research
Drawing from the descriptive overview of the literature and the critical discussion of the
intention-behaviour gap in the sustainable hospitality, we provide four directions that seek to
assist future studies in addressing the major limitations of the literature. Figure 4 presents the
key limitations recognised in the current literature and establishes links between each limitation
and the corresponding directions for future research.

Figure 4. Literature about the intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality. Source:
Authors own creation.
5.1.

Investigate diverse sustainable practices

Two distinct objects of analysis seem to emerge from the reviewed articles: the sustainable
practices of guests/tourists once at the destination versus the practices of hotels/restaurants that
may or may not be considered sustainable. For instance, Kapoor et al. (2021) and Assaker
11

(2020) highlight the potentially beneficial effects of sustainable positioning and the promotion
of environmentally friendly behaviours on consumer choices, value perception, and satisfaction
with these services. Others, on the other hand, are interested in consumers' behaviour: whether
they adopt environmentally friendly behaviours or, conversely, whether they enact harmful
behaviours toward the environment. Burhanudin et al. (2022) analyse the responsible
behaviours reported by tourists according to their level of nature-relatedness. Chatterjee and
Barbhuiya (2021) use the TPB to explore the determinants of tourists' use of bottled water. Nisa
et al. (2017) highlight, in a meta-analysis, the effect of different types of interventions
implemented by hotels to promote towel reuse (environmental appeals, messages encoring
conservation, messages using social norms or charitable donations). Nudges and social norms
emerge as the most effective strategies to promote reuse of towel among hotel guests. Samaddar
et al. (2022) highlight the importance of cultural engagement in reinforcing tourists' responsible
intentions.
However, few studies address potential spillover effects, i.e., the effect of adopting one
behaviour on the adoption of another. Indeed, a negative spillover effect could very well be
envisaged, with consumers who have already made a choice in favour of the environment in
opting for a green hotel for instance, feeling morally licensed to adopt less environmentally
friendly behaviours. This negative spill-over has already been investigated in studies showing
for instance that encouraging consumers to reduce water use can lead them to increase energy
use (Truelove, 2014). It is possible that a consumer who has chosen a sustainable destination,
or a destination promoted as sustainable behaves sustainably once there for the sake of
coherence and consistency, which represents positive spill-over. This effect has been
demonstrated to occur in other domains. For instance, consumers who are encouraged to buy
green products, through monetary incentives, also engage in other pro-environmental
behaviours such as taking public transport or using less water, without being encouraged to do
so (Lanzini and Thøgersen, 2014). In any case, more research seems necessary on this aspect
of sustainable consumption in hospitality, and convincing results can only be obtained using
behavioural measures, as the spillover effect is difficult to demonstrate with self-reported
intentions and measures. Finally, the literature investigates consumer responses to eco-friendly
practices in hospitality (e.g., water-saving measures or use of eco-labels), with limited research
on social sustainability. We encourage future studies to observe how companies and
policymakers can promote their social initiatives (e.g., fair-trade food menus or employment of
disadvantaged personnel in hotels) and enhance the social sustainability of hospitality. We
believe this path for future studies is interesting because consumers might behave differently
depending on the environmental vs. social practice they are presented with (Catlin et al., 2017).
5.2.

Expand the scope of the research setting

The current literature predominantly focuses on hotels and tourism, neglecting other sectors
(i.e., restaurants, attractions, cruise, and tour operators). This narrow focus limits our grasp of
sustainable consumption across the hospitality industry, making it potentially misleading to
generalise hotel-centric research findings. In our sample, only one study (Hossain et al., 2023)
examines self-reported consumer behaviour in a combined restaurant and accommodation
setting. It underscores the necessity for dedicated research on responsible behaviour in
12

restaurants. Hossain et al., (2023) highlight the scarcity of research concerning consumer
experiences in tourism and hospitality. Altogether, we advocate for further research in the
neglected contexts. Geographically, the current research primarily focuses on developed
countries and urban areas (Sadiq et al., 2022). While these findings may in part provide a
foundation for research in developing countries and in rural settings (Oriade et al., 2021), rural
and eastern geographical settings have their own peculiarities that should be considered in
future investigations. Sustainable consumption patterns vary across developed and developing
countries due to factors like cultural diversity and economic growth stage (Wang et al., 2019).
Indeed, Zulauf and Wagner (2021) highlight variations in the adoption of sustainable
innovations and their dynamics in urban and rural contexts, offering insights into differing
values, enablers, and motives for sustainability among different individuals. Hence, future
researchers should aim to diversify locations and explore cross-cultural research which
accounts for cultural and economic differences in consumer behaviour (Balaji et al., 2022).
5.3.

Integrate existing knowledge on intention-behaviour gap into sustainable hospitality
research

Our thorough literature review emphasises the critical importance of addressing this issue.
Despite a significant body of research on consumer intention in sustainable hospitality, there is
a notable lack of integration of knowledge about the intention-behaviour gap. Astonishingly,
more than half of the studies in our sample overlook this gap. This recurring oversight highlights
the gravity of the issue and signals a critical need for renewed attention. Other research areas
such as retailing have addressed this issue effectively, changing the current industry landscape.
For instance, in retailing, supermarkets have investigated how sustainable packaging can work
in practice (i.e., beyond intentions) (Vila-Lopez and Küster-Boluda, 2021). To address the
challenges of understanding and bridging the intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality,
researchers can adopt an empirical approach similar to successful strategies in other sectors by
adapting and contextualizing the findings to the unique challenges and dynamics of the
hospitality industry. Additionally, researchers can navigate the challenges associated with field
studies by integrating conventional behaviour theories with advanced methodologies,
maintaining its relevance in understanding consumer behaviour in sustainable hospitality. This
critical literature review aims, in part, to highlight this need to integrate existing knowledge on
the intention-behaviour gap into sustainable hospitality research, facilitating more impactful
studies in this domain. Given the substantial influence of the hospitality industry on the
environment and society, addressing this issue is crucial for the development of a sustainable
future.
5.4.

Combine traditional research methods with emerging technologies

Combining traditional methods with emerging technologies is a way to address the intentionbehaviour gap. This includes integrating AI-powered tools like chatbots, which enable dynamic
and real-time interactions with consumers (Kelly et al., 2022), facilitating data collection on
consumer behaviour. For instance, ChatGPT can contribute to promoting sustainable practices
and assisting guests in making sustainable choices during their stay. Instead of relying on selfreported measures, leverage Internet of Things (IoT) devices (Elkhwesky and Elkhwesky,
2023) to examine the intention-behaviour gap in sustainable hospitality. For instance, smart
13

room systems can provide real-time objective data about energy use or waste management. It
can reduce susceptibility to social desirability bias and offer a naturalistic environment for data
collection. Text analysis, powered by natural language processing, can unveil valuable insights
into consumer sentiments, intentions, and behaviour from social media, online reviews, and
guest feedback. Moreover, embracing AI and machine learning can facilitate predictive
modelling of sustainable behaviours, enhancing the ability to design targeted interventions.
However, traditional methods like field experiments remain indispensable for observing actual
consumer behaviour in natural setting and establishing causal relationships (Viglia and
Dolnicar, 2020). As most of the mixed-method studies in our sample used surveys and
interviews, we recommend a mixed-methods approach that combines surveys and interviews
with behavioural observations. Additionally, the absence of longitudinal studies in the current
literature is a glaring gap (Assaker, 2020; Huang and Liu, 2017; Yadav et al., 2019). It can help
track changes in consumer behaviour over time and offer a deeper understanding of evolving
trends. Given the literature limitations and inconsistent findings, embracing innovative
methodologies alongside traditional ones holds promise for closing the intention-behaviour gap
in sustainable hospitality.
6. Discussion and conclusions
6.1. Conclusions
Sustainability research in the hospitality sector has significantly grown in the last decade.
However, the literature on this topic has emerged in a fragmented manner and provides
contradictory findings. This review, analysing 71 articles from hospitality journals, not only
underscores existing methodological issues but also proposes potential pathways for advancing
research in sustainable hospitality. The critical assessment of the current state of literature
serves to provide both theoretical and practical contributions, laying the groundwork for future
investigations in this dynamic field.
6.2.

Theoretical implications

This study carries crucial theoretical implications by highlighting the unique intentionbehaviour gap in sustainable hospitality. It establishes sustainable hospitality as a distinct area
within consumer behaviour and sustainability research. By critically analysing existing
literature, this study illuminates the intricate challenges faced by the conventional theories of
human behaviour face when applied in the dynamic hospitality context. Our findings
underscore the transformative impact of shifting from familiar home settings to exceptional
environments, revealing a notable decline in sustainable behaviour. This prompts a critical
reassessment of established frameworks like the theory of planned behaviour and norm
activation theory. This review urges researchers to re-evaluate and adapt these frameworks for
sustainability contexts when studying sustainable behaviour within the hospitality sector. This
critical evaluation opens avenues for new theoretical perspectives accommodating dynamic
forces influencing consumer intentions and behaviours during sustainable hospitality
experiences. This fosters a deeper understanding of sustainable hospitality.
Additionally, this review provides a comprehensive examination of sustainable hospitality
literature over the last decade and to what extent the intention-behaviour gap is embedded in
14

the current literature. The findings reveal a predominant focus on investigating consumer
intentions through self-reported measures, neglecting consumer behaviour. Recognizing the
need for more robust and generalisable findings, recent studies are exploring new
methodologies. By comparing studies assessing consumer intentions and behaviour, we reveal
how research findings on sustainable consumption in hospitality are sometimes inconsistent.
Acknowledging the intention-behaviour gap pitfalls for research and practice, many of the
reviewed articles do not mention the gap and only a small number of the reviewed studies
discuss it. This underscores the necessity for enhanced awareness and consideration of the
intention behaviour gap within the scholarly discourse on sustainable hospitality.
6.3.

Practical implications

This paper offers practical guidance to researchers, policymakers, managers, and marketers in
the sustainable hospitality domain. To advance knowledge on sustainable consumption in
hospitality, this study identifies four key research directions. These include investigating
diverse sustainable practices, broadening the scope of research settings, integrating existing
knowledge on the intention-behaviour gap into sustainable hospitality research, and combining
traditional research methods with emerging technologies. These recommendations provide a
roadmap for conducting more robust studies that bridge the intention-behaviour gap. Marketers
can leverage these insights to design effective marketing campaigns, considering nuanced shifts
in consumer behaviour during vacations. To address the intention-behaviour gap, stakeholders
in hospitality should collaborate on holistic sustainability solutions, accounting for broader
socio-economic and cultural contexts. Additionally, encouraging adaptability in the hospitality
sector through regular assessments of sustainability initiatives ensures businesses remain
responsive to evolving consumer preferences and trends. Policymakers and industry leaders can
leverage these findings to inform policies aligned with the United Nations SDGs, facilitating
the navigation and mitigation of the intention-behaviour gap within sustainable hospitality.
6.4.

Limitations and future research

While this review makes meaningful contributions, it is not without limitations. First, the
articles collected in this study are limited to the hospitality journals identified through the AJG
guide. If this criterion enabled us to conduct a review with a tight focus, it also excluded
potentially interesting papers published in more generalist journals. Second, our paper
specifically focuses on the gap between talks and walks of consumers. We acknowledge that
interesting and thoughtful research has investigated this inconsistency referring to other
stakeholders - e.g., employees (Wang, 2016) or managers (Koch et al., 2020). These limitations
affect this review’s generalisability, emphasising the necessity for more research in this
emerging area to address research voids.

15

References
Abrahams, Z., Hoogendoorn, G. and Fitchett, J.M. (2022), “Glacier tourism and tourist reviews: an
experiential engagement with the concept of ‘Last Chance Tourism’”, Scandinavian Journal of
Hospitality and Tourism, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 1–14, doi:10.1080/15022250.2021.1974545.*
Acuti, D., Pizzetti, M., and Dolnicar, S. (2022), “When sustainability backfires: a review on the
unintended negative side‐effects of product and service sustainability on consumer behaviour”,
Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 39 No. 10, pp. 1933-1945, doi:10.1002/mar.21709.
Agag, G., Brown, A., Hassanein, A., and Shaalan, A. (2020), “Decoding travellers’ willingness to pay
more for green travel products: closing the intention–behaviour gap”, Journal of Sustainable
Tourism, Vol. 28 No.10, pp. 1551–1575, doi:10.1080/09669582.2020.1745215.
Assaker, G. (2020), “The effects of hotel green business practices on consumers’ loyalty intentions: an
expanded multidimensional service model in the upscale segment”, International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 32 No. 12, pp. 3787–3807, doi:10.1108/IJCHM05-2020-0461.*
Balaji, M.S., Jiang, Y., Roy, S.K., and Lee, J. (2022), “To or not to adopt P2P accommodation: the
traveller’s ethical decision-making”, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol.
100, p. 103085, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2021.103085.*
Bangsa, A.B. and Schlegelmilch, B.B. (2020), “Linking sustainable product attributes and consumer
decision-making: insights from a systematic review”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 245,
p. 118902, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118902.
Berezan, O., Millar, M., and Raab, C. (2014), “Sustainable hotel practices and guest satisfaction
levels”, International Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Administration, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 1–
18, doi:10.1080/15256480.2014.872884.*
Birch, D. and Memery, J. (2020), “Tourists, local food and the intention-behaviour gap”, Journal of
Hospitality and Tourism Management, Vol. 43, pp. 53–61, doi:10.1016/j.jhtm.2020.02.006.
Blevins, D.P., Stackhouse, M.R., and Dionne, S.D. (2022), “Righting the balance: understanding
introverts (and extraverts) in the workplace”, International Journal of Management Reviews,
Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 78-98, doi:10.1111/ijmr.12268.
Booking.com.
(2022),
“Sustainable
travel
report
2022”,
available
at:
https://globalnews.booking.com/climate-community-and-choice-bookingcom-reveals-thetrends-shaping-sustainable-travel-in-2022/ (accessed 15 May 2023).
Brochado, A. and Brochado, F. (2019), “What makes a glamping experience great?”, Journal of
Hospitality and Tourism Technology, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 15–27. DOI:10.1108/JHTT-06-20170039.*
Brochado, A., Souto, J., and Brochado, F. (2021), “Dimensions of sustainable tour experiences”,
Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism, Vol. 22 No. 5, pp. 625–648,
doi:10.1080/1528008X.2020.1827479.*
Burhanudin, B. and Unnithan, A.B. (2022), “The determinants of eco-friendly tourist behaviour:
perspectives from Indian and Indonesian tourists travelling abroad”, Anatolia: An International
Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Research, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 48–64,
doi:10.1080/13032917.2021.1905014.*

16

Catlin, J.R., Luchs, M.G., and Phipps, M. (2017), “Consumer perceptions of the social vs.
environmental dimensions of sustainability”, Journal of Consumer Policy, Vol. 40, pp. 245277, doi:10.1007/s10603-017-9356-x.
Chan, E.S.W. (2013), “Gap analysis of green hotel marketing”, International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management, Vol. 25 No. 7, pp. 1017–1048, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-09-2012-0156.*
Chatterjee, D. and Barbhuiya, M.R. (2021), “Bottled water usage and willingness to pay among Indian
tourists: visual nudges and the theory of planned behaviour”, Scandinavian Journal of
Hospitality and Tourism, Vol. 21 No. 5, pp. 531–549, doi:10.1080/15022250.2021.1974544.*
Chi, C.G., Chi, O.H., Xu, X., and Kennedy, I. (2022), “Narrowing the intention-behavior gap: the
impact of hotel green certification”, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol.
107, p. 103305, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2022.103305.
Chin, C.H., Chin, C.L., and Wong, W.P.M. (2018), “The implementation of green marketing tools in
rural tourism: the readiness of tourists?”, Journal of Hospitality Marketing and Management,
Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 261–280, doi:10.1080/19368623.2017.1359723.*
Cicognani, S., Figini, P., and Magnani, M. (2022), “Social influence bias in ratings: a field experiment
in the hospitality sector”, Tourism Economics, Vol. 28 No. 8, pp. 2197-2218,
doi:10.1177/13548166211034645.
Dedeoğlu, S.B., Eren, D., Percin, N.S., and Aydin, Ş. (2022), “Do tourists’ responsible behaviors shape
their local food consumption intentions? An examination via the theory of planned behaviour”,
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 34 No. 12, pp. 4539–
4561, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-05-2021-0579.*
Denyer, D. and Tranfield, D. (2009), “Producing a systematic review”, Buchanan, D. A. and Bryman,
A. (Eds.), The Sage handbook of organizational research methods, Sage Publications Ltd, pp.
671–689.
Dharmesti, M., Merrilees, B., and Winata, L. (2020), ““I’m mindfully green”: examining the
determinants of guest pro-environmental behaviors (PEB) in hotels”, Journal of Hospitality
Marketing
and
Management,
Vol.
29
No.
7,
pp.
830–847,
doi:10.1080/19368623.2020.1710317.*
Dolnicar, S., Knezevic Cvelbar, L., and Grün, B. (2017), “Do pro-environmental appeals trigger proenvironmental behavior in hotel guests?”, Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 56 No. 8, pp. 988–
997, doi:10.1177/0047287516678089.
Donthu, N., Kumar, S., Mukherjee, D., Pandey, N., and Lim, W.M. (2021), “How to conduct a
bibliometric analysis: An overview and guidelines”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 133,
pp. 285–296, doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.04.070.
ElHaffar, G., Durif, F. and Dube, L. (2020), “Towards closing the attitude-intention-behavior gap in
green consumption: A narrative review of the literature and an overview of future research
direction”,
Journal
of
Cleaner
Production,
Vol.
275,
p.
122556,
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122556.
Elkhwesky, Z., and Elkhwesky, E.F.Y. (2023), “A systematic and critical review of Internet of Things
in contemporary hospitality: a roadmap and avenues for future research”, International Journal
of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 533–562, doi:10.1108/IJCHM01-2022-0090.
Hall, C.M., Dayal, N., Majstorović, D., Mills, H., Paul-Andrews, L., Wallace, C., and Truong, V.D.
(2016), “Accommodation consumers and providers’ attitudes, behaviours and practices for
17

sustainability: a systematic review”, Sustainability, Vol. 8, No. 7, p. 625,
doi:10.3390/su8070625.
Han, H., Jae, M., and Hwang, J. (2016), “Cruise travelers’ environmentally responsible decisionmaking: an integrative framework of goal-directed behavior and norm activation process”,
International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 53, pp. 94–105,
doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2015.12.005.*
Hossain, M.S., Hossain, M.A., Al Masud, A., Islam, K.M.Z., Mostafa, M.G., and Hossain, M.T. (2023),
“The integrated power of gastronomic experience quality and accommodation experience to
build tourists’ satisfaction, revisit intention, and word-of-mouth intention”, Journal of Quality
Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism, pp. 1–27, doi:10.1080/1528008x.2023.2173710.*
Huang, Y.C. and Liu, C.H.S. (2017), “Moderating and mediating roles of environmental concern and
ecotourism experience for revisit intention”, International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management, Vol. 29 No. 7, pp. 1854–1872, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-12-2015-0677.*
Jones, P., Hillier, D., and Comfort, D. (2016), “Sustainability in the hospitality industry: Some personal
reflections on corporate challenges and research agendas”, International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 36–67, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-112014-0572.
Joshi, Y. and Rahman, Z. (2015), “Factors affecting green purchase behaviour and future research
directions”, International Strategic Management Review, Vol. 3 No. 1–2, pp. 128–143,
doi:10.1016/j.ism.2015.04.001.
Kang, S. and Nicholls, S. (2021), “Determinants of willingness to pay to stay at a green lodging
facility”,
International
Journal
of
Hospitality
Management,
Vol.
94,
doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102834.*
Kapoor, P.S., Balaji, M.S., and Jiang, Y. (2021) “Effectiveness of sustainability communication on
social media: role of message appeal and message source”, International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 949–972, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-092020-0974.*
Karlsson, L. and Dolnicar, S. (2016), “Does eco certification sell tourism services? Evidence from a
quasi-experimental observation study in Iceland”, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, Vol. 24 No.
5, pp. 694–714, doi:10.1080/09669582.2015.1088859.
Kelly, S., Kaye, S.A., and Oviedo-Trespalacios, O. (2022), “A multi-industry analysis of the future use
of AI chatbots”, Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, Vol. 2022,
doi:10.1155/2022/2552099.
Koch, J., Gerdt, S.O., and Schewe, G. (2020), “Determinants of sustainable behavior of firms and the
consequences for customer satisfaction in hospitality”, International Journal of Hospitality
Management, Vol. 89, p. 102515, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102515.
Lanzini, P. and Thøgersen, J. (2014), “Behavioural spillover in the environmental domain: an
intervention study”, Journal of Environmental Psychology, Vol. 40, pp. 381-390,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.09.006.
Lin, M.T., Zhu, D., Liu, C., and Kim, P.B. (2022), “A systematic review of empirical studies of proenvironmental behavior in hospitality and tourism contexts”, International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 34 No. 11, pp. 3982–4006, doi:10.1108/IJCHM12-2021-1478.

18

Lin, N. and Roberts, K.R. (2020), “Using the theory of planned behavior to predict food safety
behavioral intention: a systematic review and meta-analysis”, International Journal of
Hospitality Management, Vol. 90, p. 102612, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102612.
Lissner, I. and Mayer, M. (2020), “Tourists’ willingness to pay for Blue Flag’s new ecolabel for
sustainable boating: the case of whale-watching in Iceland”, Scandinavian Journal of
Hospitality and Tourism, Vol. 20 No. 4, pp. 352–375, doi:10.1080/15022250.2020.1779806.*
Lopez-Guzman, T. and Santa-Cruz, F.G. (2016), “International tourism and the UNESCO category of
intangible cultural heritage”, International Journal of Culture, Tourism and Hospitality
Research, Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 310–322, doi:10.1108/IJCTHR-03-2015-0025.*
MacInnes, S., Grün, B., and Dolnicar, S. (2022), “Habit drives sustainable tourist behaviour”, Annals
of Tourism Research, Vol. 92, doi:10.1016/j.annals.2021.103329.
Mariani, M. and Borghi, M. (2021), “Are environmental-related online reviews more helpful? A big
data analytics approach”, International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management,
Vol. 33 No. 6, pp. 2065–2090, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-06-2020-0548.*
Mokhtari, D., Roostaei, S., Khodadadi, M., Ahmadi, M., Ebrahimi, O., and Shahabi, H. (2019),
“Evaluation of the role of environmental education in Manesht and Ghelarang geotourism
destination, Iran”, Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism, Vol. 20 No. 6, pp.
681–708, doi:10.1080/1528008X.2019.1616039.*
Munro, P., Kapitan, S., and Wooliscroft, B. (2023), “The sustainable attitude-behavior gap dynamic
when shopping at the supermarket: a systematic literature review and framework for future
research”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 426, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.138740
Nguyen, H.V., Nguyen, C.H., and Hoang, T.T.B. (2019), “Green consumption: closing the intention‐
behavior gap”, Sustainable Development, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 118–129, doi:10.1002/sd.1875.
Nimri, R., Dharmesti, M., Arcodia, C., and Mahshi, R. (2021), “UK consumers’ ethical beliefs towards
dining at green restaurants: a qualitative evaluation”, Journal of Hospitality and Tourism
Management, Vol. 48, pp. 572-581.
Nisa, C., Varum, C., and Botelho, A. (2017), “Promoting sustainable hotel guest behavior: a systematic
review and meta-analysis”, Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, Vol. 58 No. 4, pp. 354–363,
doi:10.1177/1938965517704371.*
Njite, D. and Schaffer, J. (2017), “Revisiting attributes: how important is green in the consumer
selection of hotel rooms?”, International Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Administration,
Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 219–244, doi:10.1080/15256480.2016.1263168.*
Oliver, J., Benjamin, S., and Leonard, H. (2019), “Recycling on vacation: does pro-environmental
behavior change when consumers travel?”, Journal of Global Scholars of Marketing Science,
Vol. 29 No. 2, pp. 266–280, doi:10.1080/21639159.2019.1577158
Oriade, A., Wang, Y., Osinaike, A., and Aduhene, K. (2021), “Sustainability awareness, management
practices and organisational culture in hotels: Evidence from developing countries”,
International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 92, p. 102699,
doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102699.
Patwary, A.K., Rasoolimanesh, S.M., Rabiul, M.K., Aziz, R.C., and Hanafiah, M.H. (2022), “Linking
environmental knowledge, environmental responsibility, altruism, and intention toward green
hotels through ecocentric and anthropocentric attitudes”, International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 34 No. 12, pp. 4653–4673, doi:10.1108/IJCHM01-2022-0039.*
19

Pekovic, S. (2021), “Green pull motives and overall tourist satisfaction: a macro- and micro-levels
analysis”, International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 33 No. 4, pp.
1368–1390, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-06-2020-0609.*
Pinto, J. (2019), “Key to effective organizational performance management lies at the intersection of
paradox theory and stakeholder theory”, International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol.
21 No. 2, pp. 185-208, doi:10.1111/ijmr.12199.
Ruhanen, L. (2019), “The prominence of eco in ecotourism experiences: An analysis of post-purchase
online reviews”, Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Vol. 39, pp. 110–116,
doi:10.1016/j.jhtm.2019.03.006.*
Sadiq, M., Adil, M., and Paul, J. (2022), “Eco-friendly hotel stay and environmental attitude: a valueattitude-behaviour perspective”, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 100, p.
103094, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2021.103094.*
Samaddar, K., Mondal, S., and Sharma, S. (2022), “Reinforcing responsible tourism through cultural
involvement: an empirical evidence from India”, Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality
and Tourism, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 365–387, doi:10.1080/1528008X.2020.1867698.*
Seeler, S., Zacher, D., Pechlaner, H., and Thees, H. (2021), “Tourists as reflexive agents of change:
proposing a conceptual framework towards sustainable consumption”, Scandinavian Journal
of
Hospitality
and
Tourism,
Vol.
21
No.
5,
pp.
567–585,
doi:10.1080/15022250.2021.1974543.*
Sharma, G.D., Taheri, B., Gupta, M. and Chopra, R. (2023), “Over 33 years of the hospitality research:
a bibliometric review of the International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management”,
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 35, No. 7, pp. 2564–
2589, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-04-2022-0499.
Sirakaya-Turk, E., Baloglu, S., and Mercado, H.U. (2014), “The efficacy of sustainability values in
predicting travelers’ choices for sustainable hospitality businesses”, Cornell Hospitality
Quarterly, Vol. 55 No. 1, pp. 115–126, doi:10.1177/1938965513499822.*
Sloan, P., Legrand, W. and Chen, I.J. (2013), Sustainability in the Hospitality Industry: Principles of
Sustainable Operations, Routledge, London.
Teng, C.C., Cheng, Y.J., Wang, S.N., and Wang, Y.C. (2023), “Religious beliefs and food waste
prevention practices: mechanisms of divine and environmental awareness”, Journal of
Hospitality Marketing and Management, Vol. 32 No. 4, pp. 530–554,
doi:10.1080/19368623.2023.2189199.
Teng, Y.M., Wu, K.S., and Liu, H.H. (2015), “Integrating altruism and the theory of planned behavior
to predict patronage intention of a green hotel”, Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research,
Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 299–315, doi:10.1177/1096348012471383.*
Truelove, H.B., Carrico, A.R., Weber, E.U., Raimi, K.T., and Vandenbergh, M.P. (2014), “Positive
and negative spillover of pro-environmental behavior: an integrative review and theoretical
framework”, Global
Environmental
Change, Vol.
29,
pp.
127-138,
doi:
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.09.004.
Ulker-Demirel, E. and Ciftci, G. (2020), “A systematic literature review of the theory of planned
behavior in tourism, leisure and hospitality management research”, Journal of Hospitality and
Tourism Management, Vol. 43, pp. 209–219, doi:10.1016/j.jhtm.2020.04.003.

20

Viglia, G. and Acuti, D. (2023), “How to overcome the intention–behavior gap in sustainable tourism:
tourism agenda 2030 perspective article”, Tourism Review, Vol. 78 No. 2, pp. 321–325,
doi:10.1108/TR-07-2022-0326.
Viglia, G. and Dolnicar, S. (2020), “A review of experiments in tourism and hospitality” Annals of
Tourism Research, Vol. 80, p. 102858, doi:10.1016/j.annals.2020.102858.
Vila-Lopez, N. and Küster-Boluda, I. (2021), “A bibliometric analysis on packaging research: towards
sustainable and healthy packages”, British Food Journal, Vol. 123 No. 2, pp. 684–701,
doi:10.1108/BFJ-03-2020-0245.
Wang, C., Ghadimi, P., Lim, M.K., and Tseng, M.L. (2019), “A literature review of sustainable
consumption and production: a comparative analysis in developed and developing economies”,
Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 206, pp. 741–754, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.172.
Wang, C.L. and Chugh, H. (2014), “Entrepreneurial learning: past research and future challenges”,
International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 24-61,
doi:10.1111/ijmr.12007.
Wang, Y.F. (2016), “Modeling predictors of restaurant employees’ green behavior: comparison of six
attitude-behavior models”, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 58, pp. 66–
81, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2016.07.007.
Yadav, R., Balaji, M.S., and Jebarajakirthy, C. (2019), “How psychological and contextual factors
contribute to travelers’ propensity to choose green hotels?”, International Journal of
Hospitality Management, Vol. 77, pp. 385–395, doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2018.08.002.*
Yu, Y., Li, X., and Jai, T. (2017), “The impact of green experience on customer satisfaction: evidence
from TripAdvisor”, International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 29
No. 5, pp. 1340-1361, doi:10.1108/IJCHM-07-2015-0371.
Zulauf, K. and Wagner, R. (2021), “Urban and rural sustainability: divergent concepts and their
consequences for marketing”, Frontiers in Sustainability, Vol 2, pp. 1–6
doi:10.3389/frsus.2021.670866.

21

Appendix.
Table I. Hospitality Journals included in the critical review. Source: Authors own creation.
No. of
Title of the hospitality journals
%
articles
15.5
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management
11
15.5
Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality and Tourism
11
15.5
Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism
11
7.0
International Journal of Culture, Tourism and Hospitality Research
5
7.0
International Journal of Hospitality Management
5
7.0
Journal of Hospitality Marketing and Management
5
5.6
Anatolia: An International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Research
4
5.6
Cornell Hospitality Quarterly
4
5.6
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research
4
4.2
International Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Administration
3
4.2
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management
3
4.2
Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes
3
1.4
International Hospitality Review
1
1.4
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology
1
0.0
Advances in Hospitality and Leisure
0
0.0
Hospitality and Society
0
0.0
Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport, and Tourism Education
0
0.0
Journal of Human Resources in Hospitality and Tourism
0
Total
100.0
71

22

