Original Article

Evaluating Aaker’s sources of brand
equity and the mediating role of
brand image
Received (in revised form): 9th August 2010

Manpreet Singh Gill
is Faculty Marketing at LGC Ludhiana. His primary research interest is in theoretical and empirical modeling focusing on branding and advertising.
As a part of his research for PhD, he has developed an interesting model in the area of advertising effectiveness.

Jagrook Dawra
is a PhD from ICFAI Business School, Hyderabad (India). He worked in the industry for about 6 years, before his teaching assignment with ICFAI.
His research interest lies in the area of product and brand management, with special emphasis on store brands. He has some national and
international publications to his credit.

ABSTRACT Brand equity has been defined and measured by different researchers in different
ways. While one school of thought measures brand equity as the additional preference a consumer
has for a branded product over a similar no-name product, another school of thought led by Aaker
defines it in terms of a set of assets, popularly called the sources of brand equity. This study
measures brand equity using both methods and tries to establish the extent to which they reconcile.
We first measure brand equity using conjoint, establishing the part-worths of attribute ‘brand’ as
brand equity. We then go on to measure Aaker’s sources of brand equity. Regressing brand equity
on these sources of brand equity, we found that Aaker’s sources were inadequate in explaining
brand equity fully. Moreover, some of these sources were highly correlated. Factor analyzing
Aaker’s sources resulted in two factors – cognitive factor and image factor. Further analysis
revealed that the image factor plays a mediating role between awareness and brand equity.
Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing (2010) 18, 189–198. doi:10.1057/jt.2010.11;
published online 13 September 2010
Keywords: brand equity; conjoint analysis; regression analysis; factor analysis

INTRODUCTION
Marketers endeavor to reduce marketing expenses
and increase sales. Their objective is to increase
the efficiency of the marketing effort. They
continuously look for the factors that increase
marketing efficiency. Strong brands enjoying high
brand equity can help managers to relish higher
margins, greater customer loyalty, less vulnerability
Correspondence: Manpreet Singh Gill
H.No 7-G, Sarabha Nagar, Ludhiana, 141001 Punjab, India
E-mail: manpreetgill1981@yahoo.co.in

to competitive attacks, better customer response to
communications, and more cooperation from trade
and other intermediaries. In order to keep track
of the strength of their brands, managers need to
able to quantify brand equity. However, measuring
brand equity is a challenge for managers. The
measure of brand equity should reflect the
construct it is measuring, should capture the
changes in brand equity and should be applicable
to different markets and products.
Brand equity has been defined by researchers
in different ways. Aaker defines brand equity as

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198
www.palgrave-journals.com/jt/

Gill and Dawra

‘a set of assets (and liabilities) linked to a brand’s
name and symbol that adds to (or subtracts from)
the value provided by a product or service to a
firm and/or that firm’s customers’.1 Keller,
however, defines brand equity as ‘the differential
effect of the brand knowledge on consumer
response to the marketing of the brand’.2
Similarly, Yoo and Donthu define brand equity
as ‘consumer’s different response between a focal
brand and an unbranded product when both
have the same level of the marketing stimuli and
product attributes’.3 According to Srinivasan et al,
‘Brand equity is defined as the incremental
contribution ($) per year obtained by the brand in
comparison to the underlying product (or service)
with no brand-building efforts’.4
Researchers have carried out a lot of work in
identifying the dimensions to capture and measure
brand equity. Some of them have come up with
perceptual dimensions. For instance, according
to Keller,2 brand awareness and brand image
constitute brand equity. As per Park and Srinivasan,5
brand equity consists of attribute-based and
non-attribute-based components. Researchers like
Kamakura and Russell5 used actual consumer
purchase behavior or market behavior to ascertain
brand equity. Considering both perceptual and
market behavior measures, Aaker6 proposed
that brand loyalty, perceived quality/leadership,
associations/differentiation, awareness and market
behavior are the various dimensions acting as
sources of brand equity. Using perceptual
dimensions from the studies of Keller 2 and
Aaker,6 Yoo and Donthu3 developed a scale for
measuring brand equity comprising brand loyalty,
perceived quality and brand awareness/associations
as various dimensions. Because this scale is based
on Keller’s 2 and Aaker’s6 dimensions, we do not
know whether this scale is sufficient to explain
brand equity or whether some more items
representing additional sources of brand equity
are required to be identified. This is so because
Keller 2 does not explain the relationship between
brand awareness and brand image and has only
provided a framework to measure these dimensions,
and does not provide a concrete measure of
brand equity. Similarly, Aaker6 provides only
an indication towards a set of items that can

190

contribute to brand equity. Nobody knows how
these items and which of these items should be
combined to capture brand equity. Whether these
items are exhaustive and what is the reliability
and validity of these items are some of the other
questions left unanswered by the study.
Hence, the choice of items to measure brand
equity is arbitrary and we do not know to what
extent these dimensions actually contribute to
brand equity. The present study is an attempt to
find the explanatory power of these dimensions
in the toothpaste product category. This study
investigates to what extent the dimensions
identified by the various authors in general and
by Aaker in particular are able to explain, or
measure, brand equity.
The rest of the study is arranged as follows.
We first present different studies explaining the
measurement of brand equity along with their
critiques. We then go on to explain the different
dimensions that we considered for our study and
the reasons for them. Finally, the methodology is
explained and the results are presented,
interpreted and discussed.

MEASURING BRAND EQUITY
Researchers have adopted different approaches
to quantify or measure brand equity. Some of
them, like Keller,2 Park and Srinivasan,5 and Yoo
and Donthu3 used perceptual, or psychological,
measures to measure brand equity. Kamakura
and Russell7 used actual consumer and market
behavior to arrive at brand equity. Aaker6
combines both market behavior-related measures
and perceptual measures to provide a framework
to capture brand equity. Below we provide the
results of different studies (along with their critique)
carried out over a period of time explaining
different ways to measure brand equity.
According to Keller,2 brand image and brand
awareness constitute brand equity. The study
provided indirect and direct approaches to
measure brand equity. The indirect approach
attempts to assess the sources of brand equity in
terms of brand recognition and brand knowledge.
As the indirect measure is unable to capture the
strength and favorability of associations, direct
measures are employed. On the other hand, the

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

Aaker’s sources of brand equity and brand image

direct approach measures brand equity directly by
assessing the impact of brand knowledge on
consumers’ response to the marketing program.
Although the study contributes immensely to
the literature by providing a mechanism to think
of brand knowledge in terms of an associative
memory network model, it does not explain the
relationship between brand awareness and brand
image, and has only provided a framework to
measure these dimensions, not a concrete
measure of brand equity.
Aaker 6 introduced the concept of ‘brand equity
Ten’, comprising 10 items spread across five
dimensions, to measure brand equity. He did not
mention a single measure of brand equity, but
expressed it as a set of five dimensions: brand
loyalty, perceived quality/leadership, associations/
differentiation, awareness and market behavior.
Brand loyalty was captured in two elements: the
price premium and satisfaction/loyalty. Perceived
quality/leadership dimension consists of two
components: perceived quality and leadership.
The third dimension comprises associations and
differentiation measures. The fourth dimension is
brand awareness, consisting of brand recognition
and recall, and the last dimension is market
behavior measures, consisting of market share and
distribution depth of the brand. This study attempts
to operationalize brand equity and create a standard
measure of it that could be used across products
and markets to measure brand equity. However,
this study also provides only an indication towards
a set of items that can contribute to brand equity.
Nobody knows how and which of these items
should be combined to capture brand equity.
Whether these items are exhaustive and what their
reliability and validity is are some of the other
questions left unanswered.
Using perceptual dimensions from the studies
of Keller 2 and Aaker,6 Yoo and Donthu3
developed a multidimensional scale to measure
brand equity across different products and
markets. Their scale consisted of brand loyalty,
perceived quality and brand awareness/
associations as different dimensions to capture
brand equity. But we do not know whether
this scale is sufficient to explain brand equity
or whether some more items representing

additional sources of brand equity are required
to be identified.
According to Park and Srinivasan,5 brand
equity consists of two components: one is an
attribute-based component and the other is a
non-attribute-based component. Hence, brand
equity is the sum of the attribute-based component
and the non-attribute-based component. The
attribute-based component is the difference
between subjectively measured attribute preference
and objectively measured attribute preference,
and the non-attribute-based component is the
difference between the preference of an individual
towards a brand and his subjective attribute-based
preference. This study provides an excellent
method to capture brand equity and that too at
the individual as well as aggregate level; however,
acquiring an objective attribute rating from the
experts is a somewhat tedious task and, secondly,
as objective attribute ratings provided by experts
are not really objective, these ratings may be
influenced by their own biases.
Kamakura and Russell 7 proposed a method to
measure brand value using the actual purchase
behavior of consumers. The actual purchase
behavior was captured using the scanner panel
data. This behavior reflects the ‘regular market
conditions’ under which a brand is purchased.
Therefore, the measure of brand value attained
should be the actual brand value. The brand
value was thought of as the value attached by the
consumers to the brand ‘after discounting the
current price and advertising exposures’.
Brand value was considered to consist of two
components, namely brand intangible value and
brand tangible value. Brand tangible value was
considered as a function of physical attributes,
and the value not arising from physical attributes
was termed brand intangible value. Brand
intangible value consisted of the value derived by
the consumer from brand name associations. This
study aims to provide one of the best measures
for brand equity, as it is based on actual purchase
incidence. It should be borne in mind, however,
that a particular brand could have been purchased
as a competing brand was not available or a
particular brand was purchased from a retail
outlet with a limited range, as it did not stock

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

191

Gill and Dawra

the brand of choice. Further, this method cannot
be used in countries where the presence of
organized retail is meager.
According to Srinivasan et al,4 brand equity is
‘the incremental contribution per year obtained
by the brand in comparison to the base product’.
The authors assumed that the choice probabilities
of an individual would be different for the
branded and unbranded base product. The choice
probability for the branded product would be
higher than that for the unbranded base product.
The incremental contribution of a brand for a
particular person would depend upon the
difference between the choice probabilities of a
branded and non-branded version of the product.
The brand equity for an individual was calculated
as the product of customer i’s total category-level
purchase, brand j’s contribution margin and the
customer i’s incremental choice probability. It
was also conceptualized that the incremental
choice probability would depend upon the
difference between brand awareness, attribute
perceptions and non-attribute preference for the
unbranded and branded versions of the same
product.
Over the years researchers have recognized
Aaker’s6 dimensions as sources of brand equity,
assuming that these five dimensions fully and
completely explain the construct brand equity.
The literature shows that different researchers
have defined, and therefore measured, brand
equity differently. We feel that irrespective of the
approach, triangulation mandates that all methods
should measure the construct brand equity
accurately.
In this study the brand equity is measured
using conjoint analysis (which we propose is a
better measure to capture brand equity) and also
by using different dimensions identified by
Aaker 6 to ascertain the extent to which these
sources of brand equity can explain brand
equity.
Although this study uses the sources of brand
equity as defined by Aaker,6 we feel that they
need to be operationalized by further studying
the available literature. The following section
outlines how these constructs were defined
and operationalized by different authors.

192

On the basis of these studies various dimensions
have been identified that contribute to enhancing
brand equity. A questionnaire was formulated
based on these dimensions. These dimensions and
the reasons for their incorporation in the
questionnaire have been discussed below.

BRAND LOYALTY
Oliver 8 defined loyalty as ‘an attained state of
enduring preference to the point of determined
defense’. The definition consists of two parts: one
is the enduring preference and the other is the
point of determined defense. Enduring preference
means that a person purchases the product again
and again, and ‘the point of determined defense’
means that the person defends himself from
the attacks of competitors. Mellens cited the
definition of brand loyalty as ‘The biased
behavioral response expressed over time by some
decision making unit with respect to one or
more alternative brands out of a set of such
brands and is a function of psychological
process’.9
Sheth10 developed a factor analytic model
for finding individual-level brand loyalty. In
this model, loyalty has been considered as the
frequency and the pattern of purchases made by
the consumer. This model was able to segregate
the buyer’s manifested behavior into two
components – the behavior owing to environmental
effects and the behavior owing to the individual
buyer himself. This premise is based on the
S-O-R model, where ‘S’ means stimulus, ‘O’
means organism and ‘R’ means response. The
response, that is, the manifested behavior,
depends upon stimulus that could be provided by
the environment or by the individual himself.
The importance of this measure of brand loyalty
is that it is able to provide individual-level brand
loyalty, as against the aggregate-level provided by
stochastic models of brand loyalty.
A closer look at these definitions can help to
conclude that loyalty consists of both the
behavioral and attitudinal dimensions. Behavioral
loyalty means that there is repeated purchase by
the consumers, whereas attitudinal loyalty means
the attitude, beliefs and intentions of the
consumer towards the brand.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

Aaker’s sources of brand equity and brand image

For measuring brand loyalty, both the dimensions
(that is, behavioral as well as attitudinal) of loyalty
have been incorporated into the questionnaire.
To incorporate the ‘determined defense’ component
as mentioned by Oliver10 in his definition of
loyalty, the price premium component has been
considered.

BRAND PERSONALITY
Like human beings, a brand also has a personality.
It is important to understand brand personality,
as consumers use brand personality to express
themselves. According to Sirgy,11 the greater the
congruity between brand personality and self or
ideal self, the greater will be the preference for
the brand. Moreover, the personality traits that
become associated with the brand are enduring
and unique, and, as a result, the brand personality
can be used to differentiate a brand in the
market. Aaker,12 while conducting a study to
determine different dimensions of brand
personality, defined brand personality as ‘the set
of human characteristics associated with the
brand’. She identified five dimensions of brand
personality: sincerity, excitement, competence,
sophistication and ruggedness. In this study, these
dimensions of brand personality have been
considered because these dimensions can help us
understand which personality type is related to
the brand under consideration instead of merely
concluding whether or not a personality is
associated with it, as is the case with Aaker.12

BRAND ASSOCIATIONS
Aaker1 defined brand identity as ‘a unique set of
brand associations that the brand strategist aspires
to create or maintain. These associations represent
what the brand stands for and imply a promise to
customers from the organization members’. This
means that brand association is something that
provides meaning to a brand. Aaker 6 mentioned
three types of brand associations while providing
a measure for brand equity. The three types of
associations are brand as a product, brand as an
organization and brand as personality. Keller 2
defined brand associations as ‘the other
informational nodes linked to the brand node in
memory and contain the meaning of the brand’.

It is the strength, favorability and uniqueness of
the brand associations that are responsible for the
differential effect of the consumers towards the
brand. In this study, the associations related to
the product in the form of perceived value,
associations related to personalities (which have
been discussed above) and associations related to
organizations have been taken into consideration
and incorporated into the questionnaire.

BRAND AWARENESS
According to Keller,2 brand awareness involves
brand recognition and brand recall. Brand
recognition is the extent to which a person is
able to recognize a particular brand given a set of
brands. Brand recall is the extent to which a
person is able to remember a brand, given a
product category or need. As per Aaker,6 brand
awareness consists of many levels. These levels are
brand recognition, brand recall, top of mind,
brand dominance, brand knowledge and brand
opinion. As one moves from brand recognition
to brand opinion, the brand awareness increases.
In this study, questions related to brand opinion
and brand knowledge were used to capture brand
awareness.

PERCEIVED QUALITY
Perceived quality is related to a consumer’s
opinion on the extent to which a particular
product will be able to meet his expectations.
In this regard perceived quality has nothing to do
with the actual performance of the product. But
perceived quality can have a great impact on a
brand’s equity: the higher the perceived quality
of a brand, the greater will be its brand equity.
It is important that a customer perceives a brand
to be of high quality because it will increase the
brand preference and build brand equity. Kirmani
and Rao13 discussed the presence of uncertainty
in the minds of consumers regarding the quality
of the products offered by the sellers. This
uncertainty is caused by information asymmetry.
The sellers have more information than the
buyers. The buyers will make inference
depending on the information provided by the
sellers. Therefore, the type of inference required
by sellers will decide the type of information to

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

193

Gill and Dawra

be communicated to the buyers. In this regard
brand name, product design, packaging,
advertisements and other brand identities are the
types of information that communicate the
unobservable quality. These elements can help
build favorable perceived quality in the minds of
the consumers. In this study, perceived quality
was captured by asking a person about the extent
to which he feels that a brand is of the best
quality and is consistent in quality. The responses
were captured on a five-point Likert scale.
Although the dimensions suggested by various
authors such as Aaker 6 and Keller 2 seem very
captivating, and owing to the way these authors
have put forward these dimensions, one would
be forced to believe that these dimensions would
be able to capture 100 per cent of the brand
equity. Investigation needs to be carried out
to assess whether these dimensions are able to
explain brand equity and to what extent they
can do so.
To be able to explore the above-mentioned
issue, both brand equity and its sources need to
be appropriately operationalized.
We measured brand equity using conjoint
analysis as described by Green and Wind.14
Conjoint analysis involves the computation of the
utilities for different attributes of a product.
Brand equity is defined here as the preference
that a respondent has for the attribute ‘Brand’.
The part-worth of the levels of attribute ‘Brand’,
therefore, capture all those reasons that motivate
a person to purchase a particular brand. Hence,
it should be a true measure of brand equity.

METHOD
Selection of product category and
its attributes
The product category is chosen in such a way
that the target respondents are aware of it and
its features so that it is easy to identify the
attributes and their levels in the product
category to carry out conjoint analysis.
Toothpaste is one such product that is used
daily and by everyone. Moreover, toothpaste as
a category has also been considered in an earlier
related study by Park and Srinivasan,5 which

194

Table 1: Attributes and levels for conjoint analysis
Sr. no.

Attributes

Attribute levels

1

Brand

2
3
4
5
6
7

Breath freshness
Germ protection
Teeth strengthening
Whitening capability
Medicated properties
Price (Rs)

Colgate, Pepsodent,
Close-Up, Meswak
High, Normal
High, Normal
High, Normal
High, Normal
Present, Absent
28, 29, 30

further enhances the relevance of this category
for this study.
In order to identify the attributes of toothpaste,
40 respondents were interviewed. It was found
that brand, breath freshness, germ protection,
teeth strengthening, whitening capability,
medication properties and price were the
attributes that are important to them. Therefore,
these attributes were considered for the study.
Four different brands, Colgate, Pepsodent,
Close-Up and Meswak, were considered. For
breath freshness, germ protection, teeth
strengthening and whitening capability, the levels
were ‘normal’ and ‘high’. For medicated
properties the levels were ‘absent’ and ‘present’.
Lastly, for price three different levels were
considered: ‘Rs 28’, ‘Rs 29’ and ‘Rs 30’.
The attributes and their levels are presented in
Table 1.

PROCEDURE
Data were collected using a structured
questionnaire that had two parts – the first part
consisted of the items that were adapted from
those mentioned in the study by Aaker6
‘Measuring brand equity across products and
markets’, and the second part of the questionnaire
consisted of the 16 cards generated using
fractional factorial design. Four hold-out cards
were also generated to check the validity of
responses.
The respondents were asked to fill in the
questionnaire by rating different items on a
5-point Likert scale (1 being ‘highly disagree’ and
5 being ‘highly agree’). Subsequently, respondents
were asked to arrange the cards according to
their overall preference for the product concept
as reflected in the cards. The first card was the

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

Aaker’s sources of brand equity and brand image

most preferred, and the sixteenth one the least
preferred. A similar procedure was followed for
the arrangement of the hold-out cards. In total,
data were collected from 260 respondents, out of
which 188 responses were usable and taken for
analysis. The remaining 72 responses (27.69 per
cent) were rejected, as these responses were
incorrectly provided by the respondents. In these
cases, a portion of the questionnaire was left
blank by the respondents, leaving them useless for
the analysis. Because the analysis was carried out
on a student sample that is homogeneous, the
rejection of the responses should not give biased
results.

MEASURES
The questionnaire incorporated loyalty measures,
measure of price premium, perceived quality
measure, leadership measure, brand awareness
measure, perceived value, brand personality and
organizational association measures. While adapting
the items for the questionnaire from the items
suggested by Aaker 6 there were a few deviations,
which are worth mentioning. Apart from brand
personality and brand loyalty measures, all the
measures for the other dimensions were similar to
those suggested by Aaker.6
Brand personality was captured using the five
dimensions of personality mentioned by Aaker.12
These dimensions include sincere, rugged,
sophisticated, excited and competent. The
respondents were asked to rate themselves on
these five dimensions of personality and were
then asked to rate all the four brands based on
these five dimensions. Euclidean distance was
calculated between the personality of the
respondent and the brand personality. This
distance was taken as a measure of brand
personality.
While capturing brand loyalty both attitudinal
and behavioral loyalty measures were used.
Satisfaction, as advised by Aaker,6 was not
considered as a measure of loyalty because
according to Oliver 8 ‘satisfaction is a fairly
temporal post usage state for one time
consumption or a repeatedly experienced state
for ongoing consumption that reflects how the
product or service has fulfilled its purpose’,

whereas ‘loyalty is an attained state of enduring
preference to the point of determined defense’.
Therefore, loyalty and satisfaction are two
different things, and it is not necessary that if a
person is satisfied he will be loyal as well.
Moreover, satisfaction may lead to loyalty but it
is not part of loyalty.
All these dimensions of brand equity suggested
by Aaker 6 were the independent variables for the
regression analysis. The dependent variable was the
brand equity. Conjoint analysis was run treating
brand as one of the attributes with four levels, that
is, Colgate, Pepsodent, Meswak and Close-Up.
Brand equity was obtained as part-worths of the
attribute ‘Brand’. This brand equity acted as a
dependent variable in the regression analysis.

RESULTS
Conjoint analysis using LINMAP was run for the
188 valid responses and the reliability of the
responses was found to be 0.79. In addition,
utility scores related to brands were obtained for
all the respondents. These utility scores acted as a
dependent variable, capturing the brand equity.
These utility scores were then regressed on the
dimensions suggested by Aaker.6 Therefore, our
regression model was as follows
BE = b S ′ + e
where BE is brand equity obtained as part-worths
of the attribute ‘brand’ in the conjoint study, and
S is a vector (1, S1, S2, … , S14). S1 – S14 are
defined in Table 2.  is a vector of parameters to
be estimated. Although the model was significant
at 0.01 per cent, high multicollinearity was reflected
in Variance inflation factor (VIF) and Tolerance
measures (Gujrati,15 as shown in Table 3).

ADDRESSING THE PROBLEM
OF MULTICOLLINEARITY USING
FACTOR ANALYSIS
In order to take care of multicollinearity, factor
analysis was used with Varimax rotation. The
output of factor analysis is shown in Table 4.
Bartlett’s test of sphericity is significant at the
5 per cent level of significance and the value of
KMO is 0.94, and thus factor analysis is justified.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

195

Gill and Dawra

Factor analysis gave two factor solutions
explaining 62.350 per cent variance of the original
dimensions with Cronbach  of 0.748 and 0.804,
respectively. The values indicate good reliability of
the factors. Items 1, 2 and 3 loaded heavily on the
first factor, whereas the other items loaded on the
second factor. Depending upon the nature of the
items included in the first factor it was named
brand awareness. The same items were mentioned
by Aaker 6 also to capture brand awareness and the
second factor has been named brand image. The
output was consistent with the argument of Keller 2
that it is brand awareness and brand image that
contribute to brand equity.

Table 2: Independent variables (S1–S14)
Sr. no. Name of the item
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14

As per Pett et al,16 the factor scores were
calculated by summing the scores for only those
items that had been selected for inclusion in a
given factor. These factor scores for brand
awareness and brand image were used as the
independent variables and regression was run
with brand equity obtained from conjoint analysis
as dependent variable.

Table 4: Results of factor analysis
Sr. no.

Name of the item

1
2
3
4
5

I know the brand
I know what the brand stands for
I have an opinion about the brand
I frequently purchase this brand
I would buy the brand on the next
purchase
I have a favorable attitude
towards the brand
The brand is of the best quality
The quality of the brand is
consistent
The brand is the most popular
brand
I think the brand is number one
among all the brands
The brand is worth purchasing it
provides value for money
The organization manufacturing
the brand is trustworthy
Price premium
Personality
Eigenvalue
Percentage of variance explained
Cronbach 

6

I know the brand
I know what the brand stands for
I have an opinion about the brand
I frequently purchase this brand
I would buy the brand on the next purchase
I have a favorable attitude towards the brand
The brand is of the best quality
The quality of the brand is consistent
The brand is the most popular brand
I think the brand is number one among all the brands
The brand is worth purchasing it provides value for
money
The organization manufacturing the brand is
trustworthy
Price premium
Brand personality

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Factor 1
Brand
awareness

Factor 2
Brand
image

0.797
0.790
0.660
—
—

—
—
—
0.834
0.852

—

0.702

—
—

0.694
0.610

—

0.586

—

0.679

—

0.625

—

0.641

—
—
1.78
13.142
0.748

0.598
− 0.380
7.133
49.182
0.804

KMO=0.943 and Bartlett test of sphericity (P value 0.000).

Table 3: Beta coefficients and collinearity statistics
Unstandardized
coefficients

(Constant)
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14

Standardized
coefficients

B

SE

Beta

− 15.05
− 1.082
− 0.117
− 0.203
1.816
1.783
1.682
0.315
0.057
0.464
1.599
0.256
0.563
0.464
− 2.224

3.928
0.73
0.559
0.605
0.703
0.708
0.814
0.88
0.754
0.702
0.694
0.76
0.675
0.141
0.387

—
− 0.054
− 0.007
− 0.012
0.153
0.15
0.111
0.019
0.004
0.032
0.114
0.016
0.034
0.102
− 0.176

t

− 3.832
− 1.482
− 0.21
− 0.335
2.582
2.519
2.067
0.358
0.076
0.661
2.303
0.337
0.834
3.284
− 5.742

Sig.

0
0.139
0.834
0.738
0.01
0.012
0.039
0.72
0.94
0.509
0.022
0.736
0.405
0.001
0

Collinearity
statistics
Tolerance

VIF

—
0.563
0.604
0.559
0.216
0.215
0.263
0.267
0.357
0.328
0.31
0.337
0.464
0.789
0.812

—
1.776
1.656
1.788
4.63
4.661
3.797
3.748
2.803
3.053
3.221
2.97
2.157
1.267
1.231

Dependent variable: BE (Brand equity); the variables S1–S14 are defined in Table 2.

196

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

Aaker’s sources of brand equity and brand image

Table 5: Regression output
Model

1

Unstandardized
coefficients

(Constant)
Brand image
Brand awareness

Standardized
coefficients

B

SE

Beta

− 42.11
0.97
0.285

2.666
0.063
0.257

—
0.567
0.041

t

Sig.

− 15.797
15.371
1.105

0
0
0.269

Independent variables: Brand image and brand awareness; Dependent variable: brand equity.

Table 6: Regression results to check the mediating role of
brand image
Dependent
variable

Independent
variables
(Beta coefficients)

P-value
(Model)

Adjusted
R2 (%)

Brand
awareness

Brand
image

Brand image

0.598
(0.000)

—

0.000

35.7

Brand equity

0.380
(0.000)

—

0.000

14.3

Brand equity

—

0.591
(0.000)

0.000

34.8

Brand equity

0.041
(0.269)

0.567
(0.000)

0.000

34.9

The regression model was significant at the
5 per cent level of significance with adjusted R2
equal to 34.9 per cent. Moreover, it is clear from
Table 5 that the coefficient of brand image is
significant but the regression coefficient of brand
awareness is insignificant.

BRAND IMAGE AS A MEDIATOR
BETWEEN AWARENESS AND
EQUITY
Brand image seemed to explain brand equity.
One possibility could be that brand image acts as
a mediating variable between brand awareness
and brand image. To identify the mediating role
of brand image, the following conditions should
be satisfied as per Baron and Kenny.17
(i) Regression model consisting of brand image
as dependent variable with brand awareness as
independent variable should be significant.
(ii) Regression model consisting of brand equity
as dependent variable with brand awareness

as independent variable should be significant.
(iii) Regression model consisting of brand equity
as dependent variable with brand image as
independent variable should be significant.
(iv) Regression model consisting of brand
equity as dependent variable with brand
awareness and brand image as independent
variable should be significant, but the
coefficient of brand awareness should not be
significant.
Four separate regressions were run to check the
mediating role of brand image. The results of
these regressions are shown in Table 6. The
results indicate the mediating role of brand image
between brand awareness and brand equity. From
the output it seems that brand awareness does not
have a direct impact on brand equity. Rather, it
has an indirect impact, which is through the
brand image.
The mediating role of brand image revealed
by the analysis could be used to integrate the two
dimensions of brand equity, that is, brand
awareness and brand image, for which no
empirical relationship was provided previously.
Keller 2 argued that brand awareness and brand
image are two distinct dimensions that lead to
brand equity. Similarly, Na et al 18 presented a
brand power model whereby they discussed the
brand awareness power dimension and the brand
image power dimension as being the two
dimensions to brand equity. However, the results
of our analysis reveal that it is brand awareness
that leads to brand image, which further leads to
brand equity. Therefore, brand awareness and
brand equity cannot be considered as distinct
dimensions.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

197

Gill and Dawra

DISCUSSION
From this study it is evident that in the case of
the toothpaste product category Aaker’s6 sources
of brand equity are inadequate in explaining
the brand equity. The dimensions proposed by
Aaker were able to explain only 34.9 per cent of
the brand equity. This means that in case of
toothpastes, there are other sources of brand
equity that will further contribute to the brand
equity, apart from Aaker’s brand equity ten.
Brand managers should identify these sources in
order to build their brands accordingly and more
effectively. The same is applicable to other brand
managers managing brands in various product
categories across different geographical boundaries.
They should be aware of the extent to which
Aaker’s sources contribute and about the
additional sources of brand equity.
Aaker’s sources of brand equity for the
toothpaste product category are also correlated.
These variables have been shown in Table 4 to
factor as awareness and image factor. This result
is consistent with studies such as those by Keller 2
and Na et al. 18 The research further shows that
the image factor plays a mediating role between
awareness and brand equity. It implies that brand
image can be formed using brand awareness, which
will further build brand equity. The managers
should bear in mind that to build brand equity
they should first build brand awareness and only
then focus on building brand image. This study
also highlights the existence of interrelationships
between the sources of brand equity – strong
quality perceptions could mean higher loyalty and
vice-versa; high satisfaction could mean higher
loyalty and vice versa, and so on.
Although the present study cannot be
generalized to other product categories, it has
important implications not only for research, but
also for working managers. Managers need to
understand how their brand is being built and
how they should invest in these sources of brand
equity to maximize their returns.

198

Further exploratory research needs to be
conducted to establish other factors that build up
brand equity. The interrelationships between
these sources of brand equity also need to be
studied in detail.

REFERENCES
1 Aaker, D. (1996) Building Strong Brands. USA: The Free Press.
2 Keller, K.L. (1993) Conceptualizing, measuring and
managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of Marketing
57(1): 1–22.
3 Yoo, B. and Donthu, N. (2001) Developing and validating a
multidimensional consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of
Business Research 52(1): 1–14.
4 Srinivasan, V., Park, C.S. and Chang, D.R. (2005) An approach
to the measurement, analysis and prediction of brand equity and
its sources. Management Science 51(9): 1433–1448.
5 Park, S.U. and Srinivasan, V. (1994) A survey-based method of
measuring and understanding brand equity and its extendibility.
Journal of Marketing Research 31(2): 271–288.
6 Aaker, D. (1996) Measuring brand equity across products and
markets. California Management Review 38(3): 102–120.
7 Kamakura, W.A. and Russell, G.J. (1993) Measuring brand
value with scanner data. International Journal of Research in
Marketing 10(1): 9–21.
8 Oliver, R.L. (1999) Whence consumer loyalty. Journal of
Marketing 63(Special Issue): 33–44.
9 Mellens, M., Dekimpe, M.G. and Steenkamp, E.M. (1996) A
review of brand-loyalty measures in marketing. Tijdschrigt voor
Economie en Management XLI(4): 507–533.
10 Sheth, J.N. (1968) A factor analytic model of brand loyalty.
Journal of Marketing 5(4): 395–404.
11 Sirgy, M.J. (1982) Self concept in consumer behavior: A critical
review. Journal of Consumer Research 9(3): 287–300.
12 Aaker, J.L. (1997) Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of
Marketing Research 34(3): 347–356.
13 Kirmani, A. and Rao, A.R. (2000) No pain, no gain: A critical
review of the literature on signaling unobservable product
quality. Journal of Marketing 64(2): 66–79.
14 Green, P.E. and Wind, Y. (1975) New ways to measure
consumers’ judgments. Harvard Business Review ( July–August):
107–117.
15 Gujrati, D. (2004) Basic Econometrics. Singapore: Tata Mc Graw
Hill.
16 Pett, M.A., Lackey, N.R. and Sullivan, J.J. (2003) Making Sense
of Factor Analysis. USA: Sage Publications.
17 Baron, R.M. and Kenny, D.A. (1986) The moderator-mediator
variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual,
strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality &
Social Psychology 51(6): 1126.
18 Na, W.B., Marshall, R. and Keller, K.L. (1999) Measuring
brand power: Validating a model for optimizing brand equity.
Journal of Product and Brand Management 8(3): 170–184.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 0967-3237 Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing Vol. 18, 3/4, 189–198

