Neeli Bendapudi, Surendra N. Singh, & Venkat Bendapudi

Enhancing Helping Behavior:
An Integrative Framework for
Promotion Planning
Charitable organizations playa vital role in our society, as is evidenced by their enormous economic and social impact. Yet, for many of them, soliciting adequate resources to carry out their mandates is a continuing struggle. Confronted with a growing need for their services, fierce competition from other charities, and shrinking support from government agencies, charities may turn to marketers for help in developing effective promotional strategies. Unfortunately, marketing literature is unable to provide meaningful guidance because scant research attention has hampered
a fuller understanding of why people help. The authors integrate relevant research in marketing, economics, sociology, and social psychology to advance theoretical understanding of helping behavior. They develop research propositions regarding specific promotional strategies that charitable organizations can employ to elicit help.

T

he charitable impulse-reaching out to help another in
need-is recognized as a universal human value. Yet,
the economic and social impact of helping behavior is
frequently overlooked. From an economic standpoint, helping is big business. In 1993, for example, Americans donated approximately $103 billion to charitable causes (American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel 1994). From a social standpoint, these contributions enable charities to be socially responsive, by delivering services that are not adequately provided by either business or government (Kotler
1979).
Eliciting help for charity has never been an easy task.
Nearly two decades ago, Rothschild (1979) alerted marketers to the difficulties in trying Oto sell "brotherhood" as
they would soap. Specifically, selling soap-or other forprofit goods and services-involves stressing the value directly received by customers in return for their dollars. In
contrast, selling "brotherhood" involves charities asking
people to donate some resource (e.g., time, money, blood)
with little or no commensurate reward in return. Although
social marketing has always been challenging (Bloom and
Novelli 1981), the current environment makes eliciting help
especially daunting. Charities today must grapple with a
growing need for their services, shrinking government support for their causes, and fierce competition with other charities. It is becoming more critical-and more difficult-for
charities to elicit help from individual donors.
Neeli Bendapudi is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Texas A&M University. Surendra N.Singh is Professor of Marketing and the Samuel Roberts
Noble Foundation Chair in Marketing Strategy, Oklahoma State University. Venkat Bendapudi is a doctoral candidate, University of Kansas. The
second author was at the University of Kansas when a significant portion
of this paper was completed. The authors thank T. Ramesh Dutta, John
Lastovicka, Howard Marmorstein, Peter Reingen, Michael Rothschild,
three anonymous JM reviewers, and the editor for their positive feedback
and helpful suggestions on previous versions of this article.
Journal of Marketing
Vol. 60 (July 1996), 33-49

To succeed in such an environment, a charity must rely
on an effective promotional strategy: a controlled, integrated communications program to present itself and its services
to prospective donors (Engel, Warshaw, and Kinnear 1994).
Unfortunately, marketing literature, which is rich in research
and theorizes about promoting for-profit products and services, offers little guidance to charities on how to promote
helping. This neglect is puzzling given marketing scholars'
characterizations of helping behavior as "crucially important ... and virtually undescribed" (Sherry 1983, p. 157), and
"disjointed and void of theoretical underpinnings" (Burnett
and Wood 1988, p. 2). Because of this gap in current knowledge, we seek to develop a better understanding of helping
behavior, which in tum is used to suggest promotional
strategies for charities. The article is organized as follows.
We begin with an overview of the construct of helping behavior and review the research in marketing in this area.
Next, we draw on the research in different discij .ines, such
as economics (e.g., agency theory, strategic altruism), sociology (e.g., normative influences, social comparison), and
psychology (e.g., social impact theory, reactance theory) to
identify factors that affect helping behavior. A discussion of
the donor's helping decision process follows. At each step of
the process, we explore how specific aspects of the charity's
promotion may affect the helping decision. These interventions are presented as testable propositions. Finally, we address theoretical and practical implications and directions
for further research.

People's Helping Behavior Toward
Charitable Organizations
Definition and Literature Review
Helping behavior defined. Helping behavior may take
many forms, from the trivial (giving directions to a stranger

Helping Behavior I 33

who is lost) to the magnificent (risking your life to save a
drowning victim). It may involve one person helping another or a person helping through an intermediary organization
(e.g., making a donation to the Red Cross). Organizations
also help in both fashions: by directly aiding the needy (a
church group adopting a needy family) or through an intermediary organization (e.g., corporate philanthropy, causerelated marketing; Varadarajan and Menon 1988). We focus
on people helping the needy through intermediary charitable
organizati ons.
But what constitutes help? The answer appears to vary
across disciplines. Economists (e.g., Margolis 1982) focus
on the consequences to the helper: Behavior is deemed
"helping" only if the costs of the behavior exceed the benefits; that is, there is some sacrifice involved. Sociologists
(Piliavin and Charng 1990) and psychologists (see Krebs
and Miller 1985) focus on the motives behind the help: Is
the motive to enhance the welfare of the needy (altruistic
motive) or is it to somehow enhance a person's own welfare
(egoistic motive)? The marketing discipline appears to focus
on consequences to the help recipient-behavior is deemed
helping when it enhances the recipient's welfare. Hence, donating time, money, blood, body parts, and so on are all
deemed helping behavior. Despite these differences, there is

a growing consensus that to understand helping behavior, it
is important to understand all of these facets: the consequences to the recipient and the helper and the motives for
providing help (Simon 1993). From the perspective of charitable organizations, the following definition of helping behavior seems appropriate: behavior that enhances the welfare of a needy other, by providing aid or benefit, usually
with little or no commensurate reward in return.

People Helping Through Charitable
Organizations: A Review of
Marketing Literature
In Table 1, we provide an overview of the literature on helping behavior in leading marketing journals for over the past
20 years.' One striking fact is the paucity of marketing studlA computerized search was undertaken of the following journals from 1971 onwards: Journal of Advertising, Journal of Advertising Research, Journal of Consumer Policy, Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of Macromarketing, Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of Professional Services Marketing, and Journal of Public Policy & Marketing. In addition, all marketing journals from the year 1987 were included.

TABLE 1
Marketing Studies Dealing With Helping
Study

Type of Helping

Focus

Findings

Pessemier, Beamon,
and Hanssen (1977)

Intention to donate
body parts (survey)

Donor characteristics

Significant demographic and psychographic
differences exist between those who are
willing and those who are not willing to
donate body parts.

Reingen (1978)

Face-to-face funds
donation

Size of request

Insignificant differences between foot-in-thedoor (FID) and door-in-the-face (DIF), with
or without adding even-a-penny-will-help.
All of these more effective than the control
(request only) condition.

Mindak and Bybee
(1979)

Case study of March of
Dimes

Application of
marketing principles

Applying target marketing, segmentation,
marketing audit, and so on increased the
funds received.

Burnett (1981)

Blood donors and
nondonors (survey)

Donor characteristics

Significant differences exist between donors
and nondonors on demographic and
attitudinal variables.

Burnkrant and Page
(1982)

Behavioral intentions in
blood donations

Type of request

Tests Fishbein's behavioral intention model.
Both attitudinal and normative influences
found to affect behavioral intentions.

Soukop (1983)

Markov analysis

Donor mailing lists

High costs of fund-raising justified in
attracting new donors.

Blockner and
colleagues (1984)

Face-to-face and
telephone funds
donation

Size of request

Legitimization effective for differing
suggested amounts and face-to-face as
well as telephone contacts.

Moore, Beardon, and
Teel (1985)

Panel and laboratory
studies of
advertisement
evaluations

Type of request.
Beneficiary portrayal

Labeling was effective and dependency
claims were ineffective.

Danko and Stanley,
(1986)

High-income
households'
donations (survey)

Donor characteristics

Significant differences exist between heavy
and light donors on select demographic
variables.

34/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

Study

Type of Helping

Focus

Findings

Fern, Monroe, and
Avila (1986)

Metanalysis of size of
request studies

Size of request.
FID and DIF

FID is effective when initial behavior is
performed. DIF is effective when there is
less delay between requests and the
requests are made by the same requestor.

Riecken and Yavas
(1986)

Donations to nonprofit
organizations

Opinion leaders and
recipients

Greater proportion of opinion leaders than
recipients donated to nonprofit
organizations (self-reports).

Fraser, Hite, and Sauer
(1988)

Face-to-face funds
donation

Size of request

Large anchor point effective to raise size of
donations. Legitimization effective to raise
rate of compliance.

Dawson (1988)

Monetary donations
and volunteering

Survey of motives for
giving and
volunteering

Reciprocity and income motives predict
giving as did household assets and age.
Volunteers not higher on career motive
than others.

La Tour and Manrai
(1989)

Field experiments on
blood donations

Type of request

Interaction of informative and normative
requests more effective in generating
blood donations than either one singly.

Guy and Patton (1989)

Conceptual framework

Motivation for helping/
process

Altruistic motive for helping; internal and
external mitigating factors.

Schlegelmilch Tannin
(1989)

Survey of donations

Type of request

People who donate in street collection, doorto-door, and so on-differ in demographic
characteristics.

Allen and Maddox
(1990)

Blood donations

Donor perceptions and
awareness of blood
donations

Three of four clusters of blood donors
exhibited skepticism regarding blood
donation, misinformation and
uncertainties.

Harvey (1990)

Benefit segmentation

Donor characteristics

Demographic and psychographic correlates
exist for donor segments.

Barr, Dave and Amin
(1991)

Attitudes toward one
charitable
organization

Survey of awareness
and perception

Identified unmet needs by United Way of
Horry County; low awareness in
community of services offered by the
organization.

Horton (1991)

Conceptual-Organ
donation

Type of request

Low involvement media to get attention.
High involvement media later in decision
process.

Meyers-Levy and
Maheswaran (1992)

Donation to Save the
Children

Type of request-timing
of aversive negative
outcome

More intent to donate, counterfactual
thoughts with short (versus long) time lag
for low-involvement; no difference for
highly involved.

Yavas, Riecken and
Babakus (1993)

Monetary donations
and intentions to
donate

Perceived risk
(likelihood of loss
and importance of
loss)

Perceived risk was not a good predictor of
donation behavior; however, it improves
prediction when used in conjunction with
demographic variables.

Allen and Butler (1993)

Blood donation
intention

Donor knowledge and
risk perception

Knowledge not inversely related to risk; may
accentuate risk. Perceived risk inversely
related to blood donations.

Bagozzi and Moore
(1994)

Public service
advertisement

Type of request.
Emotional appeal

Empathic emotional responses elicited
greater willingness to help. Empathy was
greater in the strong versus the weak
emotional advertisement.

Cermak, File, and
Prince (1994)

Benefit segmentation

Major or wealthy donor
market

Wealthy donors classified into four segments
on demographic and psychographic
variables.

Broadbridge and Horne
(1994)

Volunteering for charity
retail stores

Demographics and
motivation

Majority were white women, over 55, married
or widowed. Reasons were affiliation with
charity not experience with retailing.

Schibrowsky and
Peltier (1995)

Field experiment on
fund-raising

Size of request

The size of the request affected the
percentage of givers and the size of giving.

Helping Behavior /35

ies in this area; of the several thousand studies pnblished,
only 27, or less than .5%, deal with helping. A similar pattern holds for conference proceedings as well. Over the past
10 years, on average, less than 1.5% of the articles in the
proceedings of the American Marketing Association and the
Association for Consumer Research deal with helping
geared toward charities.
The few studies that have examined helping behavior
have focused on select aspects of the charitable organization's solicitation strategy. For example, 5 of the 27 studies
reported in Table I deal with the amount of donation requested. The type of request (e.g., whether labels such as
"helpful" are used) is the focus of 7 studies. Although the attention to these issues is well deserved, the literature has not
adequately addressed other equally important issues, such as
social norms for helping and donor perceptions. Also ignored are other dimensions of the organization's solicitation
strategy, such as the familiarity of the charity and the portrayal of the help recipient. It is important to integrate all of
these effects, because helping behavior most likely is a function of all of these influences.
Two calls for such an integration come from studies by
Burnett and Wood (1988) and Guy and Patton (1989), both
of which make laudable efforts to generate greater attention
to helping behavior from marketers. These authors review
some of the theoretical underpinnings of helping behavior
and propose models of the donation decision process. We extend these earlier works in three important directions. First,
we explicitly account for the diverse motivations that underlie helping behavior to answer the question, Why do people
help? Both Burnett and Wood and Guy and Patton suggest
that this is a key issue and conclude that diverse motivations
may differentially affect the person's helping decision
process. However, the different motivational routes are not
built into their proposed models. Second, we specifically address the role of the soliciting charitable organization in the
helping decision process. Most work in helping behavior has
focused on the help that is rendered directly from a donor to
a needy beneficiary. In contrast, a charity acts as an intermediary between the donor and the ultimate beneficiary. As
Burnett and Wood (p. 35) note, though there is a great deal
of research on direct help by the donor to the beneficiary,
"we know nothing about the relative impact of the agent representing the recipient." Third, in examining donor motivations and organizational context in tandem, we present
testable propositions on promotional strategies for charities.

A Conceptual Framework of Help
Rendered to Charitable
Organ izations

A conceptual framework delineating helping behavior and
its antecedents, moderators, and consequences is shown in
Figure I. Several variables may affect the help rendered to a
charity: Some can be controlled by the charity (e.g., its appeals for help), whereas others are beyond its direct control
(e.g., the state of the economy). We present the controllable
promotional variables as antecedents of helping behavior
and the uncontrollable variables as moderators that affect
36/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

the relationship between the antecedent variables and the
helping behavior.
Antecedents. The charity may affect helping behavior
through several antecedent variables under its control. For
example, within its promotional program, the charity may
control source variables (i.e., variables relating to the charity's image, such as whether it is perceived as efficient), message variables (e.g., whether it emphasizes the beneficiary's
similarity to the potential donor), and request variables (e.g.,
whether the requested help involves money, time, blood).
Moderators. The impact of the promotional variables on
helping behavior may be moderated by several uncontrollable factors. For ease of exposition, we have divided these
into donor and nondonor variables. Some donor variables
are persistent; that is, they persist across solicitations. These
include perceptions (whether the cause is perceived as worthy), motives (whether the motivation is egoistic, such as
gaining praise for helping, or altruistic, such as alleviating
the need), and abilities (e.g., the donor's physical, financial,
or psychological resources). Other variables are transient or
specific to a solicitation. These include mood state (e.g.,
whether the donor is in a good mood when exposed to the
appeal for help), media exposure (e.g., whether the donor
watches the television program in which the solicitation is
made), and attention (e.g., whether distractions in the environment prevent attending to the appeal). Whether help is
rendered also may be affected by nondonor variables, such
as govemment policies (e.g., tax deductions), the state ofthe
economy (e.g., whether the economy is in a recession), social norms (e.g., greater giving at Christmas time, particularly to children's causes), technology (e.g., medical advances in transplanting body parts), and competing charities
(e.g., appeals, perceived relative efficiency).
Behavior. In response to the solicitation, the potential
donor may respond with different degrees of helping behavior. One response may be not to help at all. If the donor
chooses to help, it may be either token help (e.g., making a
modest contribution to get rid of a persistent solicitor) or serious help (e.g., a substantial contribution to address the
need).
Consequences. The consequences of helping behavior
are manifold. First, the obvious consequences for the beneficiaries are whether their need is relieved. Second, there are
consequences for the charity: The help generated determines
the charity's level of success and aids adaptation by providing feedback in planning future solicitations. Third, there
are social, cultural, and economic consequences for the
donor's community, even when the beneficiary is not part of"
it (e.g., a person in the United States contributes to famine
relief in Africa). Helping may affect the community's attitudes regarding the roles of private charities versus public
institutions in helping the needy. It also may affect the number and growth potential of competing charities in the community. Finally, there are consequences for the individual
donor. The degree of help given may affect the donor's future perceptions (e.g., learning about the charity by helping
may lead to a more positive perception), motives (e.g., a
person who feels guilty about not helping in the past may

help later to relieve the guilt), and abilities (e.g., the size of
prior help may affect the ability to provide future help).
Most significant for the charitable organization, prior helping behavior may affect future helping behavior.
Clearly, the task facing the charity is to adapt those variables under its control to the uncontrollable variables in the
environment so as to generate the greatest helping. Discussing all these variables is beyond the scope of our article.
We focus instead on how the charity may adapt its solicitation strategy to critical donor variables. Toward this end, we
present a synthesis of insights into the donor decision
process, drawing on work in marketing, economics, sociology, and social psychology. Next, we examine specific charity-controlled variables as interventions that affect the helping decision process and present propositions regarding promotional strategies to maximize the likelihood of help.

The Donor's Decision Process:
Propositions on Promotional
Strategy
We focus on generic helping rather than on specific
forms of help, such as donating blood, versus money, versus
time, and so on. The decision process must be adjusted for
different kinds of helping, such as emergency versus nonemergency helping, planned versus spontaneous helping, or
doing versus giving (Smithson, Amato, and Pearce 1983).
There also are likely to be modifications based on the severity of the request. For example, the request to donate a body
part evokes a more involved decision process than one to
donate a dollar to charity (Simmons, Marine, and Simmons
1987). However, the basic steps in the decision processes
are the same for different kinds of helping (Smithson,
Amato, and Pearce 1983). It is the commonness of such
"generic" helping that is our focus. The generic helping decision process involves four sequential steps: (I) perception
of need, (2) motivation, (3) behavior, and (4) consequences
(Batson 1987; Krebs and Miller 1985). In Figure 2, we present a map of the helping decision process and graphically
summarize the propositions.
As is shown in Figure 2, the helping decision process is
not linear-it may be truncated at many junctures, leading to
noncompliance with the help request. Charities wishing to
shepherd donors through the decision process therefore
must be sensitive to these critical choice points. We subsequently discuss specific steps in the decision process and
propositions regarding charities' promotional strategies.
Step One: Perception

The helping decision process typically begins with the potential donor's perception that the charity is in need of help.
This perception may be triggered by personal experience (a
harsh winter may remind a person of the need for warm
clothing in a shelter for the homeless) or exposure to information. The information may come from personal sources
such as family and friends or from nonpersonal sources. The
nonpersonal sources may include appeals from the charity
itself or media reports regarding the charity or the cause.

Perception of need may not result automatically when
donors are exposed to the charity's appeal for help. It is generated only when the prospective donor perceives a significant gap between the beneficiary's current and ideal states
of well-being or between what is and what should be (Batson 1987). The charity may influence this need perception
through its image, its depiction of the cause of need, and its
portrayal of the beneficiary.
For perception of need to result, prospective donors first
must believe the charity's message depicting need. Whether
they do so may be a function of the charity's image. Social
psychological literature shows that messages are more likely to be accepted when the messengers are familiar and credible than when they are not (Kelman 1961). Consequently,
donors may be more likely to accept the portrayal of need
when it comes from familiar and credible charities. When the
charity's image is lacking-when it is obscure or lacks credibility-prospective donors may either ignore the message
or even distort it (e.g., "the message merely hypes up need to
manipulate donors"). The image of the charity thus may be
the single most critical element of its promotional program
because it may determine whether the first step of the helping decision process-perception of need-is initiated.
Why should donors rely on charity image? Charities are
intermediaries promising to act on behalf of donors, by reliably delivering the help to needy recipients. In agency theory terms, donors are principals who rely on charities to act
as their agents in disbursing help (Stark 1989).A major concern for principals in such relationships is the problem of
adverse selection, that is, the problem of choosing the right
agent-the one with desirable characteristics such as efficiency or effectiveness. For donors, the charity's image may
provide cues as to how well it will function as their agent.
Consistent with this reasoning, studies show that messages
from charities that are perceived as familiar or well known,
efficient, and effective result in greater perceptions of need
and greater helping behavior (Harvey 1990).
Familiarity is typically measured in terms of general
awareness of the charity; it is a measure of whether the charity is high or low profile. Being high profile is not necessarily good: the charity may be high profile for the wrong reasons (e.g., being cited for mismanagement or fraud). Efficiency and effectiveness deal with how well the charity
functions. Efficiency is the proportion of donations that goes
to the ultimate beneficiaries, as opposed to administrative or
fund-raising activities, for example. Effectiveness refers to
the charity's perceived success in meeting its objectives.
Does the charity's image have the same influence in all
solicitation contexts? Social impact theory (Latane 1981)
suggests not; the influence of the charity's image may be a
function of the media context in which the appeal is made.
Social impact theory proposes that people pay more attention to immediate cues than to remote cues, because the former have greater social impact. How much donors rely on
the charity's image may be determined by whether more immediate cues are available. For example, if a charity's appeal for help is presented in a door-to-door campaign, the
number, sex, appearance, and so on of the solicitors are
more immediate social cues than the charity's image and

Helping Behavior /37

should have greater social impact. If the appeal is presented
in the mass media, however, potential donors do not have
other, more immediate cues on which to rely, and hence the
charity's image may have more impact. The previous discussion leads to the following:
Pia: The perception of need and, consequently, helping behavior depends on the charity's image. The greater the charity's perceived positive familiarity, efficiency, and effectiveness, the greater the need perception and helping
behavior.
P l b : The impact of the charity's image varies by media context. It has a greater impact in mass media appeals than in
personal solicitations (e.g., door-to-door, telephone).

Charities also may influence the perception of need
through their explanations about the cause of need (Krebs
and Miller 1985). Perception of need and, consequently,
helping appears to be greater when the beneficiary's need is
caused by external, uncontrollable factors than when it is
caused by his or her own actions (Griffin et aI. 1993). There
is theoretical support for this finding in organizational jus-

tice literature (Tyler 1994), which suggests that people are
concerned about the fairness of allocated outcomes (distributive justice) and the procedures used to allocate the outcomes (procedural justice) (Bies 1987; Greenberg 1987).
People asked to allocate resources are concerned about the
fairness or equity of the allocation: Outcomes should be
consistent with inputs (Tyler 1994). When beneficiaries appear to have caused their own need, the outcomes (their
need) may appear consistent with their inputs; hence, potential donors may not perceive any need. However, when people appear to be needy through no fault of their own, the
outcome may be perceived as inequitable and donors may
seek to restore justice by acknowledging the need and helping to reduce it. For example, in response to the 100 "neediest" cases advertised in the New York Times, more donations were given to people whose need appeared to be not of
their own doing (e.g., abused children) than to people who
seemed to have "caused" their own need (e.g., recovering alcoholics) (Berkowitz 1972).

FIGURE 1
A Conceptual Framework of People's Helping Behavior Toward Charities

38/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

FIGURE 2
A Process Map of People's Helping Decisions

Helping Behavior /39

The effect of the cause of need may be moderated by one
manifestation of the distributive justice motive, a personal
characteristic termed belief in a just world (Lerner 1980),
which is the belief that this is a just world in which people
get what they deserve in life. To a person who holds this belief, the suffering of an "innocent victim" (e.g., a person
who contracted AIDS through a blood transfusion) seems
undeserved-the gap between the current and ideal states is
high-and the need seems extremely salient. On the other
hand, when confronted with people whose suffering seems
to be self-induced, this person does not perceive a gap between the current and ideal states ("After all, they merely
got what they deserved"). Thus, a person with a high belief
in a just world may be more inclined to donate to breast cancer research (a disease perceived to be outside the victim's
control) than to lung cancer research (a disease-rightly or
wrongly-perceived to be a result of the victim's choice to
smoke).
P2a : The perception of need and, consequently, helping behavior is affected by the perceived cause of need. Need perception and helping are greater when the need is perceived
to be due to external causes outside the beneficiary's control than to internal causes under the beneficiary's control.
P2b : The greater the potential donor's belief in a just world, the
stronger the association between the perceived cause of
need and helping.

As we discussed previously, prospective donors perceive need when they believe that a gap exists between the
beneficiary's current and ideal states. Charities typically attempt to increase the salience of the gap through their beneficiary portrayal. This issue is fraught with difficult choices.
The beneficiary portrayal must be strong enough to command attention but not so strong that it is viewed as manipulative. If appeals are viewed as a hard sell, helping may actually be lessened (Moore, Bearden, and Teel 1985). In
treading this fine line, a critical issue for a charity is whether
to emphasize the need by including a picture in its appeals.
Furthermore, if a picture is used, should it portray a needy
beneficiary or a helped beneficiary? The answers are unclear
because there are only two studies of the use of pictures, and
their results are contradictory.
Isen and Noonberg (1979) report that in a door-to-door
solicitation, the use of a needy beneficiary picture appeal (a
starving child) in conjunction with a verbal appeal resulted
in lower helping than the use of the verbal appeal alone.
Thornton, Kirshner, and Jacobs (1991) report that under
identical conditions, there was no significant difference between the two conditions. To explain these contradictions,
Thornton, Kirshner, and Jacobs speculate that the picture appeal had no effect because the solicitors might have had so
much social impact that donors ignored the picture; however, this does not account for the reduced helping reported by
Isen and Noonberg. Isen and Noonberg propose that the
needy picture appeal may have reduced helping because it
(1) created a bad mood in donors, (2) made the task cognitively complex, or (3) created reactance in potential donors.
The mood explanation is not tenable, because a bad mood
does not always reduce helping; at times, it increases helping (for a review, see Clark and Isen 1982). The cognitive

40 I Journal of Marketing, July 1996

complexity explanation is unconvincing because pictures
actually make messages easier to process (e.g., Childers and
Houston 1984). Reactance formation, however, remains a
plausible explanation for the observed results.
Reactance theory (Brehm 1966) posits that people possess certain behavioral and attitudinal freedoms. When these
freedoms are threatened by persuasive appeals, reactance is
aroused. The charity's appeal, for example, may threaten the
donor's freedom to spend money or time in another fashion.
When the charity uses too strong an appeal for help (e.g.,
combining a verbal appeal with a needy picture), it may be
seen as manipulative or threatening to the potential donor's
freedom to not help. This may cause strong reactance: The
donor may react by minimizing the perceived need and not
complying with the help request. If, however, a verbal appeal is combined with a picture of a helped beneficiary (e.g.,
a woman safe in a battered woman's shelter), it may be less
threatening to the donor's freedom not to help. That is, the
helped picture may reduce the reactance caused by the verbal appeal and, thus, increase the level helping.
P 3: Perception of need and, consequently, helping is affected
by beneficiary portrayal. Compared to a verbal appeal only,
adding a needy beneficiary picture should result in lower
perceived need and helping, whereas adding a helped beneficiary picture should result in greater perceived need and
helping.

Step Two: Motivation

The motivation for helping may be egoistic, altruistic, or
both. Egoistic motivation has the ultimate goal of increasing
a person's own welfare (Martin 1994). It has been further
distinguished into two categories based on the focus of a
person's concern for him- or herself (Batson 1987). The first
category is the motivation to gain rewards for helping or
avoid punishment for not helping (Cialdini et al. 1987).
These rewards and punishments include intangible cognitive
and psychological outcomes, as well as tangible benefits and
penalties; they also may be conferred by self (e.g., pride versus guilt) or by society (e.g., praise versus censure). This
category comprises such motivations as securing recognition, a sense of belonging, career advancement, tax advantages, peer pressure, and political gains (American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel 1994).
The second category deals with a different egoistic response-that of concern for a person's own distress (Piliavin et al. 1981). When confronted with someone who is
needy, a person may experience distress. The person then
may try to reduce personal distress by helping or escaping
the need situation (e.g., ignoring the message). The motivation is egoistic because even when it results in helping, the
ultimate goal is to reduce the donor's personal distress.
Altruistic motivation, in contrast, has the ultimate goal
of enhancing the welfare of the needy (Martin 1994), even
at the expense of a person's own welfare. Although the term
altruism is fairly new (coined by Comte 1851), the debate
over whether true altruism exists-that is, whether behavior
can be motivated by other than obvious or subtle self-interest-has held an abiding fascination for philosophers and
scholars of every age. Within Western thought, the Greek

philosophers (notably in Aristotle's Ethics and Plato's Lysis)
are credited with advancing egoism as the central tenet of
human behavior. The alternative perspective, that at least
some behavior is truly altruistic, is traced to the JudeoChristian religious tradition and its emphasis on "loving thy
neighbor as thy self' (for a detailed examination of the
philosophical debate and its development, see Batson 1991).
Today, there is a consensus that at least in some situations, true altruism exists. The existence of altruistic motives, as well as the distinction between the two categories
of egoistic motives, is well supported by empirical studies
(Batson et al. 1988; Fultz, Schuller, and Cialdini 1988; Griffin et al. 1993). The logic behind the studies is simple. When
people help for egoistic reasons, helping is just a means to
an end, namely, attaining rewards, avoiding punishments, or
escaping personal distress. Thus, when they are provided
with alternative ways to reach their goals-for example, by
allowing them to escape the situation and hence the needthey will readily abandon the needy target. On the other
hand, if they are altruistically motivated, they will ignore the
alternatives and persist in helping until the need is met
(Davis 1994). This pattern holds and provides evidence for
the distinct motivational paths (for reviews, see Batson
1987, 1991; Dovidio, Allen, and Schroeder 1990).
It is possible for people to simultaneously experience
several motives, some of which may even be conflicting.
The opportunity to help by volunteering at a disaster site
may evoke an altruistic motive to help others as well as an
egoistic motive to avoid the distress caused by human anguish. If the different motivational states are compatible,
there is an additive effect. If they are not, there is a drive to
satisfy the stronger motivational state (Batson 1987). We
next explore the specific motivations.
Egoistic motivation to gain reward and/or avoid punishments. The potential donor faced with a helping situation
may form expectations regarding the rewards (or punishments) for helping (or not helping). The expectations may
stem from the donor's learning history (direct and vicarious
experiences), or they may be created by the organization's
appeals for help. For example, a charity soliciting blood donations may invoke the rewards of helping (e.g., promising
first-time donors $25) or the punishments for not helping
(e.g., suggesting that nondonors are sure to experience
pangs of guilt).
Alternatively, the charitable organization could use labeling to affect donor expectations. Labeling involves giving people labels (purportedly based on their behavior) to
motivate them to behave in a label-consistent fashion. Labeling is presumed to lead the person being labeled to believe he or she possesses the characteristics of the label
(Kraut 1973). Thus, the label may activate expectations regarding the rewards for label-consistent behavior and the
punishments for inconsistent behavior. For example, labeling people as kind, generous, or helpful elicits greater motivation to help and greater helping (Swinyard and Ray 1977)
and fosters favorable attitudes toward the soliciting organization (Moore, Bearden, and Teel 1985).
Labeling is only effective when the person being labeled
accepts the label (Allen 1982). As we previously discussed,

messages are more likely to be accepted when they come
from credible sources. Because familiar sources have more
credibility, it may appear that labeling would always be
more effective for a high-profile charity than for its low-profile counterpart. However, self-perception theory (Bern
1972) suggests this may not be the case. The impact of the
charity's profile or familiarity may be moderated by the
donor's donation history.
People contacted for the first time may be more accepting of labels from high-profile charities than of those from
low-profile charities because they view the former as more
credible. Prior donors, however, may be more accepting of
labels from low-profile charities, because people who have
donated to low-profile charities are more likely to make internal attributions for their behavior (e.g., I must truly be
generous to support a lesser-known charity). In contrast,
people who have donated to high-profile charities may ascribe their behavior to the charity's familiarity (e.g., everyone gives to the Red Cross) rather than to themselves (e.g., I
gave to the Red Cross because I am generous or helpful). In
self-perception terms, the presence of external factors (the
high-profile of the organization) may lead to the discounting
of internal motivations (Scott 1978). In contrast, when the
low-profile organization uses labeling with previous donors,
the label should be consistent with their self-schema and
therefore more effective (Tybout and Yalch 1980).
P4a: Stronger motivation to help and greater helping result
when potential donors are given labels congruent with
helping behavior (e.g., kind, generous) than when such
labels are not given.
P4b : The effectiveness of a labeling strategy depends on the
person's donation history. When contacting people for the
first time, giving labels congruent with helping behavior
is more effective for charities that are familiar or wellknown than for those that are less familiar or less wellknown. When contacting people who have donated previously, the opposite pattern holds.

We have suggested that egoistic motivation may be
aroused by the prospect of either gaining rewards for helping or avoiding punishments for not helping. Which of these
is a stronger motivator may depend on the potential donor's
mood state. People in a good mood are more responsive to
gaining rewards than to avoiding punishments; those in a
bad mood respond better to avoiding punishments than to
gaining rewards (Cunningham, Steinberg, and Greu 1980).
Charitable organizations have little control over the potential donor's mood state (the mood being both transient and
affected by any number of factors beyond the charity's influence). However, they can take steps to align their message to the possible mood state of donors. First, because of
the demonstrated positive effects of good mood on helping
behavior (Isen 1984), organizations can try to place their appeals in media contexts designed to create a good mood in
their target audience (e.g., positive, upbeat forums such as
Comic Relief, a popular television comedy program designed to raise funds for the homeless). Second, when presenting their appeals in such media contexts, organizations
may do well to avoid punishment-oriented messages (e.g.,
"Think of how guilty you will feel for not helping") and inHelping Behavior /41

stead emphasize the rewards of helping. The previous discussion suggests the following:
P5: When contacting potential donors who are in a good mood,
emphasizing the rewards for helping is more effective than
emphasizing the punishments for not helping. The opposite
is true when contacting potential donors who are in a bad
mood.

Egoistic motivation to reduce personal distress. In some
potential donors, the perception of need may cause personal
distress. This in tum leads to helping.s especially when the
donors perceive the beneficiary as being similar to them
(Piliavin et al. 1981). Why should similarity matter to
donors? One explanation proffered by economists evokes
the evolutionary significance of physical similarity
(Samuelson 1993; Simon 1993). Economists have traditionally viewed helping behavior as a paradox: Rational, utilitymaximizing people engage in behavior that appears not to
enhance their personal well-being (i.e., behavior whose
costs appear to outweigh the benefits). This stream of research suggests that apparent altruism at the individual level
might actually be egoism from the vantage of evolution.
Specifically, helping behavior may enhance the person's,
genotype's, or group's prospects for survival. Helping similar others, it is argued, may be a "selfish" way of ensuring
that a person's own genetic pool is preserved, because a similar beneficiary is more likely to belong to the helper's "ingroup" (group selection) or to be kin (kin selection) (Margolis 1982). Personal distress when seeing the need of a similar beneficiary may thus have evolutionary significance.
The strategy of emphasizing beneficiary similarity
would be too restrictive if only physical similarity counts.
However, psychological studies suggest that perceived beneficiary similarity on other, nonphysical dimensions also
creates personal distress. For instance, similarity of values
or attitudes may be just as powerful as physical similarity
(Heider 1958). Thus, a charity may rely on shared values
and attitudes to create a common bond between the helper
and the beneficiary. For example, adults may give more
readily to Toys for Tots than to the American Cancer Society at Christmas time if they perceive Toys for Tots as embodying a shared value that the holiday season should be
especially joyful for children. In addition to beneficiary
similarity, charities may also capitalize on solicitor similarity, by matching solicitors to similar potential donors (e.g.,
by ethnicity, language preference). Support for the positive
effects of such matching comes from the literature on sales
force effectiveness.
P6a : Greater personal distress and stronger motivation to help
result when appeals stress the similarity of the beneficiary
or solicitor to the potential donor than when they do not.

The effect of the beneficiary's or solicitor's similarity on
the personal distress of the donor may be moderated by his
lCharities must be careful not to induce too much distress. If
personal distress is excessive, donors may seek to escape the need
situation physically (e.g., changing the television channel when an
appeal involves graphic images of starvation) or psychologically
(e.g., minimizing the need by rationalizing that it is exaggerated to
win sympathy).

42/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

or her authoritarianism and belief in a just world. Compared
to people with egalitarian personalities, people with authoritarian personalities have a lower tolerance for "out-groups"
and opinions that conflict with theirs; therefore, seeing the
need of people who are dissimilar may not be disturbing.
Authoritarian people also are more likely to find people who
are similar more appealing. For instance, the similarity of
the beneficiary has been shown to lead to greater personal
distress and therefore to more helping among potential
donors with authoritarian personalities than among those
with egalitarian personalities (Mitchell and Byrne 1973).
Beneficiary or solicitor similarity also may be more important to people with a strong belief in a just world than to
those with a weak belief in a just world. People with a strong
belief in a just world believe that people get what they deserve. Hence, the need of similar beneficiaries may cause
them greater personal distress, because they might expect
that they too might suffer similar consequences (if similar
"inputs" should lead to similar "outcomes" in a just world).
Consequently, we propose,
P6b: Beneficiary or solicitor similarity causes greater personal

distress among potential donors with authoritarian personalities than among those with egalitarian personalities.
P6c : Beneficiary or solicitor similarity causes greater personal
distress among potential donors with a strong belief in a
just world than among those with a weak belief in a just
world.

Altruistic motivation. In contrast to the egoistic motives
discussed earlier, donors may also experience altruistic motives, especially if they experience empathy (Davis 1994).
Empathy may be defined as being aware of another person's
internal states and putting oneself in the place of another to
experience his or her feelings (Hoffman 1984). Not everyone
experiences empathy when confronted with someone who is
needy. Research suggests that a person is more likely to experience empathy when he or she has high empathic ability
("the tendency to spontaneously adopt the psychological
point of view of others," Davis 1983, pp. 113-14), prior experience with the need (a recovering alcoholic may more
easily empathize with another person in the same state), or
emotional attachment to the cause (Hoffman 1984).
Typically, a charity has little control over these factors
other than to attempt to target people with these characteristics.3 However, the charity may affect empathy through the
perspective advocated in its appeals. In an effort to encourage empathy, most charitable organizations currently encourage their potential donors to imagine how they would
feel if they were in the beneficiary's situation. Unfortunately, this causes potential donors to focus on their own imagined distress and thus leads to a more negative affect (Aderman, Brehm, and Katz 1974), which would depress helping
behavior. Charitable organizations might find it more prof3Some evidence suggests that charities might affect the emotional attachment of potential donors by using strong emotional advertisements (Bagozzi and Moore 1994). Although this is promising, more research is needed regarding the effectiveness of this
strategy. Appeals that are too strong may lead to negative emotional responses of distress, fear, and denial, thus reducing empathy
and consequently helping (Stayman and Aaker 1988).

itable to instruct potential donors to imagine how the beneficiary would feel in the given situation. This has been
shown to lead to a more positive effect (Davis et al. 1987),
which should enhance the help rendered. The previous discussion suggests the following:
P7 : Greater empathy, and hence greater altruistic motivation, is
created when the appeal for help asks donors to imagine
how the beneficiary must be feeling than when the appeal
asks donors to imagine how they would feel if they were in
the beneficiary's place.

Step Three: Behavior

Following the motivation to help, the potential donor engages in the chosen behavior by complying or not complying with the request for help. If the donor complies with the
help request, the help may range from token helping (making a nominal contribution) to serious helping (making a
substantial contribution). The degree of help (none, token,
serious) depends on a cost-benefit analysis. The benefits of
a course of action may include attaining self- or social rewards, avoiding self- or social punishments, avoiding personal distress, or enhancing the other's welfare. These benefits may accrue from the end result (feeling good about volunteering for a good cause) as well as from the instrumental
behavior (volunteering may be a good opportunity for social
interaction). The costs involved may be financial (dollars
contributed), physical (effort involved in volunteering), psychological (trauma associated with working with a terminally ill person), or social (significant others may disapprove of
the cause). Costs also involve the opportunity costs of unchosen alternatives (dollars or time contributed to charities
are resources that cannot be spent on other activities).
Again, as with benefits, costs may accrue from the end result (personal time set back by total hours volunteered) and
instrumental behaviors (having to work in undesirable surroundings such as in an inner-city neighborhood).
Commitment to behavioral alternatives: Egoistic motivation. Research suggests that whether the potential donor
commits to helping or not helping depends on the perceived
cost-benefit trade-off. The charity may affect this trade-off
through the use of social comparisons (conveying that others have helped) and strategic altruism (conveying that helping is good strategy).
Sociological literature suggests that helping behavior
may be enhanced by stressing that it is the norm (Gouldner
1960) through the use of social comparisons. Because normative behavior is reinforced by society, knowledge that
others are behaving in a specific fashion should create pressure on a person to do so also. Specifically, people may reason, "If everyone is doing it, it must be a sensible thing to
do" (Cialdini, Reno, and Kallgren 1990). Reingen (1982)
demonstrates that providing a fictitious list of donors and
donations resulted in higher compliance rates and higher average donations: The longer the list, the greater the donations. Having a neighbor solicit blood donations (activating
normative behavior) was also shown to increase compliance
(Independent Sector 1994; LaTour and Manrai 1989). Similar findings are reported for reducing littering in public
places (Cialdini, Reno, and Kullgren 1990). Consequently,

Pga : Greater helping behavior results when normative or social
comparison appeals are used than when such appeals are
not used.

Through social comparisons, charities may be providing donors with potential models for them to emulate. Studies show that people help more when they are exposed to
role models who help (Wilson and Petruska 1984), presumably because the model provides information about the social norms for and the consequences of helping (Krebs and
Miller 1985). Providing models through normative or social comparison appeals may be particularly effective in situations that are fraught with social confusion or ambiguity
(Festinger 1954; Schachter 1959). When the behavior is
widely established and well understood or when its costs
and benefits are clear, there is no social ambiguity-a person need not rely on others for information on the appropriate conduct. When the behavior is rare or its consequences are not well understood, the situation is socially
ambiguous, and people look for social cues to guide their
behavior. Thus, social comparison appeals may be more effective in increasing behavior that is scarce (e.g., bone marrow donations among blacks and minorities) or about
which misperceptions exist (e.g., that a person can contract
AIDS by donating blood) than in increasing behaviors that
are well established or whose consequences are well understood (e.g., being a bell-ringer for the Salvation Army).
Hence, we propose,
Pgb: The effectiveness of normative or social comparison
appeals depend on the social ambiguity of the requested
helping behavior. The appeals are more effective in
increasing help when the behavior is not common in the
donor's community or when there are misperceptions
about it than when the behavior is common and the consequences are well understood.

As we previously discussed, charities may suggest that
cost-benefit trade-offs must favor helping because significant others are engaging in helping behavior. Alternatively,
they could suggest that helping is a sound strategy, thereby
invoking strategic altruism. The economic literature on
strategic altruism addresses the Samaritan's dilemma: how
to help without perpetuating dependence and selfish behavior in the recipient (Becker 1981; Bruce and Waldman 1990,
1991). Using the metaphor of the parent-child relationship,
it examines when and how a parent should help a potentially rotten child.t Knowing that the parent will come to his or
her aid, the rotten child may have no incentive to behave responsibly. In response, potential helpers focus on carefully
choosing whom, when, and how they help and monitor the
impact of the help on the recipients.
Strategic altruism suggests that choice enables donors to
optimize their resource allocation and should lead to greater
helping (Bruce and Waldman 1991). Thus, charities can enhance helping by giving potential donors greater choice in
specifying the beneficiaries, type, and timing of help. This
4The metaphor extends to transfers of wealth in other relationships, such as from a government (through welfare programs) or
private citizens (e.g., through charitable contributions) to needy
recipients.

Helping Behavior /43

beneficial effect of choice is validated by two other sources.
Studies of blood donation patterns show that providing
choice in a relatively trivial matter such as what arm from
which to draw blood leads to greater perceived benefits and
lower perceived costs to the donor (Mills and Krantz 1979).
Research on the effects of perceived choice in other, nonhelping contexts also suggests that choice leads to positive
psychological and behavioral outcomes (Hui and Bateson
1991).
Charities can improve perceived choice by providing
greater options to donors. For example, some charities allow
donors to specify the age, sex, and geographic region of the
intended beneficiary (e.g., Children's Christian Fund allows
donors to sponsor a child with a specific profile). This practice runs the risk of leaving less appealing beneficiaries underfunded. Charities in this situation may still provide
choice in the timing of donations (e.g., lump sum versus
quarterly) as well as in the type of donations (e.g., time,
money). Consequently, we propose,
P9: Greater helping results when charities allow donors to
practice strategic altruism by providing donors with choices regarding whom, when, and how they help than when
such choices are not provided.

To help, donors must believe in their self-efficacy, which
is the conviction that a person can successfully execute a behavior to produce a desired outcome (Bandura 1983). Selfefficacy has been linked to people's willingness to undertake a wide range of behaviors (Shelton 1990). People who
lack self-efficacy regarding a behavior doubt that they can
perform it, view it with anxiety, imagine negative consequences, and avoid the behavior. How do people develop
notions of self-efficacy? It may stem from direct or vicarious experiences (performing the behavior or watching others perform it) or from persuasion (exposure to information
that a person can or cannot perform a behavior) (Maddux
and Stanley 1986).
Charities may thus enhance donors' self-efficacy
through their appeals for help. This may be done in the presentation of the size of need and requested help or by emphasizing that significant (i.e., highly esteemed) others are
helping. When the need appears enormous, donors may believe that they are powerless to reduce it; this lack of selfefficacy may lead to their choosing not to help at all. To
counter this trend, the charity may focus on a manageable
segment of the need (e.g., helping one needy child as opposed to the starving millions), assuring donors it possesses the ability to provide serious help. Or, donors may believe that effective help requires contributions beyond their
means. In this case, the charity may adjust the size of the
requested help to emphasize that even a small donation is
effective and appreciated. Alternatively, they may emphasize that significant others are helping. As we discussed
previously, social comparisons can provide information on
appropriate behavior. Such models of helping may also
help donors develop vicarious expectancies of self-efficacy
(e.g., If my neighbor can help, I can, too). Consequently,
we propose,
44/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

PIO: Greater helping behavior results when charities persuade donors of their self-efficacy in helping than when
they do not.

Commitment to behavioral alternatives: Altruistic motivation. The process by which the potential donor commits to behavioral alternatives under altruistic motivation
is largely the same as in egoistic motivation. (We subsequently note a few differences.) For an altruistically motivated person, the magnitude of altruistic emotion (and the
benefit of satisfying it) is proportional to the magnitude of
the perceived need. Therefore, we expect that appeals emphasizing the need of the recipient should generate the
most helping from these donors. Altruistically motivated
donors also are presumably more focused on the need of
the other, and hence they might be less sensitive to other
factors (e.g., their own resources, their mood states, social
comparisons) in evaluating alternatives than are their egoistically motivated counterparts (Batson et al. 1988).
It also appears that people motivated by altruistic concerns are more likely to provide serious help than token help
(Clary and Orenstein 1991). Studies have demonstrated that
egoistically motivated people view help as a means to an
end. When given alternative ways to reach that end (e.g.,
gaining recognition for merely trying to help as opposed to
helping effectively), egoistically motivated people, trying to
gain the most benefits for the least costs, may choose token
helping (Davis 1994). In contrast, altruistically motivated
people are driven by the other's need. Consequently, they
may either help or not help, depending on the cost-benefit
trade-offs. They should be less likely to engage in self-serving token helping behavior because they recognize its futility in alleviating need (Batson 1987).
Step 4: Consequences

As is depicted in Figure 1, the consequences of helping behavior are far-reaching, affecting the beneficiary, charity,
donor, and community. We focus on the consequences of
helping behavior and the likelihood of subsequent help. Repeated help has not received adequate attention, primarily
because few longitudinal studies have been conducted on
this segment (Piliavin and Callero 1990); indeed, this area of
research has been termed speculative (Burnett and Wood
1988). Thus, we do not offer propositions for this section but
instead briefly discuss promising research streams.
Compliers. People who have helped in the past, or compliers, may continue to help, thereby becoming repeat
donors, or they may refuse to help again, thereby becoming
lapsed donors. A critical issue for charities in creating repeat
donors is how much to ask for in the next help request. One
strategy is to make escalating requests, that is, follow a
small request that is honored with a later, larger request for
help: This approach is termed foot-in-the-door (Freedman
and Fraser 1966). Foot-in-the-door is presumed to work, because people who have complied with a small, initial request
are expected to attribute their initial compliance to a distinctive favorable disposition to the cause or charity (I must
have helped because I truly believe in the cause). When such
attribution occurs, people feel pressured to continue to help

in order to appear consistent. If people are able to find other,
external reasons for their compliance, the act loses its distinctiveness and there is no pressure to continue helping
(Zuckerman, Lazzano, and Waldgeir 1979).
Hence, foot-in-the-door may not be equally effective for
all charities. When people help a high-profile charity, compliance may lose its distinctiveness, with donors reasoning,
for example, that anybody would help the Salvation Armyit is such a well-known organization. On the other hand,
when people help a low-profile charity, they are more likely
to view the initial help as distinctive and hence feel pressured to continue to help.> The strategy of escalating requests thus may be more effective for low-profile charities.
Recovering lapsed donors poses formidable challenges
(Squires 1992). Having once helped, why do some donors
lapse? Charities may find the insights from behavior modification particularly applicable here (Luthans and Kreitner
1985); namely, people's behavior is strengthened, maintained, weakened, or modified by its consequences. That is,
people persist in behavior that is rewarded or has positive
consequences and desist from behavior that is punished or
has negative consequences. When donors lapse, perhaps
helping is no longer rewarding to them, and the charity may
do well to probe why. It is possible that the donor believes
the help situation no longer meets his or her needs. For example, a student who volunteers in order to gain a resume
item may have no incentive to continue once that goal is
met. The charity may then focus on a different set of needs
that helping can satisfy. Such follow-up is costly, and organizations may wish to tailor the level of recovery effort to
the likelihood of recovery and the payoffs of recovery, using
such factors as number of years lapsed and the status at the
time of lapse (e.g., level of giving, annual versus multiple
gifts per year) (Kuhn 1989).

Noncompliers. People who have denied an initial request for help, or noncompliers, may continue to refuse to
help, thereby becoming hard-core nondonors, or they may
accede to a later request for help, thereby becoming converted to donors. In attempting to convert nondonors to
donors, charities may find guidance in the research on the
door-in-the-face technique (Cialdini et al. 1975), which focuses on the effect of noncompliance on later requests for
help. In this procedure, a subject is asked to comply with a
large, initial request for help. Following the subject's refusal, a smaller, critical request for help is made. It is proposed that the person who turns down the larger request for
help views the second, smaller request as a concession on
the part of the solicitor. Norms of reciprocity (Gouldner
1960) are then expected to prevail, with the subject reasoning that a similar reciprocal concession is in order and then
acceding to the smaller request for help. The success of the
technique depends on the person's perceiving a concession
on the part of the solicitor and feeling obligated to reciprocate. Again, the perception of the charity may dictate
whether this is an effective strategy. For the potential donor
5The attributions people make are only one reason for their helping low-profile charities. Another may be that they believe their
help will make a greater difference in these obscure charities than
in high-profile ones.

to feel obliged to reciprocate, it is important that he or she
view the soliciting charity as powerful or high-profile, because a concession is only viewed as magnanimous if made
by a powerful bargainer; in a weak counterpart, it is viewed
as a retreat. Hence, the donor may experience a greater
obligation to reciprocate a concession by a high-profile
charity (the Red Cross) than a low-profile one (Inter Faith
Hunger Appeal).
An important issue in tracking donors is whether they
have switched from one form of helping to another (a donor
who volunteers time may be in a time crunch and choose to
donate money instead) or from one cause to another. Some
evidence suggests that helpers are consistent: They may
move from one activity to another but they continue the general pattern of helping (American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel 1994). If this is true, identifying helping-prone
customers may be an effective strategy for charitable organizations (Danko and Stanley 1986).

Discussion
Trends indicate that the already significant demand for charities' services will increase in the years to come (Independent Sector 1994). To meet these growing needs, charities
may need to devise effective promotional strategies to elicit
greater help from donors. Literatures in which helping has
been studied (e.g., economics, sociology, social psychology)
are too fragmented by disciplinary boundaries to be of much
value in this task (Schlegelmilch, Diamantopouos, and Love
1992). Consequently, we attempt to advance theoretical understanding of such underresearched issues as what factors
affect helping behavior, why people help charitable causes,
and what promotional strategies are most likely to enhance
helping.
To understand the factors that affect helping, we present
a conceptual framework of helping behavior, including its
antecedents, moderators, and consequences, in Figure 1.
This framework is useful in synthesizing insights from different disciplines. Consider the focus of two fields of study:
Marketing research in the area has focused primarily on narrow aspects of the charity's solicitation, such as the size of
the request for help. In contrast, social psychological literature has emphasized donor characteristics-especially different motivations-and their effects on helping behavior;
because of the focus on a person directly helping a needy recipient, the influence of an intermediary charity is not investigated. By integrating the insights from these (and other)
disciplines, the framework enables theorizing to move beyond the prediction of main effects (either charity or donor
variables) to the richer investigation of the interaction effects of the charity and donor variables on helping behavior.
However, significant gaps remain in our understanding of
other aspects of the framework. For example, little is known
about the role of macroenvironmental variables (nondonor
moderators such as the state of the economy and government policy) in shaping helping behavior. The consequences
of helping behavior are also virtually unexplored and must
be examined in longitudinal studies.
To understand why people help charities, we examine
the donor's decision process (see Figure 2) and how chari-

Helping Behavior I 45

ties' promotional strategies can positively influence it to enhance helping, and we develop propositions regarding the
impact of these promotional strategies. Consider, for instance, the initial step of perception of need. The propositions suggest that the image of the charity, cause of the need,
and the portrayal of the beneficiary may determine whether
donors even perceive that the need exists. This conceptualization has significant practical and theoretical implications.
From a practical standpoint, raising donations for causes
such as drug rehabilitation or treatment of sexually transmitted diseases may pose a formidable challenge if people
believe the situation is caused by or is under the volition of
its victims. Stressing that the causes are at least partially outside the victims' control should help enhance perception of
need and helping behavior. These theoretical insights into
beneficiary portrayal must be extended to charities that deal
with multiple beneficiaries.
We have focused on how charities portray a single beneficiary or a segment of beneficiaries. Some organizations follow
this approach, clearly aligning themselves with a specific segment (e.g., Save the Children foundation). Other organizations
benefit a variety of recipients and causes (e.g., the United
Way). Clearly, these multiple constituencies vary in the extent
to which they are perceived as "causing" their own need. It is
possible that in such instances, donors are helping the charitable organization and not a specific beneficiary. Further research must empirically verify the implications of beneficiary
portrayal for an organization that has multiple beneficiaries.
Heeding earlier calls for attention to the diverse motivations that may underlie helping behavior, we examine the
different motivational paths to helping and the factors that
guide the helping decision on each path. The presence of
distinct motivational paths has received considerable research support in the social psychological, sociological, and
economic literature. Marketing, however, has hitherto relied
only on anecdotal evidence regarding the different motivations behind donations to charitable organizations (Sharpe
1987). By formalizing the motivational routes-to gain rewards or avoid punishments, to reduce personal distress, to
alleviate the other's need-we enrich current understanding
of the helping decision process. This understanding also can
help charities recruit and sustain donors by aiding in pairing
potential donors with appropriate helping opportunities.
Charitable organizations (e.g., Big BrotherslBig Sisters of
America, hospitals) routinely screen volunteers before accepting their help. If a volunteer is identified as motivated
by social rewards (e.g., praise, recognition), the organization
may be better off placing the volunteer in a high-visibility
position (e.g., as a receptionist) than in a low-visibility position (Omoto and Snyder 1989).
The process map also reflects our conceptualization of
different degrees of helping behavior (no help, token help,
serious help), instead of a dichotomy of helping or not help-

ing. Current research enables us to offer propositions regarding the conditions under which helping behavior (either
token or serious help versus no help) is more likely. However, there remains a significant gap in the understanding of
the conditions under which token versus serious help is rendered. For example, we have posited that social comparisons result in a greater likelihood of helping. Would people
responding to such appeals (e.g., everyone is helping) try to
make token contributions so that they can reap the benefits
of helping at minimal cost?
Another area that must be addressed is the consequences
of helping. Because of the lack of adequate research in this
area, we have not offered propositions regarding the effects
of initial helping behavior; however, we have identified several potentially useful research streams to guide theorizing
in this area. Current marketing literature ignores the differences between charitable organizations (e.g., a familiar,
well-known versus a less familiar, less well-known organization), recommending universal strategies for all organizations. We advocate recognizing these differences and adapting the solicitation strategies accordingly. Consider, for example, the choice between foot-in-the-door and door-in-theface solicitation techniques. Our discussion suggests that
foot-in-the-door may be more effective for less familiar organizations, whereas door-in-the-face may be better for
more familiar organizations.
Most of the propositions presented require a knowledge
of the donors' persistent and momentary characteristics;
however, there is no syndicated information on these dimensions. Charities may avoid this problem in two ways.
First, for mass-media appeals, they may try to establish the
demographic correlates of constructs such as belief in a just
world (Witt 1989) and match these to audience profiles.
Second, charities maintain some profiles on regular or new
donors; these may be extended and refined to include information about the donor's motivations for helping and expectations regarding the consequences. Customizing the
helping situation in this fashion may help charitable organizations practice relationship marketing (McCort 1993). Relationship marketing, with its focus on maintaining longterm relationships, may provide valuable guidelines to charities hoping to sustain reliable donor bases.
In studying helping behavior, marketers would be entering a new and challenging area (Goldberg 1994). Despite
the challenges, however, the study of the help rendered to
charitable organizations will have significant payoffs on
several fronts. Charitable organizations are often the front
line of defense against the myriad, growing problems of
today's society--drugs, violence, AIDS, homelessness, and
hopelessness, to name a few. By buttressing the efforts of
charitable organizations, marketers may make the world a
healthier and happier place (Andreasen 1993), not a mean
accomplishment for any discipline or its practitioners.

REFERENCES
Aderman, David, Sharon Brehm, and Lawrence Katz (1974), "Empathic Observations of an Innocent Victim," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29 (3), 342-47.

46I Journal of Marketing, July 1996

Allen, Chris T. (1982), "Self-Perception Based Strategies for Stimulating Energy Conservation," Journal of Consumer Research,
8 (March), 381-90.

Allen, Jeff and Nick Maddox (1990), "Segmenting Blood Donors
by Their Perceptions and Awareness About Blood Donations,"
Health Marketing Quarterly, 7 (1/2), 177-93.
- - - and Daniel D. Butler (1993), "Assessing the Effects of
Donor Knowledge Risk on Intentions to Donate Blood," Journal of Health Care Marketing, 13 (3), 26-33.
American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel (1994), Giving
USA. New York: American Association of Fund-Raising
Counsel.
Andreasen, Alan R. (1993 ), "A Social Marketing Research Agenda
for Consumer Behavior Researchers," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 20, Leigh McAlister and Michael L.
Rothschild, eds. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1-5.
Bagozzi, Richard P. and David J. Moore (1994), "Public Service
Advertisements: Emotions and Empathy Guide Prosocial Behavior," Journal of Marketing, 58 (January), 56-70.
Bandura, Albert (1983), "Self-Efficacy Determinants of Anticipated Fears and Calamities," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45 (2), 464-469.
Barr, Peter B., Dinesh S. Dave, Sammy Amin (1991), "Perceptual
Attitudes of a Charitable Organization," Health Marketing
Quarterly, 8 (3/4), 81-95.
Batson, Daniel C. (1987), "Prosocial Motivation: Is it Ever Truly
Altruistic?" in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
Vol. 20, L. Berkowitz, ed. New York: Academic Press, 65-122.
- - - (1991), The Altruism Question. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
- - - , Janine L. Dyck, Randall Brandt, Judy A. Batson, Anne L.
Powell, M. Rosalie McMaster, and Cari Griffith (1988), "Five
Studies Testing Two New Egoistic Alternatives to the EmpathyAltruism Hypothesis," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 (1), 52-77.
Becker, Gary S. (1981), A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Bem, Darryl J. (1972), "Self-Perception Theory," in Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, L. Berkowitz, ed. New York:
Academic Press, 1-62.
Berkowitz, L. (1972), "Social Norms, Feelings, and Other Factors
Affecting Helping Behavior," in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 6, M. L. Berkowitz, ed. New York: Academic Press, 220-30.
Bies, Robert J. (1987), "The Predicament of Injustice: The Management of Moral Outrage," in Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 9, L. L. Cummings and B. M. Staw, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 289-319.
Blockner, Joel, Beth Guzzi, Julie Kane, Ellen Levine, and Kate
Shaplen (1984), "Organizational Fundraising: Further Evidence
on the Effect of Legitimizing Small Donations," Journal of
Consumer Research, 11 (June), 611-14.
Bloom, Paul N. and William D. Novelli (1981), "Problems and
Challenges in Social Marketing," Journal of Marketing, 45
(Spring), 79-88.
Brehm, Jack W. (1966), A Theory of Psychological Reactance.
New York: Academic Press.
Broadbridge, Adelina and Suzanne Home (1994), "Who Volunteers for Charity Retailing and Why?" Service Industries Journal, 14 (4), 421-37.
Bruce, Neil and Michael Waldman (1990), "The Rotten Kid Theorem Meets the Samaritan's Dilemma," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105 (I), 155-65.
- - - and - - - (1991), "Transfers in Kind: Why They Can Be
Efficient and Non-Paternalistic," American Economic Review,
81 (5), 1345-51.
Burnett, John J. (1981), "Psychographic and Demographic Characteristics of Blood Donors," Journal of Consumer Research, 8
(June), 62-66.

- - - and Van R. Wood (1988), "A Proposed Model of the Donation Decision Process," in Research in Consumer Behavior, E.
Hirschman and J. Sheth, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1--47.
Burnkrant, Robert E. and Thomas J. Page, Jr. (1982), "An Examination of the Convergent, Discriminant, and Predictive Validity
of Fishbein's Behavioral Intention Model," Journal of Marketing Research, 19 (November), 550-61.
Cermak, Dianne S. P., Karen Maru File, and Russ Alan Prince
(1994), "A Benefit Segmentation of the Major Donor Market,"
Journal of Business Research, 29 (2), 121-34.
Childers, Terry L. and Michael J. Houston (1984), "Conditions for
a Picture-Superiority Effect on Consumer Memory," Journal of
Consumer Research, II (September), 643-54.
Cialdini, R. 8., R. R. Reno, and C. A. Kallgren (1990), "A Focus
Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of
Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58 (6), 1015-26.
- - - , M. Schaller, D. Houlihan, K. Arps, F. Fultz, and A. Beaman (1987), "Empathy-Based Helping: Is it Selfishly or Selflessly Motivated?" Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 749-58.
- - - , J. E. Vincent, S. K. Lewis, J. Catalan, D. Wheeler, and B.
L. Darby (1975), "Reciprocal Concessions Procedure for Inducing Compliance: The Door-in-the-Face Technique," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 31 (February), 206-15.
Clark, Margaret S. and Alice M. Isen (1982), "Toward Understanding the Relationship Between Feeling States and Social Behavior," in Cognitive Social Psychology, Albert H. Hastoef and
Alice M. Isen, eds. New York: Elsevier North-Holland, 73-108.
Clary, Gil E. and Leslie Orenstein (1991), "The Amount and Effectiveness of Help: The Relationship of Motives and Abilities
to Helping Behavior," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17 (I), 58-64.
Comte, I. Auguste (1851), System of Positive Polity. London:
Longmans, Green.
Cunningham, M. R., 1. Steinberg, and R. Greu (1980), "Wanting to
and Having to Help: Separate Motivations for Positive Mood
and Guilt-Induced Helping," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 38 (2), 181-92.
Danko, William D. and Thomas J. Stanley (1986), "Identifying and
Reaching the Donation-Prone Individual: A Nationwide Assessment," Journal of Professional Services Marketing, 2
(FalllWinter), 117-22.
Davis, Mark H. (1983), "Measuring Individual Differences in Empathy: Evidence for a Multidimensional Approach," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 44 (1), 113-26.
- - - (1994), "Helping and Empathy: Taking the Multi-Dimensional View," in Marketing Theory and Applications: American
Marketing Association Winter Conference, c. Whan Park and
Daniel C. Smith, eds. Chicago: American Marketing Association, 1.
- - - , Jay G. Hull, Richard D. Young, and Gregory G. Warren
(1987), "Emotional Reactions to Dramatic Film Stimuli: The
Influence of Cognitive and Emotional Empathy," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52 (1), 126-33.
Dawson, Scott (1988), "Four Motivations for Charitable Giving:
Implications for Marketing Strategy to Attract Monetary Donations for Medical Research," Journal of Health Care Marketing
8 (June), 31-37.
Dovidio, John E, Judith L. Allen, and David A. Schroeder (1990),
"Specificity of Empathy-Induced Helping: Evidence for Altruistic Motivation," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59 (2), 249-60.
Eisenberg, Nancy (1986), Altruistic Emotion, Cognition, and Behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Engel, James, Martin R. Warshaw, and Thomas C. Kinnear (1994),
Promotional Strategy. Boston: Richard D. Irwin

Helping Behavior I 47

Fern, Edward E, Kent B. Monroe, and Ramon A. Avila (1986),
"Effectiveness of Multiple Request Strategies: A Synthesis of
Research Results," Journal of Marketing Research, 23 (May),
144-52.
Festinger, Leon (1954), "A Theory of Social Comparison Processes," Human Relations, 7, 117-40.
Fraser, Cynthia, Robert E. Hite, and Paul L. Sauer (1988), "Increasing Contributions in Solicitation Campaigns: The Use of
Large and Small Anchor Points," Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (2), 284-87.
Freedman, J. L. and S. Fraser (1966), "Compliance Without Pressure: The Foot-in-the-Door Technique," Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 4 (October), 195-202.
Fultz, 1., M. Schaller, and R. B. Cialdini, (1988), "Empathy, Sadness, and Distress: Three Related but Distinct Affective Responses to Another's Suffering," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14 (2), 312-25.
Goldberg, Marvin E. (1994), "Social Marketing: Are We Fiddling
While Rome Burns?" Presidential Address for the Society for
Consumer Psychology.
Gouldner, A. W. (1960), "The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary
Statement," American Sociological Review, 25 (2), 161-79.
Greenberg, Jerald (1987), "A Taxonomy of Organizational Justice
Theories," Academy of Management Review, 12 (I), 9-22.
Griffin, Mitch, Barry 1. Babin, Jill S. Attaway, and William R. Darden (1993), "Hey You, Can Ya Spare Some Change? The Case
of Empathy and Personal Distress As Reactions to Charitable
Appeals," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 20, Provo,
UT: Association of Consumer Research, 508-14.
Guy, Bonnie S. and Wesley E. Patton (1989), "The Marketing of
Altruistic Causes: Understanding Why People Help," Journal
of Consumer Marketing, 6 (I), 19-30.
Harvey, James (1990), "Benefit Segmentation for Fundraisers,"
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 18 (I), 77-86.
Heider, Fritz (1958), The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Hoffman, M. L. (1984), "Interaction of Affect and Cognition in
Empathy," in Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior, C. E. Izard,
J. Kagan, and R. B. Zajonc, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 41--63.
Horton, Raymond L. (1991), "Marketing the Concept of Becoming
A Potential Organ Donor," Journal of Health Care Marketing,
11 (3), 36-45.
Hui, Michael K. and John E. G. Bateson (1991), "Perceived Control and the Effects of Crowding and Consumer Choice on the
Service Experience," Journal of Consumer Research, 18 (2),
174-84.
Independent Sector (1994), Giving and Volunteering in the United
States. Washington: Independent Sector.
Isen, Alice M. (1984), "Towards Understanding the Role of Affect
in Cognition," in Handbook of Social Cognition, R. Wyer and
T. Srull, eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
- - and Alan Noonberg (1979), "The Effect of Photographs of
the Handicapped on Donations to Charity: When a Thousand
Words May Be Too Much," Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 9 (5), 426-31.
Kelman, Herbert C. (1961), "Processes of Opinion Change," Public Opinion Quarterly, 25 (1), 57-78.
Kotler, Philip (1979), "Strategies for Introducing Marketing into
Non Profit Organizations," Journal of Marketing, 43 (January),
37-44.
Kraut, Robert E. (1973), "Effects of Social Labeling on Giving to
Charity," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 9 (6), 551--62.
Krebs, Dennis L. and Dale T. Miller (1985), "Altruism and Aggression," in Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol. 2, G.
Lindzey and E. Aronson, eds. New York: Random House, 1-72.
Kuhn, Donald M. (1989), "Lapsed Donors Are Your Friends,"
Fundraising Management, 20 (6), 24-32.

48/ Journal of Marketing, July 1996

Latane, Bibb (1981), "Psychology of Social Impact," American
Psychologist, 36 (4), 343-56.
LaTour, Stephen A. and Ajay K. Manrai (1989), "Interactive Impact of Informational and Normative Influence on Donations,"
Journal of Marketing Research, 26 (August), 327-35.
Lerner, Melvin J. (1980), The Belief in a Just World: A Fundamental Delusion. New York: Plenum Press.
Luthans, Fred and Robert Kreitner (1985), Organizational Behavior Modification and Beyond: An Operant Social Learning Approach. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Maddux, James E. and Melinda A. Stanley (1986), "Self-Efficacy
Theory in Contemporary Psychology: An Overview," Journal
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 4 (3), 249-55.
Margolis, H. (1982), Selfishness, Altruism, and Rationality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, Mike W. (1994), Virtuous Giving: Philanthropy,. Voluntary
Service, and Caring. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
McCort, 1. Daniel (1993), "A Framework for Evaluating the Relational Extent of A Relational Marketing Strategy in Non-Profit
Organizations," in Marketing Theory and Applications: American Marketing Association Winter Conference, Rajan Varadarajan and Bernard Jaworski, eds. Chicago: American Marketing
Association, 409-33.
Meyers-Levy, Joan and Durairaj Maheswaran (1992), "When Timing Matters: The Influence of Temporal Distance on Consumers' Affective and Persuasive Responses," Journal ofConsumer Research, 19 (3), 424-33.
Mills, Richard T. and Davis S. Krantz (1979), "Information,
Choice and Reactions to Stress: A Field Experiment in a Blood
Bank With Laboratory Analogue," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37 (4), 608-20.
Mindak, William A. and H. Malcolm Bybee (1971), "Marketing's
Application to Fund Raising," Journal of Marketing, 35 (July),
13-18.
Mitchell, Herman E. and Donn Byrne (1973), "The Defendant's
Dilemma: Effects of Jurors' Attitudes and Authoritarianism on
Judicial Decisions," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25 (I), 123-29.
Moore, Ellen M., William O. Bearden, and Jesse E. Teel (1985),
"Use of Labeling and Assertions of Dependency in Appeals for
Consumer Support," Journal of Consumer Research, 12 (June),
9D-96.
Omoto, Allen and Mark Snyder (1989), "Basic Research in Action:
Volunteerism and Society's Response to AIDS," Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16 (1), 152--65.
Pessemier, Edgar A., Albert C. Beamon, and Dominique M.
Hanssen (1977), "Willingness to Supply Human Body Parts:
Some Empirical Results," Journal of Consumer Research, 4
(December), 131-40.
Piliavin, J. A. and P. L. Callero (1990), Giving the Gift of Life to
Unnamed Strangers. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
- - - and Hong-Wen Charng (1990), "Altruism: A Review of
Recent Theory and Research," in Annual Review of Sociology,
Vol. 16, W. R. Scott and J. Blake, eds. Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews, 27--65.
- - - , J. E Dovidio, S. L. Gaeitner, and R. D. Clark (1981),
Emergency Intervention. New York: Academic Press.
Reingen, Peter H. (1978), "On Inducing Compliance With Requests," Journal of Consumer Research, 5 (September),
96-102.
- - - (1982), "Test of a List Procedure for Inducing Compliance
With a Request to Donate Money," Journal of Applied Psychology, 67 (1), 1ID-18.
Riecken, Glen and Ugur Yavas (1986), "Seeking Donors Via Opinion Leadership," Journal of Professional Services Marketing, 2
(1/2), 109-16.

Rothschild, Michael L. (1979), "Marketing Communications in
Nonbusiness Situations or Why It Is So Hard to Sell Brotherhood Like Soap," Journal of Marketing, 43 (Spring), 11-20.
Sameulson, Paul A. (1993), "Altruism as a Problem Involving
Group Versus Individual Selection in Economics and Biology,"
American Economic Review, 83 (2), 143-48.
Schachter, S. (1959), The Psychology ofAffiliation. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Schibrowsky, John A. and James W. Peltier (1995), "Decision
Frames and Direct Marketing Offers: A Field Study in a
Fundraising Context," Journal ofDirect Marketing, 9 (I), 8-16.
Schlegelmich, Bodo B., A. Diamantopoulos, and A. Love (1992),
"Determinants of Charity Giving," Marketing Theory and Applications: American Marketing Association Winter Conference, Chris T. Allen et ai., eds. Chicago: American Marketing
Association, 507-16.
- - - and A. C. Tannin (1989), "Market Segment-Oriented
Fund-Raising Strategies: An Empirical Analysis," Marketing
Intelligence and Planning, 7 (11), 16-24
Scott, C. A. (1978), "The Effects of Trial and Incentives on Repeat
Purchase Behavior," Journal of Marketing Research, 13 (August), 263-69.
Sharpe, Robert F. (1987), "Helping People Give What They Want,
and When," Fundraising Management, 17 (12),90+.
Shelton, Suzanne H. (1990), "Developing the Construct of General Self-Efficacy," Psychological Reports, 66 (3), 987-94.
Sherry, John F. (1983), "Gift Giving in Anthropological Perspective," Journal of Consumer Research, 10 (September), 157-68.
Simmons, Roberta G., s. K. Marine, and R. L. Simmons (1987),
Gift of Life: The Effect of Organ Transplantation on Individual,
Family and Societal Dynamics. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Simon, Herbert A. (1993), "Altruism and Economics," American
Economic Review, 83 (2), 156-61.
Smithson, Michael, Paul R. Amato, and Philip L. Pearce (1983),
Dimensions of Helping Behaviour. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Soukop, David J. (1983), "A Markov Analysis of Fund-Raising Alternatives," Journal of Marketing Research, 20 (3), 314-19.

Squires, Con (1992), "Don't Let Your Donors Go Without a Fight,"
Fundraising Management, 23 (4),55-56.
Stark, Oded (1989), "Altruism and the Quality of Life," American
Economic Review, 79 (2), 86-90.
Stayman, Douglas M. and David A. Aaker (1988), "Are All the Effects of Ad-Induced Feelings Mediated by A-Ad?" Journal of
Consumer Research, 15 (3), 368-73.
Swinyard, William R. and Michael L. Ray (1977), "AdvertisingSelling Interactions: An Attribution Theory Experiment," Journal of Marketing Research, 14 (Winter), 22-32.
Thornton, Bill, Gayle Kirshner, and Jacqueline Jacobs (1991), "Influence of a Photograph on a Charitable Appeal: A Picture May
Be Worth a Thousand Words When It Has to Speak for Itself,"
Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 21 (6),433-45.
Tybout, Alice M. and Richard F. Yalch (1980), "The Effect of Experience: A Matter of Salience?" Journal of Consumer Research, 6 (March), 406-13.
Tyler, Tom R. (1994), "Psychological Models of the Justice Motives: Antecedents of Distributive and Procedural Justice,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67 (5), 850-63.
Varadarajan, P. Rajan and' Anil Menon (1988), "Cause Related
Marketing: A Coalignment of Marketing Strategy and Corporate Philanthropy," Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 58-74.
Wilson, John P. and Richard Petruska (1984), "Motivation, Model
Attributes, and Prosocial Behavior," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 46 (2), 458-68.
Witt, L. Alan (1989), "Urban-Nonurban Differences in Social Cognition: Locus of Control and Perceptions of a Just World," Journal of Social Psychology, 29 (5), 715-17.
Yavas, U., G. Riecken, and E. Babakus (1993), "Efficacy of Perceived Risk as a Correlate of Reported Donation Behavior: An
Empirical Analysis," Journal ofthe Academy ofMarketing Science, 21 (1),65-70.
Zuckerman, M., M. Lazzaro, and D. Waldgeir (1979), "Undermining Effects of Foot-in-the-Door With Extrinsic Rewards," Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 9 (3), 292-96.

Helping Behavior /49

