1
ATTITUDES, HABITS AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE

Bas Verplanken
University of Bath, UK.
b.verplanken@bath.ac.uk. Orcid: orcid.org/0000-0001-7217-0293

Sheina Orbell
University of Essex, UK.
sorbell@essex.ac.uk. Orcid: orcid.org/0000-0002-8665-3541

Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 73, 2022

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Ian Anderson, Asaf Mazar, David Trafimow, and Wendy Wood
for reading and insightful comments. To Alice Eagly, who more than 30 years ago inspired
much of the work reported in this paper. Bas Verplanken and Sheina Orbell contributed
equally to this article.

2
ABSTRACT
Efforts to guide peoples’ behavior towards environmental sustainability, good health, or new
products have emphasized informational and attitude change strategies. There is evidence
that changing attitudes leads to changes in behavior, yet this approach takes insufficient
account of the nature and operation of habits, which form boundary conditions for attitudedirected interventions. Integration of research on attitudes and habits might enable
investigators to identify when and how behavior change strategies will be most effective.
How might attitudinally driven behavior change be consolidated into lasting habits? How do
habits protect the individual against the vicissitudes of attitudes and temptations and promote
goal achievement? How might attitudinal approaches to change habits be improved by
capitalizing on habit discontinuities and strategic planning? When and how might changing
or creating habit architecture shape habits directly? A systematic approach to these questions
might help move behavior change efforts from attitude change strategies to habit change
strategies.

Keywords:
Habit Architecture; Habit Formation; Habit Discontinuity; Attitude-Behavior Relation;
Automatic Processes; Self-Regulation

3

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
The Constructs of Attitude and Habit
Does Changing Attitudes Change Behavior
Four Key Relationships Between Attitudes, Habits and Behavior Change
ATTITUDES CAN LEAD TO HABITS
Antecedents of Habit Formation
The Role of Rewards
Planning to Create Habits
Conclusion
DO HABITS SHIELD AGAINST THE OPERATION OF ATTITUDES?
Insensitivity to Outcome Devaluation
Habit Slips
Protective Functions of Habits
The Longevity of Habitual Behavior
Conclusion
MOTIVATED HABIT CHANGE
Monitoring Unwanted Habits
Retraining Cue-Action Links
Planning to Change
Habit Discontinuities
Conclusion
LEVERAGING HABIT ARCHITECTURE TO CREATE OR CHANGE HABITS
Cue Contexts
Feasibility of Action in Context
Conclusion
CONCLUSIONS

4
INTRODUCTION
A long-established practice used to guide social policy is to rely upon informational
and attitudinal strategies to accomplish behavior change. According to this perspective, it is
assumed that behavior is goal-directed and people’s evaluative responses to recommended
actions or to the outcomes of behavior are key to behavior change. A separate, arguably
longer research tradition concerns the construct of habit, which developed in the context of
learning. While both perspectives were investigating why people behave as they do, they
describe different processes and mechanisms. Only during the last two decades has the view
started to emerge that attitude and habit processes are both important to consider when
tackling societal problems such as obesity, congestion, climate change or the need to regulate
behavior during crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
While attitudes and attitude change have a long history in the Annual Review of
Psychology and started to appear in the form of stand-alone articles since the sixties
(Moscovici 1963), an article on habit did not feature until recently (Wood & Rünger 2016)
and the two literatures have not previously been integrated into a single article despite earlier
calls to incorporate habit into attitude models (Eagly & Chaiken 1993). There are good
reasons to address these topics together. Habits are often seen as 'ills of society' that need to
be overcome, perhaps via changes in attitude, in order to arrive at healthier, safer, or more
sustainable societies. However, this narrow view of habits overlooks the important role habits
play in regulating desirable everyday behavior, or the goal of creating habits to consolidate
long term behavior change. The re-emergence of habit within the domain of social
psychological enquiry can be attributed to investigations regarding the strength of the
relationship of attitude to behavior and to the importance of habit in modulating this
relationship.

5
The emerging literature on attitudes and habits co-occurs with three major paradigm
shifts. The first shift began to flourish in the nineteen eighties and nineties and concerns a
focus on nonconscious processes (Schneider & Schiffrin 1977), which contributed to a
renewed interest in the habit concept. A second shift concerns the realization that behaviors
may be triggered by context cues rather than arising from deliberation or willpower within
the individual. This is for instance signified by the popularity of the 'nudge' concept (Thaler
& Sunstein 2008). These authors proposed the engineering of the context where choices are
being made, the 'choice architecture' in their words, to influence people's behavior. Similarly,
habitual behavior can be seen as being guided by a 'habit architecture', that is cues in the
performance context, rather than individuals' attitudes and intentions (Lin et al. 2016).
Finally, there is an increasing urge to test the validity of theory in field settings. While
laboratory experiments remain important for investigating processes in controlled research
environments and theory building, field experiments provide invaluable information on the
robustness of findings and effect sizes that might be anticipated amongst general population
samples and in daily life contexts. This has been propelled by new technologies, such as
online experiments, within-person designs used in experience sampling, or the analysis of
'big data', for instance data retrieved from social media, which gives unprecedented insight
into people's ongoing behavior (Lee & Kwan 2018).
The Constructs of Attitude and Habit
Eagly and Chaiken (1993) defined attitude as “a psychological tendency that is
expressed by evaluating a particular entity with some degree of favor or disfavor” (p.1). This
definition stresses the core feature of an attitude as a propensity to produce an evaluative
response. This article focuses on attitudes towards behaviors such as buying new products,
eating particular foods or taking actions to sustain the environment. Consequently attitude
might be understood here as an individual’s evaluation of behavior and its outcomes.

6
'Habit' was for a long time equated with 'past behavioral frequency', which is how
most lay people understand the term. This thwarted progress in habit theory since the heyday
of behaviorism (Eagly & Chaiken 1993). Contemporary writers arrived at definitions of
habits that are remarkably similar to William James' (1887) conception of habit (Wood &
Neal 2007). Habits are memory-based propensities to respond automatically to cues that led
to performance of behavior in the past. These propensities derive from cue-response
associations in memory that were acquired through repeatedly acting in response to those
cues in a stable contexts (Verplanken 2018). A distinction can be made between a habit (the
mental construct), which is automatically activated when a cue is encountered, and a
habitized response that may follow. This response may be an overt action or habitized
thinking (Verplanken et al. 2007). While a habit mechanism is not directly observable, it may
be inferred from precursors to and consequences of habit formation, for instance habit
performance contexts (Wood et al. 2005), reaction time measures of context-response
associations (Neal et al. 2012) or speed of response switching (Luque et al. 2020), selfreports of qualities of habitized behavior (Verplanken & Orbell 2003) or habit slips (de Wit et
al. 2012) (see also Rebar et al. 2018). Habitized behavior has qualities such as persistence
and insensitivity to new information and alternative choice options (Verplanken et al. 1998).
These qualities render unwanted habits difficult to change, but are advantageous for desirable
habits to acquire.
Does Changing Attitudes Change Behavior?
How strong is the power of persuasion? A vast literature exists on the attitudebehavior relation, much of this research guided by subjective expected utility models and
dominated by studies merely observing the relationship of attitudes to behavior. However,
there are significant difficulties associated with inferring a causal association of attitude to
behavior from observational studies. Consequently, the effect size observed from

7
correlational data may overestimate the extent of behavior change that might be expected
from manipulating attitudes and intentions (Hornsey et al. 2016, Rhodes & Dickau 2012).
Recent syntheses of findings from experimental studies in which participants were
randomized to a control group or received an intervention designed to change their attitudes
have provided reliable evidence that attitudes can be changed. Albarracin and Shavitt (2018)
report that "attitude change based on interventions or messages delivered at a particular time
hovers around d+ = 0.22, which is a small effect" (p. 303, italics added). Targeting attitudes
can also change behavior. Sheeran et al. (2016) reported in an analysis in the health behavior
domain, that interventions that successfully changed attitude had a small to medium effect on
behavior change (d+ = .38). While it is evident that attitude change can lead to behavior
change, nonetheless these and other syntheses also show that changes in attitude have highly
variable (heterogeneous) consequences for behavior change and particularly for sustained
behavior change (Wakefield et al. 2010).
Three broad approaches to explaining variability in the attitude-to-behavior relation
can be discerned. First, people may not be sincere in reporting their attitudes, not aware of
their attitudes, or change them ‘on the fly’ so that as guides to behavior they are relatively
unimportant. Second, some attitudes acquire more resilience and therefore guide action more
reliably than others. These differences in resilience can be referred to as attitude strength.
Third, there are circumstances in which attitudes’ influence on action is attenuated because
existing behavior is controlled by alternative mechanisms characterized by habit and
consequently insensitive to fluctuations in attitude.
The first concern, regarding the veridicality of attitude reports, prompted specification
of measurement conditions, including the important principles of compatibility between
measures of attitude and behavioral criteria in terms of action, target, time, and context
(Ajzen 2011). The development of implicit measures re-invigorated methodological enquiry

8
with the promise to examine people’s ‘real’ attitudes, even those to which they might not
have conscious access or the desire to self-report truthfully in socially sensitive domains.
These implicitly measured attitudes, it was supposed, might more faithfully predict behavior
and represent suitable targets for intervention. However, syntheses of a substantial body of
work examining the ability of implicitly measured attitudes to incrementally increase
behavioral prediction (Greenwald et al. 2009, Kurdi et al. 2018, Oswald et al. 2013) suggest
minimally consequential and highly heterogeneous effects (Albarracin & Shavitt 2018,
Blanton et al. 2016, Oswald et al. 2013). Nor is there evidence that implicitly measured
attitudes offer superior prediction of behavioral criterions characterized by lack of
controllability and awareness, or even social sensitivity, calling a key assumption of implicit
measurement into doubt.
A second approach to understanding variability in the attitude-to-behavior relation
concerns attitude strength. Explicit attitudes may vary not only in evaluative positivity or
negativity, but in properties collectively referred to as ‘attitude strength’. Strongly held
attitudes are stable over time (durable), resistant to persuasion (difficult to change) and have
impact on behavior (Howe & Krosnik 2017). Persuasive interventions that target not only the
valence of attitudes, but also ensure that they become integrated, crystallized, accessible and
stable, are those most likely to lead to sustained intentions and behavior. If behavior is
subsequently repeated in stable contexts, strong attitudes might also promote habit formation.
Glasman and Albarracín (2006) synthesized evidence from experimental studies in which
novel attitudes were formed, such as might occur when a new consumer product or
vaccination is introduced. Direct, unambiguous experience of an attitude object and frequent
expression of an attitude each strengthened the attitude-to-behavior relation via increases in
attitude accessibility (how easily an attitude can be recalled or reported) and attitude stability.
The link between accessible attitudes and behavior is not fully understood. More accessible

9
attitudes may drive people to seek motivational consistency in their actions. Alternatively,
perhaps because of passive or active attitude-consistent information search, strong attitudes
may bolster knowledge of related behavioral information such as self-efficacy to act.
Interestingly, this idea that strong elaborated attitudes might include behavior-relevant
information beyond attitude itself has recently been found to have traction. For example,
Dalege et al. (2019) show that highly connected attitude networks are more stable and more
likely to relate to behavior.
A third important boundary condition to the attitude-to-behavior relation derives from
Triandis' (1977) theory of interpersonal behavior, and has been discussed ever since the
renewed interest in habits in the late nineties (Aarts et al. 1998, Gardner et al. 2020, Ouellette
& Wood 1998, Verplanken & Aarts 1999, Verplanken & Wood 2006, Wood & Neal 2007,
Wood & Rünger 2016). Triandis proposed that if people repeatedly enact behaviors in the
same contexts, those actions will gradually come to be guided by habit mechanisms.
Consequently, changes in attitude and intention will be relatively ineffective in changing
subsequent behavior. However, tests of this hypothesis that rely upon correlational data and a
negative intention x past behavior interaction coefficient are problematic for many reasons,
including restriction of range effects, use of self-reports if, for instance, participants infer an
intention from their habit (Mazar & Wood 2021, Neal et al. 2012), or inadequate sampling of
participants with strong habits and counter-habitual intentions, particularly in studies of
desired behaviors such as exercise (Rebar et al. 2019). An alternative approach is to classify
types of behavior according to whether they can be performed frequently in stable contexts
and might therefore be capable of becoming habits (Ouellette & Wood 1998, Sheeran et al.
2016, Webb & Sheeran 2006). For example, Sheeran et al. (2016) reported that for behaviors
that are infrequently performed, the effect of attitude change on behavior obtained in
experimental studies was d+ = .48. For frequent behaviors however, the relation was

10
attenuated to d+ = .36. Perhaps stronger evidence was the observation that the effect of
attitude change on behavior change was limited to interventions that sought to ‘increase’
behavior. Attitude change was ineffective in ‘decreasing’ existing behavior, consistent with
the possibility that behavior was controlled by counter-attitudinal habits that were not
susceptible to changes in attitude. In sum, habitized past behavior does seem to exert
powerful limits on the influence of attitudes on behavior.
The observation derived from Triandis (1977) that attitudes are less predictive of
behavior when people have acquired strong habits deserves further comment because it may
be seen as inconsistent with the idea that attitudes derived from direct experience are stronger
and more likely to predict subsequent behavior. However, this becomes more reconcilable
from a process perspective; initially, direct experience with a novel behavior strengthens
one's attitude toward that behavior, so that attitude is the primary driver. Over time, if the
behavior is repeatedly performed in a stable context, the influence of an attitude diminishes
and habit becomes the more consistent determinant of action (Sheeran et al. 2017). The
diminishing relevance of motivation as habit strengthens can be reliably seen in studies that
examined accessibility of attitudes versus habits in memory. For instance, Neal et al. (2012,
Study 1) revealed the inverted U-shape relationship of attitude to behavior using a word
recognition task with experimentally manipulated subliminal primes. They found that
participants who had not yet formed strong habits recognized action words faster when
primed with words related to motives, whereas participants with established habits
recognized habit-related action words faster when primed with words referring to the
performance context (habit cues), but not when primed with habit-related motives. This study
demonstrated a shift from the mental availability of a motive that initiates a behavior, to the
heightened mental association of the context with which the habitually performed behavior is
associated.

11
Four Key Relationships Between Attitudes, Habits and Behavior Change
Heterogeneity in the attitude-to-behavior relation and the modest effects of attitude
change on behavior change have spurred renewed interest in habits in the past two decades,
and in the potential for effective behavior change that might be afforded by consideration of
habit cueing processes as well as motivational attitude change processes. The remaining
sections of this article are devoted to taking stock of the accumulated evidence in this
endeavor. We organize the review around four broad themes. Figure 1 provides a schematic
overview.
First, attitude change can be an important starting point for behavior change. If
successful, such change may be consolidated and become enduring by turning the newly
formed behavior into a habit. This may occur spontaneously, for instance when someone
decides to start regular exercising, or may benefit from interventions aimed at habit
formation. This section addresses factors that foster this process.
Second, we consider features, operation, and persistence of habits once these have
been established. Many initiatives such as exercising are discontinued when times get busy or
stressful, or motivation wanes. Evidence that habits are relatively resilient against persuasion
suggests they can persist despite the vicissitudes of daily life and, importantly, that habits can
serve to regulate and protect behavior in times of stress or distraction. This section considers
evidence for the resilience of habits and discusses the benefits of habitizing behavior.
Evidence that changes in attitude are often not sufficient to change established habits
raises the question as to how and when it might be possible to break existing unwanted habits
and increase the power of behavior change interventions. In the third section we consider
how motivation might form the starting point for habit change and explore deliberative
strategies to change habitized behavior, such as replacing the habit of taking the lift with stair
climbing.

12

The final theme focuses on the context where habits are performed - the habit
architecture. Cues in those contexts, rather than attitudes or 'willpower', elicit and maintain
habitual action. Habit change may be accomplished by directly changing the habit
architecture, such as features of the built environment that may foster exercising, thus
changing behavior with relatively little regard to attitudes.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
ATTITUDES CAN LEAD TO HABITS
Attitudes can be the starting point of habit formation. When we do something new
and it works or we like it, this behavior might be repeated and ultimately become habitual.
This may occur spontaneously, and sometimes lead to what are considered as 'bad' habits
associated with unhealthy or unsustainable lifestyles. The same principles govern the
formation of desirable 'good' habits and can be exploited in the context of behavior change
interventions. The goal of behavior change interventions is usually long-term change.
However, apart from the fact that most research stops short of evaluating whether behavior
change remains detectable beyond the short term, consolidation of new behavior is seldom
formulated explicitly as an intervention goal and few if any tools have been developed to
specifically promote the maintenance of new behavior. Consequently, interventions could
maximize long-term behavior change by making habitual new, desirable behaviors, so that
they acquire features such as persistence or insensitivity to counterinformation (Orbell &
Verplanken 2020). Habit formation might be a way to consolidate behavior change and, more
generally, align behavior change with the attitudes that originally motivated it (Aarts &
Dijksterhuis 2000).
Antecedents of Habit Formation

13
What determines habit formation? If the behavior is something a person really wishes
to establish, a positive, strong, and stable attitude is a good starting point. Likely candidate
variables for habit formation are the frequency with which a behavior has been executed,
consistency over time, the simplicity (vs. complexity) of behavior, positive affect or
satisfaction with the outcome, the selection of suitable cues and their salience, and the
stability of the performance context (Lally & Gardner 2013). To the degree these factors are
present, behavior may evolve into a habit over time. This process was observed over a year in
a longitudinal study on the introduction and development of use of tablet devices in a
secondary school (Courtois et al. 2014). Pupils and teachers were given tablets to use in place
of much of the usual hard copy paperwork. The researchers found that during a schoolyear,
attitudes and intentions initially predicted the uptake of tablet use. Mid-intervention some
difficulties were encountered as people mastered the tablets and perceived control was a
dominant predictor of use. In the end phase, the frequency of tablet usage during the previous
9 months was the main predictor, suggesting the development of a habit. While cue
consistency was not directly assessed, the highly structured and integrated nature of the
intervention marked opportunities to cue tablet use and made frequent and consistent usage
likely. The study demonstrated how, with a sufficient duration of observation, an initially
attitude-driven behavior may be seen to become habit-driven over time.
Some studies investigated factors influencing habit formation more explicitly.
Kaushal and Rhodes (2015) followed new gym members for twelve weeks and observed the
habitization of exercise behavior. Habits formed in approximately six weeks among
participants who exercised at least four days a week. This was most strongly predicted by
consistent attendance at the same time each day, followed by low behavioral complexity
(perceived effort), a supporting physical environment, and positive affect. McCloskey and
Johnson (2019) assessed relationships between perceived automaticity of 25 behaviors and

14
perceptions of frequency, reward, context stability and complexity. Frequency, reward and
context stability were positively, and complexity negatively associated with perceived
automaticity.
Lally et al. (2010) asked participants to perform a new behavior once daily and to
submit daily entries of self-reported habit. There was wide variation in the time it took for
habits to be established, ranging from approximately three weeks to over eight months. Two
parameters of individuals' habit formation curves were observed. The first is the steepness of
the curve, that is, the length of time it takes to reach maximum habit strength. In other words,
how fast does a behavior habitize? The second parameter is the degree to which a behavior
can become habitized and cue contingent. To what extent can the behavior be elicited with
minimal conscious awareness and deliberation? This study demonstrated that habit formation
can be modeled at the intra-individual level. The relationship of habit formation (frequency,
complexity, context stability, cue salience) to these two parameters of habit curves is still
open to investigations and requires systematic scrutiny across behaviors and contexts in
longitudinal and experimental designs.
The Role of Rewards
The classical mechanism for habit formation explored extensively in the behaviorist
tradition is the use of rewards to promote action repetition in a given cue context. A
distinction can be made between extrinsic and intrinsic motivation (Deci & Ryan 1985).
Externally motivated behavior is instrumental in obtaining rewards such as money or other
people's approval. Extrinsic rewards may be particularly effective in prompting action
initially and promote habit formation by engaging dopamine systems (Amaya & Smith 2018).
Provision of financial incentives have been used to promote behavior and form new habits.
Such incentives can positively influence health behaviors (e.g. smoking cessation, physical
activity), although these effects declined after the incentive was removed (Giles et al. 2014,

15
Mantzari et al. 2015). Maki et al. (2016) showed that financial rewards promoted specific
pro-environmental behaviors, some of which (energy conservation, travel) persisted after
removal of the incentive, perhaps because they de facto saved participants’ money. However,
few studies in this domain have assessed long-term effects or indeed the formation of habits.
Intrinsically motivated behavior is considered as an end in itself because it is
inherently rewarding (Kruglanski et al. 2018). Gardner and Lally (2013) found that people
whose frequent physical activity was autonomous, experienced exercising in their leisure
time as more fluent, which characterizes habitual behavior. Intrinsic motivation may be
present for some, but not all behaviors. Behaviors that are aligned with the self-concept may
have the rewarding properties that ensure repetition and habit formation. The relation
between habit and self-identity may stem from habits being based on important values, which
can be considered as long-term motivations. This may pertain to personal identities but
equally to shared social identities (Udall et al. 2021). Verplanken and Sui (2019, Study 2)
provided experimental evidence that the association of habits with self-identity is stronger if
habits are linked to values. Participants were presented with eighty behaviors covering ten
value domains. For each behavior, they rated habit strength and the extent to which it
represented their 'true self'. In the experimental condition, participants’ values were primed
by indicating how much each behavior was linked to the value domains, while in the control
condition participants indicated at what time of day the behavior would typically occur. For
each participant a within-participant correlation was calculated between their eighty habit and
true self ratings. These correlations were larger in the experimental condition, when values
were primed, compared with the control condition. Values may thus form a 'bridge' between
habits and (parts of) one's self-concept by framing the intrinsic rewards gained from a
behavior. In a two-month habit formation study containing four measurement points habit
strength was initially predicted by consistent and frequent behavioral repetition (Verplanken

16
et al. 2021). At the final measurement habit strength was predicted by the degree to which
participants associated the new habit with their identity, suggesting a process of
internalization.
Habits may also be intrinsically rewarding because they simplify life, or make life
easier by avoiding the need for new learning or decision making. The process of action
repetition may in and of itself be rewarding as a consequence of the sense of ease, fluency
and reduced mental effort that accrues as habit develops. This may lead the individual to
enjoy their habit (Reber et al. 2004).
Planning to Create Habits
An intuitively appealing vehicle in promoting habit formation is to supplement
positive attitudes with deliberate self-regulation strategies such as planning to act in specific
cue contexts (Hagger & Luszczynska 2014). For example, implementation intentions are
specific plans of action in the form of "When encountering cue X, I will do Y" (Gollwitzer
1993). These simple self-instructions increase the likelihood of action by ensuring intentions
are not forgotten or opportunities missed (Adriaanse, Gollwitzer et al. 2011). An
implementation intention involves a single consciously formed plan to act when an imagined
future performance cue is encountered. This type of planning increases the mental
accessibility of situational cues, thereby installing a mechanism that, like a habit mechanism,
automatically activates a representation of the associated behavior. Whereas in the case of
habit the automatic propensity to act in response to cues is forged over a great many
repetitions in stable contexts, an implementation intention forges the link via a single act of
planning (Gollwitzer 1993; Holland et al. 2006).
If the action specified in a plan is sufficiently specific, remains functional and feasible
beyond a single planned instance, and if the cue specified occurs in an ongoing stable
context, it is possible that by extended repetition, the cue-response link initially forged by an

17
implementation intention may gradually become directly cued by habit (Holland et al. 2006;
Keller et al. 2021). Orbell and Verplanken (2010, Study 3) showed that participants who
formed an implementation intention to use dental floss were more likely to initiate and repeat
the behavior during the next four weeks and began to habitize flossing more rapidly
compared to controls. Implementation intentions seem to be efficient, strategic vehicles to
promote repeated behavior by mentally anticipating a habit architecture. While attitudes may
play an important role in initiating the formation of an implementation intention (Milne et al.
2002), the translation of action into habit will ultimately depend upon repetition in stable cue
contexts over prolonged time periods.
Conclusion
Habit formation may serve to consolidate behavior change that has been
accomplished in interventions via changes in attitudes and intentions. It is unfortunate if
behavior change interventions, usually requiring major resources, leave the hard-fought new
behavior decaying over time or vulnerable to waning motivation or counter-persuasion. Habit
formation should be incorporated as a goal of behavior change interventions and outcomes
assessed for a sufficient duration to truly evaluate habit formation. What strategies foster
habit formation? Given that a new behavior has been specified and accomplished, a primary
tool should be to analyze and possibly design the environments that foster habit formation so
as to establish an optimal habit architecture. Key features of habitization – repetitive,
automatic, cue-driven - can become guiding principles to inform the design phase of
interventions: targeting simple behaviors; optimizing cue-specific repetition of the behavior;
providing a stable performance context; employing plans that are mapped onto the future
habit architecture. Clearly, attitudes - especially strong attitudes - and motivation can be
active ingredients in the initial phases of habit formation. Once established, however, control
over behavior gradually shifts to the performance context.

18
DO HABITS SHIELD AGAINST THE OPERATION OF ATTITUDES?
While attitudes and motivation play a major role in the formation of habits, what is
their relation once habits are established and behavioral control has shifted to the
performance context? Why does evidence suggest limits to the effects of attitude change
interventions, particularly to change established habits? When attitudes are in operation,
people are sensitive to available behavioral options and outcomes. In this section we explain
what happens when habits are in place and a deliberate mode of functioning, in which an
open mind to alternative courses of action is available, changes to a mode that instead fosters
direct cue-driven action. We discuss different manifestations of the habit mode and the
different paradigms employed to investigate habit mechanism; outcome insensitivity and
habit slips, habit as protector of self-regulatory goals and habit as a source of behavioral
persistence.
Insensitivity to Outcome Devaluation
When engaged in evaluating options, attitude-driven systems are in operation. Habits,
on the other hand, deal with regularity. In habit mode, people do not engage in passive or
active information search (Verplanken et al. 1997) and are less sensitive to possible
fluctuations in outcome values. A person who chooses a new tasty pizza may order this again
next time. Upon repetition, ordering this pizza may become a habit, and the person may
become less sensitive to quality fluctuations. In other words, if the value of an outcome
diminishes or if better alternatives become available, once a habit has formed, the individual
may not change their behavior. This has been denoted as devaluation insensitivity (Dickinson
& Balleine 1995; de Wit et al. 2009). For instance, Lattarulo et al. (2019) demonstrated that
commuters may stick to their travel mode even if it becomes a suboptimal option due to
temporary restrictions. In testing insensitivity to the devaluation of outcomes, an individual is
trained to obtain a valued outcome, which is then devalued. If the individual subsequently

19
adapts their action accordingly by avoiding the devalued option, the operation of a goaldirected system is assumed, while sticking to the original devalued outcome signifies a habit
system in operation. Originating from animal learning research, this paradigm has been
employed in research with humans (de Wit et al. 2009), including the study of pathological
conditions (Gillan et al. 2016). Neal et al. (2011, Study 1) used the outcome devaluation
paradigm in a field experimental study by presenting either stale or fresh popcorn during a
cinema performance. Participants with weak cinema popcorn habits showed behavioral
flexibility by eating less stale popcorn, whereas strong habit participants ate equal amounts of
stale popcorn despite reporting they did not like it. In a non-cinema context, however, both
strong and weak habit participants adapted their intake to the taste. This study demonstrated
how context trumps attitudes in influencing behavior when strong habits are present.
Devaluation insensitivity as a feature of habitization has been studied to explain
societal problems such as obesity. For instance, Horstmann et al. (2015) conducted a
devaluation experiment among participants differing in weight status. They used a selective
satiation procedure whereby participants were first trained to learn associations between
abstract stimuli and two rewarding food items and were rewarded one of the two. Participants
were then given ad libitum access to that item, which was thus devalued through satiation.
Subsequently, responses to the abstract stimuli representing the two food items were reassessed. The researchers found a reduced devaluation effect among those with higher BMIs,
suggesting that these individuals did not adequately adapt to lower outcome values brought
about by satiety, but continued to operate in habit mode, that is, performing a behavior that
contributes to weight gain.
Devaluation insensitivity is not unequivocally demonstrated in humans. Participants
have been found to be sensitive to devalued outcomes even after receiving extensive habit
training (de Wit et al. 2018). Possibly the laboratory context cannot replicate the everyday

20
distractions that facilitate habit responding in real life. Also, it is not always easy to attribute
behavioral inflexibility observed in the outcome devaluation paradigm to habitization alone.
Devaluation insensitivity can be related to a compromised goal-directed system (Gillan et al.
2016). This may occur under conditions like stress (Fournier et al. 2017) or pathologies such
as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Ceceli et al. 2020). Finally, the outcome
devaluation paradigm itself has been criticized. For instance, evidence is based upon
hypothesizing a null effect, that is, behavior will not change following devaluation (De
Houwer et al. 2018, Hogarth 2018). Such hypotheses are hard to test. There are also
alternative interpretations of devaluation insensitivity, such as a switch to an alternate goal
than the one linked to the devalued option (De Houwer et al. 2018). This touches upon the
wider question of whether habits can be performed independently of a goal (Aarts &
Dijksterhuis 2000, Hommel 2019, Kruglanski & Szumowska 2020, Trafimow 2018, Wood et
al. 2021, Wood & Neal 2007).
Habit Slips
Another signature of habitization is the occurrence of habit slips. Occasional habit
slips are familiar, such as when we find ourself mistakenly setting off to drive toward work
on a Sunday instead of to the countryside for a walk. A tendency to ‘slip back’ into old habits
occurs once behavior has become controlled by cues and is less sensitive to changes in the
desirability of behavioral outcomes. The cue contingent behavioral inflexibility conferred by
habits represents a challenge for attempts to change behavior via attitudes such as campaigns
by governments or companies wishing to introduce new products to consumers (Labrecque et
al. 2017). However, resistance also confers protection of desired behavioral habits against the
vicissitudes of daily attitudes or counter-attitudinal persuasion attempts (Itzchakov et al.
2018).

21
Habit slips are consequences of the habit cuing process. As habits gain strength, the
cue context automatically activates the associated response in memory (brings it to mind),
thereby provoking the behavior habitually performed in that context. Thus, instead of
consciously deciding which street to turn onto at the crossing, you automatically take the
route toward work. The power of context in contributing to habit slips despite people’s
intentions has been demonstrated in a few field studies. Orbell and Verplanken (2010, Study
2) observed naturally occurring habit slips following the introduction of a ban on smoking in
public places. Smokers who had strong habits for lighting up inside pubs (public houses
licensed to sell alcohol) measured before the smoking ban were more likely to make
‘smoking slips’ after the ban came into force, despite intending to comply with the law and
step outside. The study also revealed the nature of habits that comprise action sequences;
once the habit sequence was initiated (picking up a cigarette paper), it ran on to its conclusion
(lighting up) even if individuals intended and expected that they would be able to interrupt
the sequence and step outside before the final act. In a consumer context, Labrecque et al.
(2017) report that a habit slip “I fell back on my old habit and did what I used to do” was the
most frequent reason given by consumers for rarely using new products they had
intentionally purchased.
Habit slips occur as a consequence of the passive, automated cueing of actions
performed in that context in the past. They are distinct from an active decision not to adopt a
novel behavior, perhaps because the new behavior requires a learning curve (Murray &
Häubl 2007), and from passivity that might result from lack of awareness of alternatives or
lack of personal relevance. In other words, habit slips do not occur as a function of
unfavorable attitudes or lack of motivation. Habit slips are more likely to occur when an
individual is distracted or acting mindlessly (Labrecque et al. 2017, Orbell & Verplanken

22
2010). The smokers in Orbell and Verplanken’s field study reported that they found
themselves lighting cigarettes indoors when they were distracted in conversation.
Protective Functions of Habits
Habits are cognitive structures that preserve responses to recurring situations. Often
habits align with the attitudes and goals from which the behavior originated yet keep us on
track via mechanisms (i.e. automatic responses to context cues) that are independent of
attitudes or motivation. When mental resources are depleted and an individual is less capable
of exerting willpower to accomplish valued or desired outcomes, habits become the default
behavior. While we may fall back on 'bad' or undesirable habits, if constructive habits are in
place, the operation of these 'good' habits will protect goal accomplishment at times when
they might otherwise have been derailed (Lin et al. 2016). Neal et al. (2013) demonstrated the
operation of good and bad habits at times of resource depletion. These authors found that
naturally occurring and experimentally induced depletion of resources increased the
performance of existing habits. For instance, students with pre-existing healthy eating habits
were more likely to enact these habits during a stressful exam period, but equally, students
with unhealthy eating habits fell back on those 'bad' habits during that period.
Habits may also be functional in counteracting persuasion attempts when people are
in a vulnerable condition. Itzchakov et al. (2018) found that when participants were resource
depleted they were more susceptible to persuasion. However, depleted participants with
strong habits performed their habit rather than acting on the newly formed attitude. While
unsuccessful persuasion attempts are unfortunate if the target behavior is desirable and the
existing habit undesirable, the opposite is true when 'good' habits keep an individual on track
in the light of attempts to derail them. Habits therefore protect behavior that was originally
established for good reasons.

23
Habit formation also plays an important role as a self-regulatory tool. Behaviors that
serve desired goals such as eating a plant diet, progressing an article or minimizing one’s
carbon footprint may be derailed by tempting or easier alternatives that require willpower and
effortful control to ignore, avoid or resist. However, an alternative, effective strategy is to
create and rely upon functional habits that serve these goals. When a useful behavior (starting
to study immediately after breakfast) that fulfills a goal (preparing for an exam) has become
habitized, procrastination can be avoided. Without the habit the individual is vulnerable to
producing excuses and rationalizations. Rather than engage in effortful inhibition, individuals
who form habits can pursue desired outcomes with minimal effort (Hofmann et al. 2012).
Galla and Duckworth (2015) found that students with strong study habits experienced fewer
study-leisure conflicts and continued their study habits under difficult circumstances.
Forming strong habits protects against the need to fight off obstacles. In other words, smartly
developed habits are ways to make life work better for you (Orbell & Verplanken 2018), and
are particularly useful under conditions of depleted mental resources (Allom et al. 2018). Lin
et al (2016) showed that experimentally acquired habit cues induced habitual snacking
behavior even when presented with a tempting alternative under resource depletion.
The Longevity of Habitual Behavior
Habits are structures for the long haul. This is a reason why problematic behaviors
such as those associated with obesity or environmental damage are difficult to overcome. In
other cases, longevity of behavior is desirable and habitization might be crucial. This holds
for behaviors that serve important goals, such as adhering to medication or behaviors that are
the end product of behavior change interventions. If those behaviors have not been turned
into habits they are vulnerable to attitudinal fluctuations, temptations or rationalizations.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that in the natural course of life some habits persist for
long periods of time, but others are not maintained. Habits may decay when they are no

24
longer activated or are replaced by other actions. As long as the performance context remains
stable, so that contextual cues are consistent, habits are likely to be 'protected' by strong cueresponse associations. However, habits may cease to operate when cue-response links are not
strongly established, for instance when the performance of behavior is not sufficiently
frequent or consistent. Performance contexts may change or individuals may change contexts,
as discussed in more detail in the next section. Individuals may also prioritize new goals and
associated behaviors. In cases where a new habit replaces an old one, habit maintenance is
also endangered by the presence of the old habit memory traces, which only fade slowly. This
slow decay was illustrated among employees in an organization that relocated (Walker et al.
2015). Some employees embarked on an organized scheme to promote sustainable
commuting. While the new commuting habit gained strength, the old habit became weaker
but still existed over a period of four weeks.
What factors foster longevity of habits? The strength of cue-response links and the
stability of the performance context are paramount. The former is for instance indicated by
the speed of responding to habit cues (Neal et al. 2012) or the time it takes to switch to a nonhabitized option (Luque et al. 2020) or a newly learned response (Hardwick et al. 2019).
Context stability can be safeguarded by legislation, such as traffic regulations controlling
motorists' behaviors. Longevity may also increase if the habit is linked to long-lasting
structures such as another established habit, for instance linking dental flossing with teeth
brushing (Judah et al. 2013), or to a social practice (Kurz et al. 2015).
While habits function primarily through the strength of the cue-response link in
memory and the stability of the performance context, it is not unreasonable to suggest that in
order for desirable habits to survive in the long run at least some habits benefit from
motivational support. Those habits may originate from significant events, external threats, or
issues that bring important values to the fore. For instance, coping habits may be instigated

25
by illness (Orbell & Phillips 2019), prosocial habits by the COVID-19 pandemic (Wolf et al.
2020) or by desire to challenge gender stereotypes (Croft et al. 2020), pro-environmental
habits by worry about global warming (Verplanken et al. 2020). A habit may thus become
intrinsically motivated and be internalized as an end in itself (Kruglanski et al. 2018). This
internalization process may involve an element of self-perception. That is, people can
observe their own habits, reflect on their meaning, and infer that they serve a purpose. Such
attributions may be misguided (Adriaanse et al. 2018; Mazar & Wood 2021, Wood & Rünger
2016) and amount to confabulations. However, it is not inconceivable that such reflections
may form or strengthen a genuine intrinsic motivation. Charging for plastic carrier bags in the
UK resulted not only in customers developing a habit of bringing their own bags but also in
support for other initiatives to reduce the use of plastic, thus signaling a spillover effect
indicative of an enhanced intrinsic motivation (Thomas et al. 2019). Slovinec D'Angelo et al.
(2014) monitored physical exercise among coronary heart disease patients and found that
self-efficacy and autonomous motivation were predictors in the short-term (6 months), while
autonomous motivation continued to predict engagement in physical exercise in the longer
term (12 months). A long-term habit may become 'mine' or part of my identity and may thus
implicate the self (Udall et al. 2021). Verplanken and Sui (2019, Study 1) showed that the
degree to which participants associated habits with their true self correlated with selfintegration, self-esteem and an orientation towards an ideal self. Given the relative stability of
the self, these results support the notion that linking a habit and the self may contribute to the
stability and longevity of the habit.
Conclusion
Habits are more than simple responses to a recurrent situation. Once established,
habitized behavior may proceed without being influenced by fluctuations in attitudes caused
by changing outcome structures, stress, or diminished willpower. Habits negate the need for

26
self-control. This rigidity is unfortunate when people lose out from obtaining better outcomes
or persist after the original benefits of action have diminished. However, habits also foster
stability and predictability. They shield against indecisiveness, attitude change, and the
distraction by tempting alternative courses of action or stress. Habits can thus be important
ingredients of successful self-regulation. The long-term survival of at least some habits may
be optimized by support from values, intrinsic motivation, or connections to self-identity.
MOTIVATED HABIT CHANGE
While habits may develop because they are instrumental or pleasant, changing them is
notoriously challenging (Orbell & Verplanken 2020, Wakefield 2010). The cue-action
memory traces that constitute habits cannot be suddenly erased and are difficult to override.
Also, it is not easy to be aware of cues that trigger habits (Adriaanse, de Ridder, Evers 2011,
Lin et al. 2016), given that many of these are a part of everyday contexts and actions.
Relatedly, people may lack opportunities to change the action associated with that context.
Yet, given sufficient motivation and opportunities, habits may change or be overcome.
Habitization attenuates the role of attitudes and motivation in the operation of habits and
consequently the ability of attitude-based interventions to change behavior. Yet it is possible
to effortfully discontinue or not perform a habit, if a situation calls for it. That ability is
important in the process of overcoming habits. In this section we discuss several avenues to
motivated habit change that augment attitudinal strategies or emphasize the use of a targeting
strategy in their implementation.
Monitoring Unwanted Habits
Intuitively, the most straightforward strategy to avoid or change an unwanted habit is
to be alert, monitor the behavior and the circumstances of its occurrence and effortfully
inhibit the performance of the habit. Quinn et al. (2010) identified 'vigilant monitoring' as the
most frequently used and most effective strategy to inhibit unwanted habits. Other strategies,

27
in particular removing oneself from the performance situation and distracting oneself, were
ineffective, consistent with observations that regression to habit (habit slips) is rendered more
likely when people are distracted (Orbell & Verplanken 2010). In order for a vigilant
monitoring strategy to succeed, a person needs to be sufficiently and consistently motivated
and have mental resources available to execute the strategy, conditions that can easily be
compromised. Also, vigilant monitoring is likely to be more effective if one intends to
replace the inhibited habit by an alternative behavior (Labrecque et al. 2017). For instance, in
'habit reversal training', which is used to treat nervous habits such as nail biting and hair
pulling (Bate et al. 2011), a first step is to monitor cues that trigger the habitual response and
the context in which it occurs. Heightened awareness of one's habit is then combined with
practicing competing responses, that is a response to the cue that is antagonistic to the
original habitized behavior (Mancuso & Miltenberger 2016).
Retraining Cue-Action Links
A potential intervention route to change habits might be to target the cue-response
links in memory that constitute habits. To what extent is it possible to retrain habitual
responses? Habitized behaviors may have associated cognitive biases, that is, above-average
likelihoods to attend to, approach, or avoid certain types of stimuli (Greenwald & Lai 2020).
Such biases are particularly ingrained in behaviors with addictive properties, such as the
consumption of unhealthy but rewarding food, alcohol, cigarettes, or drugs. Hence, an
intriguing question is whether modification of these biases can lead to behavior change.
A few studies have reported behavior changes in response to cognitive bias
modification. However, while cognitive biases are malleable, there is no convincing evidence
that cognitive bias modifications have profound effects on behaviors, such as food
consumption, substance use relapse, or smoking cessation (Turton et al. 2016). There is
somewhat more optimism with respect to approach bias modification (Kakoschke et al. 2017)

28
and using cognitive bias modification as part of larger treatment packages in clinical
populations (Batschelet et al. 2020). For instance, Rinck et al. (2018) found that furnishing
regular treatment of alcohol-dependent patients with retraining attentional and approach
biases resulted in higher abstinence rates one year later. However, retraining programs are
only effective through long and intensive training programs, which poses questions of
feasibility and cost-benefit balances.
Planning to Change
Is it possible to plan to willfully inhibit or disrupt habitized responding? So long as a
habit cue can be correctly identified, which is by no means certain given that people often
acquire habits to co-incidental cues (Lin et al. 2016) or misattribute habits to internal states
such as stress (Adriaanse, de Ridder, Evens 2011; Mazar & Wood, 2021), it is plausible to
supplement motivation to change behavior by planning a reaction to the cue other than the
unwanted habit response. For example, an individual may plan to ignore the habit cue as soon
as it is perceived, or resist acting upon the cue. In general, the use of implementations
intentions to support adoption of a new behavior has been associated with larger effect sizes
than their use to decrease or inhibit an unwanted behavior (d+ = 0.51 vs. d+ = 0.29;
Adriaanse, Vinkers et al. 2011). This is commensurate with habit theory; it can be argued that
ignoring or not performing is less likely to forge a cue-response link in memory compared
with training to link a cue with a tangible response.
Alternatively, an individual might replace an undesirable habit, such as throwing
waste paper in the refuse, with a new desirable habit, such as recycling the paper. The idea
that an established habit might be replaced by a new response to an existing cue has rarely
been examined in the field (Holland et al. 2006, Labrecque et al. 2017) and requires evidence
of a pre-existing strong habit, together with evidence that a plan results in behavior change. If
a new habit is to replace an old one, further evidence is required to establish that the new

29
habit is enduring and the previous habit has been consistently attenuated (Holland et al.
2006). This has been demonstrated for mental as well as behavioral habits. For instance,
Thürmer et al. (2013) successfully used implementation intentions to replace selfhandicapping thoughts and behaviors in anxiety-evoking test situations with positive selftalk. Targeting one of the toughest habits, Armitage (2016) had smokers form individually
tailored implementation intentions to replace lighting a cigarette with alternative actions. In a
follow-up one month later, a significantly larger proportion of smokers who had formed
implementation intentions had avoided ‘lighting up’ (15%), whereas only 2% had done so in
the no-implementation intention control group. This effect was mediated by a reduced sense
of smoking automaticity in the implementation intention condition consistent with the idea
that the act of lighting up had become more mindful, at least over a four-week period.
In a laboratory context, Adriaanse, Gollwitzer et al. (2011) employed a word
recognition task to provide insight into the cognitive processes underlying implementation
intentions that target unwanted habits. The authors hypothesized that due to the nature of
implementation intentions, the planned automatic cue-response links may directly compete
with existing habitized cue-response links in memory. By taking away the mental
accessibility advantage of the existing habit over the new behavior, a 'level playing field' is
created. This paves the way for an attitude-driven choice process, which may then establish a
new behavior if there is sufficient and consistent motivation to do so, and if relapse is
avoided while the new habit is being established (Walker et al. 2015).
Holland et al. (2006) and Labrecque et al. (2017) provide elegant tests of planning to
adopt new desired habits that directly compete with existing habits. Holland et al showed that
over a two month period during which behavior was objectively and unobtrusively
monitored, participants of an organization who planned how, where and when to dispose of
their waste paper in a recycling bin were more likely to establish a new consistent behavior

30
than controls. Labrecque (2017) installed a novel laundry product use behavior, showing that
it was necessary to supplement an implementation intention to use the new product with a
plan to monitor and inhibit the existing habit in order to establish a new behavior.
Habit Discontinuities
Habits function so long as the performance context remains intact and stable.
However, there are times when contexts are disrupted, enabling attitude-led behavior change
strategies. This may occur by choice, such as when an individual is relocating or changing
jobs. Other disruptions come from 'natural' life course changes, such as leaving school,
starting a family or retirement. External events such as the COVID-19 pandemic may also
cause disruptions, as may legislation, such as the ban on smoking in public houses (Orbell et
al. 2009) or the introduction of a charge on plastic bags (Thomas et al. 2019). When a
disruption alters the performance context and habit cues are disorganized or removed, so that
habitual behavior is no longer feasible, this may, in Lewin's (1947) terms, 'unfreeze' existing
habits. This means a disruption of the smooth operation of a habit, such as caused by changes
in a computer platform (Anderson & Wood 2021). Disruption may initiate a shift to
deliberate processing and a more open mindset, contrary to the 'tunnel vision' mindset that
characterizes strong habits (Verplanken et al. 1997). In order to adapt to the new situation,
the individual may consider goals, acquire information, and form new attitudes which then
guide new behavior. For instance, when a person retires, the cue for going for a drink with
colleagues on Fridays after work is removed and this habit is disrupted. If socializing is
important for this person, they need to consider new ways of fulfilling that goal.
In some instances a disruption is known to be temporary. Individuals may endure the
disturbance, cope with its immediate consequences, and return to old habits once the situation
is restored. This happened for instance with travel mode behaviors in London in 2012 that
were temporarily distorted by the Olympic Games (Parkes et al. 2016). In those cases old

31
habits remain activated, but are temporarily blocked from execution. Discontinuities that are
the result of life course changes may lead to more permanent changes and new habits, such as
a transition from education to work (Busch-Geertsema & Lanzendorf 2017), changing jobs
(Clark et al. 2016), relocating businesses (Walker et al. 2015), changes in family
circumstances (Janke & Handy 2019), or retirement (Barnett et al. 2014).
Although an individual may find familiar cues in the new environment that trigger an
existing habitual response (Wood et al. 2005), major discontinuities more often than not
require replacing old habits by new behaviors. By becoming temporarily more mindful and
deliberate, attitudes toward available new courses of action have to be formed. In this process
important goals and values may come to the fore and guide the new choices (Verplanken et
al. 2008). For instance, Clark et al. (2016) found that in the context of employment changes
and residential relocations, environmental values predicted switches to public transport or
active commuting. A discontinuity may also change the priority of certain values, such as
prioritization of security over environmental values amongst new parents (Thomas et al.
2018).
Discontinuities provide unique opportunities for behavior change interventions. Given
that discontinuities pave the way for more deliberate processes, behavior change
interventions are more likely to attract attention and effectively convey information. This
Habit Discontinuity Hypothesis (Verplanken et al. 2008) was tested in a field experiment
among 800 households (Verplanken & Roy 2016). Half the households received an
intervention designed to promote more sustainable behaviors whereas the other half served as
control group. In each condition half of the households had relocated in the previous six
months. The intervention was found to be more effective among those who had relocated
than those who had not, compared with no-intervention control groups. A more detailed
analysis revealed that the effect was confined to those who had relocated in the previous three

32
months, raising two questions; what makes a 'window of opportunity' last and when does a
window 'open'? The latter may well be in advance of an expected discontinuity, for instance
when people start planning how to commute prior to moving house (Haggar et al. 2019).
Conclusion
There are several routes to support deliberate efforts to control unwanted habitual
behavior by augmenting and strategically targeting attitude change approaches; monitoring
and willfully changing a habit, retraining cue-action links, creating plans that are tied to the
cues activating the unwanted habit and supplemented by efforts to inhibit previous habits.
Habit discontinuities provide interesting windows of opportunity, both for individuals to
initiate change and for larger attitudinally based behavior change programs. Insights from this
research provide important boundary conditions for situating effective attitudinally based
interventions. Strong attitudes are likely an important additional facilitator in persistent
efforts to inhibit strong habits (Sheeran et al. 1999). In the next section we turn to change
processes where attitudes play a minimal or no role.
LEVERAGING HABIT ARCHITECTURE TO CREATE OR CHANGE HABITS
People who are effective at controlling their consumption, managing their recycling
or staying in regular contact with older relatives, do so by outsourcing action control so that
their actions are triggered automatically by recurring contexts in their environment. These
established habits are broadly insensitive to vicissitudes of attiude and protect action even
under conditions of stress or distraction, or when the originating goals of action are less
salient, so long as the context remains intact and stable. By outsourcing behavioral control to
the environment, habits are maintained by the habit architecture that supports them.
Certain environments are more prone to elicit habits, in particular environments that
are stable, contain consistent cues, and deliver positive outcomes for an individual. This
section considers the features of context that might be functional in the creation,

33
maintenance, and disruption of habits. These features relate first, to the management of action
cues and second, to management of the feasibility of actions associated with those cues, by
increasing or decreasing action friction. In these processes the role of attitudes is minimal or
absent.
Cue Contexts
The prerequisite for habit development is a stable environment that contains available,
consistently recurring cues. Habit cues may take many forms including locations, visual cues,
or preceding actions. However, when strong habits are established, people are usually not
aware of the actual cues that govern their habitual behavior. Consequently, an individual may
incorrectly confabulate reasons for their automatically cued actions or attribute automated
habitized behavior to internal motivations such as stress relief (Adriaanse et al. 2011, Mazar
& Wood 2021, Wood & Rünger 2016). This lack of awareness of context-cue contingency in
habit may diminish strategic efforts to identify and design optimum architecture required to
develop a new habit, and limit effective context-based public health intervention. For
example, reliance upon ‘stickies’ or mobile phone alerts as cues may provoke a single act
such as ‘phoning mum’ or ‘getting up in time to eat breakfast’ but will fail as contextual tools
for long-term habit development because the cue contingency between the reminder and
action will not meet the requirements of a consistent, stable contextual cue. Devices such as
these may instigate action but will impede automaticity. Medical interventions to promote
adherence, by employing text message reminders for example, may similarly have limited
capacity to create enduring habits cued by the patient’s own environment. Consequently,
when the intervention texts cease, so may adherence (Stawarz et al. 2015).
How might context be leveraged to promote habit development? Effective habit
development necessitates repetition of action in relation to context cues that naturally and
reliably occur with an appropriate frequency. Piggy backing on existing daily routines, by

34
inserting new actions may be a solution (Labrecque et al. 2017, Orbell & Verplanken 2020).
For example, if tooth brushing is a reliable activity, a flossing habit may be established as a
new action to be performed at the end - but not before - brushing (Judah et al. 2013). Potent
cues also exist at naturally occurring boundaries between action sequences such as upon
arrival home in the evening. Interventions that build upon existing practices and cue contexts,
be they individual or cultural, will facilitate habit development (Orbell & Phillips 2019).
Consumer habits and accompanying tendencies to resist change can be a powerful
source of passive resistance to trying new products (Heidenreich & Kraemer 2016). If
supermarkets seek to increase new sales, they may choose to capitalize upon the habit
discontinuity effect by disrupting the existing layout and location of products, thereby forcing
the customer to look around, deliberate and attend to different products.
Cues themselves may be manipulated in order to modulate behavior. A demonstration
is the 'portion size effect', which comprises the tendency to consume relatively more from
larger and less from smaller portions of food. People acquire a habit to ‘clear their plate’ or to
‘finish their drink’ during childhood irrespective of the amount consumed and consider it
appropriate behavior (Herman et al. 2015). When presented with smaller portions, glasses, or
spoons in a variety of contexts, people consume less food (Zlatevska et al. 2014), alcohol
(Kersbergen et al. 2018), and sugar (Venema et al. 2020). Hollands et al. (2015) concluded
that the portion size effect would equate to a 12-16% change in adult daily energy
consumption. The effect is robust and occurs even after participants are informed about this
phenomenon (Cavanagh et al. 2014), consistent with habitually and automatically clearing a
plate, particularly when distracted by a simultaneous activity.
Feasibility of Action in Context
Habits rely upon the possibility of their frequent, consistent execution in the
environment context. An important tool to promote or diminish the likelihood of repeated

35
behavior is to introduce friction for a less desired course of action by making it seem more
difficult, or by reducing friction for a more desired course of action by making it the simpler,
more readily available, or default course of action. In both cases the environment is
manipulated to decrease or increase, respectively, the likelihood of frequent and consistent
execution. This can be accomplished in microenvironments such as one's house or office (e.g.
not stockpiling unhealthy snacks), by organizations (e.g. creating open-plan offices), by
governmental bodies (e.g. closing city centers for automobiles), or by legislation (e.g.
smoking bans in public places).
Increases in friction might include imposition of waiting times. For example, the
introduction of a 16 sec time delay in closing a lift (elevator) door was more effective in
prompting employees to take the stairs, leading to a one third reduction in electricity use, than
a persuasive message posted on a sign. Moreover, the stair climbing habit persisted after the
study ended (Houten et al. 1981). Appelhans et al. (2018) retrofitted snack vending machines
such that unhealthy snacks were announced to be delivered with a 25 seconds delay whereas
healthy snacks were delivered immediately. This led to an increase in the purchase of the
healthier snacks. Smoking bans inside public buildings, restaurants and pubs increase friction
for smokers, forcing more mindful processing and search for alternative arrangements.
Studies suggest that this results in a decline in smoking among those who regularly visit those
places (Anger et al. 2011, Orbell et al. 2009). Ejlerskov et al. (2018) demonstrated that
habitual purchases of small packages of less-healthy food for immediate consumption could
be readily disrupted by increasing friction. Purchase of these products was more than 70%
lower if supermarkets adopted a policy of not presenting those items at check-out points but
elsewhere in the store. Friction may be altered by manipulating 'default' choices or actions.
For example, people are more likely to grab food items that are nearer to them, even if
preferred items are available further away. If the nearby items constitute low calorie and the

36
less proximate high calorie food, this arrangement promotes healthier habits (Privitera &
Zuraikat 2014).
Habit acquisition is also more likely and faster if the required action is simple rather
than complex (Kaushal & Rhodes 2015). Policies can reduce friction by simplifying behavior
into the ‘smallest doable action’ (Sanghvi et al. 2016). Behaviors requiring multiple actions
can be habitized but require extended action repetition. In an experimental study, participants
practiced making sushi in an online game so as to acquire a habit (Labrecque et al. 2020).
The authors showed that this multiple action sequence could not be automatized merely by
conscious mental rehearsal, but had to be repeatedly performed to create strong cue-action
links in memory. Similarly, an opera singer must rehearse by singing their words. Once the
word sequences are habitized, it is possible to be free to think about the acting performance,
once on stage.
The built environment may provide considerable potential for facilitation of habit by
reducing friction. Nicosia and Datar (2018) used the quasi-experimental variation in the
environments of adolescents' military families who regularly had to relocate, to demonstrate
how the presence or absence of fitness and recreation facilities in these locations affected
physical exercise frequencies. Particular districts may impact upon the feasibility of
development of a walking habit in everyday life via presence of footpaths, proximity to a
preferred school, shop or bus stop (Fleig et al. 2016, Le et al. 2019). Interventions to reduce
friction by addressing the built environment and its services may also need to address
affordability and equality of provision. Similarly, at a microenvironment level, development
of a habit to consume fruit and vegetables requires the availability of these items in the home
environment, which may be limited by financial cost (Daniel 2016).
Conclusion

37
Habit architecture refers to features of the performance context that foster specific
cue-action links. Whether by personal choice, via a group intervention, or organizational or
public policy, it is possible to intervene to create or modify habit via an appreciation of habit
context cueing. Manipulations can target the occurrence, salience or features of cues and
manipulate behavior in context by increasing or decreasing action friction. Increased friction
passively dissuades, whereas reduced friction passively induces action.
CONCLUSIONS
Reliance upon attitude-based strategies to accomplish behavior change without regard
to habit mechanisms diminishes their likely impact. Attitude-based strategies will have
limited impact on behavior change if they fail to translate temporary behavior into new long
term habits, or if they are employed to try to change existing habits that are insensitive to
changes in attitude. However, with recognition of the context-dependent operation of habits,
we have outlined approaches that exploit the potential of both attitudinally based and habitbased strategies.
The creation of new habits requires attention to those features that lead to cue
contingent automaticity, namely consistent repetition in a stable, friction-minimizing context.
Once formed, habits protect behavior against fluctuating attitudes and are resilient under
stress or fatigue. Habit change may be assisted by strong attitudes and effortful monitoring,
but slips are inevitable so long as strong cues to the original habit remain in place. Awareness
of this contingency permits behavior change efforts to be targeted to exploit habit
discontinuities, or interruptions in existing habits due to changes in the performance context
(e.g. life course transitions, changes in the external environment). Such habit discontinuities
may put deliberative strategies in the driving seat and provide prospects for more effective
interventions. Finally, understanding of the role of habit architecture provides the opportunity

38
to manipulate cue contexts and to introduce or reduce friction or to embed new habits in old
cue contexts.
It should be noted that even when habits are strong and a habit is automatically
brought to mind by a cue, habitual action is not obligatory. If a situation calls for it, we are
usually (unless distracted, stressed or fatigued) able to discontinue a habitized action and
think about alternatives. Habitual action also does not preclude episodes when we do think or
evaluate, even for a split second. The origins of habits often leave them attitude-aligned.
Thus, in real life it may not be possible to draw as strict a distinction between habit-based and
attitude-based behavior as models may suggest.
How might habit research progress? A good deal of research effort to date relies upon
correlational observational studies in the field, using self-reported explicit measures of habit,
attitude, and behavior. Laboratory-based work, on the other hand, while providing an
opportunity to examine the mechanics of habit, may not be conducive to testing the slow
development of realistic human habits, nor their destruction via various strategies. A good
deal of prior research has established the necessity to manipulate distraction or ego depletion
in order to distinguish habit from deliberate processes. Advancing knowledge on the relations
between attitudes and habits requires research that combines controlled laboratory work with
field studies investigating real-life behaviors (Marien et al. 2019). Further work is required
that employs longitudinal and experimental designs, as well as techniques such as experience
sampling and within-person statistical analyses. While a multitude of measurements are
available in the attitude domain, this is less the case in habit research. The available selfreport measures are limited to reporting experiences that arise from habitual processes.
Reaction time-based and cognitive neuroscientific methods are confined to laboratory-based
contexts. Therefore, more work on developing valid and reliable habit measures is needed.

39
Further work is also needed to identify optimal techniques to change attitudes and
habits (Hagger et al. 2020, Kok et al. 2015), capitalizing on the integrative approaches
outlined in this article. Taken together, considering the separate and interacting functions of
attitudes and habits provides powerful and new perspectives on how people behave and how
behavior may change. We hope that this review provides further inspiration to attitude and
habit researchers to combine forces and develop this intriguing field.

40
LITERATURE CITED
Aarts H, Dijksterhuis A. 2000. Habits as knowledge structures: Automaticity in goaldirected behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 78: 53-63
Aarts H, Verplanken B, van Knippenberg A. 1998. Predicting behavior from actions in
the past: Repeated Decision Making or a matter of habit? J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 28,
1355-74
Adriaanse, MA, Gollwitzer, PM, De Ridder TDT, de Wit JBF, Kroese FM. 2011.
Breaking habits with implementation intentions: A test of underlying processes.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37: 502-13
Adriaanse MA, de Ridder DTD, Evers C. 2011. Emotional eating: Eating when emotional
or emotional about eating? Psychol. Health 26: 23-39
Adriaanse MA, Kroese FM, Weijers J, Gollwitzer PM, Oetingen G. 2018. Explaining
unexplainable food choices. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48: O15-O24
Adriaanse MA, Vinkers CDW, De Ridder DTD, Hox JJ, De Wit JBF. 2011. Do
implementation intentions help to eat a healthy diet? A systematic review and metaanalysis of the empirical evidence. Appetite 56: 183-93
Ajzen I. 2011. Is attitude research incompatible with the compatibility principle? In Most
Underappreciated, ed. RM Arkin, pp. 151-54. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Albarracin D, Shavitt S. 2018. Attitudes and attitude change. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 69:
299-327
Allom V, Mullan BA, Monds L, Orbell S, Hamilton K, et al. 2018. Reflective and
impulsive processes underlying saving behavior and the additional roles of selfcontrol and habit. J. Neurosci. Psychol. E. 11: 135-46
Amaya KA, Smith KS. 2018. Neurobiology of habit formation. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci.
20: 145-52

41
Anderson IA, Wood W. 2021. Habits and the electronic herd: The psychology behind
social media's successes and failures. Consum. Psychol. Rev. 4: 83-99
Anger S, Kvasnicka M, Siedler T. 2011. One last puff? Public smoking bans and smoking
behavior. J. Health. Econ. 30: 591-601
Appelhans BM, French SA, Olinger T, Bogucki M, Janssen I, et al. 2018. Leveraging
delay discounting for health: Can time delays influence food choice? Appetite 126:
16-25
Armitage CJ. 2016. Evidence that implementation intentions can overcome the effects of
smoking habits. Health Psychol. 35: 935-43
Barnett I, van Sluijs EMF, Ogilvie D. 2012. Physical activity and transitioning to
retirement: A systematic review. Am. Prev. Med. 43: 329-36
Bate KS, Malouff JM, Thorteinsson ET, Bhullar N. 2011. The efficacy of habit reversal
therapy for tics, habit disorders and stuttering: A meta-analytic review. Clin.
Psychol. Rev. 31: 865-71
Batschelet HM, Stein M, Tschuemperlin RM, Soravia LM, Moggi F. 2020. Alcoholspecific computerized interventions to alter cognitive biases: A systematic review of
effects on experimental tasks, drinking behavior, and neuronal activation. Front.
Psychiatry 10: 871
Blanton H, Burrows CN, Jaccard J. 2016. To accurately estimate implicit influences on
health behaviour, accurately estimate explicit influences. Health Psychol. 35: 856-60
Busch-Geertsema A, Lanzendorf M. 2017. From university to work life - Jumping behind
the wheel? Explaining mode change of students making the transition to professional
life. Transport Res. A 106: 181-96

42
Cavanagh, K, Vartanian LR, Herman CP, Polivy J. 2014. The effect of portion size on
food intake is robust to brief education and mindfulness exercises. J. Health
Psychol. 19: 730-39
Ceceli AO, Natsheh JY, Cruz D, Tricomi E. 2020. The neurobehavioral mechanisms of
motivational control in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Cortex 127: 191-207
Clark B, Chatterjee K, Melia S. 2016. Changes to commuter mode: The role of life
events, spatial context and environmental attitude. Transport Res. A-Pol. 89: 89-105
Courtois C, Montrieux H, De Grove F, Raes A, De Marez L, Schellens T. 2014. Student
acceptance of tablet devices in secondary education: A three-wave longitudinal
cross-lagged case study. Comput. Hum. Behav. 35: 278-86
Croft A, Atkinson C, Sandstrom G, Orbell S, Aknin L. 2020. Loosening the GRIP
(Gender Roles Inhibiting Prosociality) to promote gender equality. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. Rev. in press
Dalege J, Borsboom D, van Harreveld F, van der Maas HLJ. 2019. A network perspective
on attitude strength: Testing the connectivity hypothesis. Soc. Psychol. Pers. Sci. 10:
746-56
Daniel C. 2016. Economic constraints on taste formation and the true cost of healthy
eating. Soc. Sci. Med. 148: 34-41
Deci EL, Ryan RM. 1985. Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior.
New York: Plenum
De Houwer J, Tanaka A, Moors A, Tibboel H. 2018. Kicking the habit: Why evidence for
habits in humans might be overestimated. Motiv. Sci. 4: 50-59

43
de Wit S, Corlett PR, Aitken MR, Dickinson A, Fletcher PC. 2009. Differential
engagement of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex by goal-directed and habitual
behavior toward food pictures in humans. J. Neurosci. 29: 11330-8
de Wit S, Kindt M, Knot SL, Verhoeven AAC, Robbins TW, et al. 2018. Shifting the
balance between goals and habits: Five failures in experimental habit induction. J.
Exp. Psychol. Gen. 147: 1043-65
de Wit S, Watson P, Harsay HA, Cohen MX, van de Vijver I, Ridderinkhof KR. 2012.
Corticostriatal connectivity underlies individual differences in the balance between
habitual and goal-directed action control. J. Neurosci. 32: 12066-75
Dickinson A, Balleine B. 1995. Motivational control of instrumental action. Curr Dir
Psychol Sci 4: 162-67
Eagly AH, Chaiken S. 1993. The Psychology of Attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich
Ejlerskov KT, Sharp SJ, Stead M, Adamson AJ, White M, Adams J. 2018. Supermarket
policies on less-healthy food at checkouts: Natural experimental evaluation using
interrupted time series analyses of purchases. PLOS Med 15: e1002712
Fleig L, Ashe MC, Voss C, Therrien S, Sims-Gould J, et al. 2016. Environmental and
psychosocial correlates of objectively measured physical activity among older
adults. Health Psychol. 35: 1364-72
Fournier, M, d'Arripe-Longueville, F, Radel R. 2017. Effects of psychosocial stress on
the goal-directed and habit memory systems during learning and later extinction.
Psychoneuroendocrino. 77: 275-83
Galla BM, Duckworth AL. 2015. More than resisting temptation: Beneficial habits
mediate the relationship between self-control and positive life outcomes. J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 109: 508-25

44
Gardner B, Lally P. 2013. Does intrinsic motivation strengthen physical activity habit?
Modeling relationships between self-determination, past behaviour, and habit
strength. J. Behav. Med. 36: 488-97
Gardner B., Lally P, Rebar AL. 2020. Does habit weaken the relationship between
intention and behaviour? Revisiting the habit-intention interaction hypothesis. Soc.
Personal. Psychol. Compass 14: e12553
Gillan CM, Robbins TW, Sahakian BJ, van den Heuvel OA, van Wingen G. 2016. The
role of habit in compulsivity. Eur Neuropsychopharm 26: 828-40
Giles EL, Robalino S, McColl E, Sniehotta FF, Adams J. 2014. The effectiveness of
financial incentives for health behaviour change: Systematic review and metaanalysis. PLOS ONE 9: e90347
Glasman LR, Albarracín D. 2006. Forming attitudes that predict future behavior: A metaanalysis of the attitude-behavior relation. Psychol. Bull. 132: 778-822
Gollwitzer PM. 1993. Goal achievement: The role of intentions. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol.
4: 141-85
Greenwald AG, Lai CK. 2020. Implicit social cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 71: 419-45
Greenwald AG, Poehlman TA, Uhlmann EL, Banaji MR. 2009. Understanding and using
the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 97: 17-41
Haggar P, Whitmarsh L, Skippon SM. 2019. Habit discontinuity and student travel mode
choice. Transport Res. F-Trav. 64: 1-13
Hagger MS, Cameron LD, Hamilton K, Hankonen N, Lintunen T, eds. 2020. The
Handbook of Behavior Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press

45
Hagger MS, Luszczynska A. 2014. Implementation intention and action planning
interventions in health contexts: State of the research and proposals for the way
forward. Appl. Psychol.-Hlth. We. 6: 1-47
Hardwick, R. M., Forrence, A. D., Krakauer, J. W., & Haith, A. M. (2019). Timedependent competition between goal-directed and habitual response
preparation. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3: 1252-62
Heidenreich S., Kraemer T. (2016). Innovations—doomed to fail? Investigating strategies
to overcome passive innovation resistance. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 33: 277–297
Herman CP, Polivy J, Pliner P, Vartanian LR. 2015. Physiol. Behav. 144 129-136
Hogarth L. 2018. A critical review of habit theory of drug dependence. In The Psychology
of Habit: Theory, Mechanisms, Change, and Contexts, ed. B. Verplanken, pp. 32541. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Hofmann W, Baumeister RF, Föster G, Vohs KD. 2012. Everyday temptations: An
experience sampling study of desire, conflict, and self-control. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
102: 1318-35
Holland RW, Aarts H, Langendam D. 2006. Breaking and creating habits on the work
floor: A field-experiment on the power of implementation intentions. J. Exp.
Psychol. 42: 776-83
Hollands GJ, Shemilt I, Marteau TM, Jebb SA, Lewis HB, et al. 2015. Portion, package
or tableware size for changing selection and consumption of food, alcohol and
tobacco. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD011045
Hommel. B. 2019. Binary theorizing does not account for action control. Front. Psychol.
10: 2542
Hornsey MJ, Harris EA, Bain PG, Fielding KS. 2016. Meta-analyses of the determinants
and outcomes of belief in climate change. Nat. Clim. Change 6: 622-626

46
Horstmann A., Dietrich A, Mathar D, Pössel M, Villringer A, Neumann J. 2015. Slave to
habit? Obesity is associated with decreased behavioural sensitivity to reward
devaluation. Appetite 87: 175-83
Houten, R.V., Nau, P.A., Merrigan, M. 1981. Reducing elevator energy use: A
comparison of posted feedback and reduced elevator convenience. Journal of
Applied Behavior Analysis. 14: 377-387.
Howe LC, Krosnick JA. 2017. Attitude strength. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 68: 327-51
Itzchakov G, Uziel L, Wood W. 2018. When attitudes and habits don't correspond: Selfcontrol depletion increases persuasion but not behavior. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 75: 110
James W. 1887. The laws of habit. Pop Sci Mon 31: 433-51
Janke J, Handy S. 2019. How life course events trigger changes in bicycling attitudes and
behavior: Insights into causality. Travel Beh. Soc. 16: 31-41
Judah G, Gardner B, Aunger R. 2013. Forming a flossing habit: An exploratory study of
the psychological determinants of habit formation. Brit. J. Health Psychol. 18: 338353
Kakoschke N, Kemps E, Tiggemann M. 2017. Approach bias modification training and
consumption: A review of the literature. Addict. Behav. 64: 21-28
Kaushal N, Rhodes RE. 2015. Exercise habit formation in new gym members: A
longitudinal study. J. Behav. Med. 38: 652-63
Keller J, Kwasnicka D, Klaiber P, Sichert L, Lally P, Fleig L. 2021. Habit formation
following routine-based versus time-based cue planning: A randomized controlled
trial. Brit. J. Health Psych. Published online, doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12504

47
Kersbergen I, Oldham M, Jones A, Field M, Angus C, Robinson E. 2018. Reducing the
standard serving size of alcoholic beverages prompts reductions in alcohol
consumption. Addiction 113: 1598-1608
Kok G, Gottlieb NH, Peters G-JY, Dolan Mullen P, Parcel GS, et al. 2015. A taxonomy
of behaviour change methods: An Intervention Mapping approach. Health Psychol.
Rev. 10: 297-312
Kruglanski AW, Fishback A, Wooley K, Bélanger JJ, Chernikova M, et al. 2018. A
structural model of intrinsic motivation: On the psychology of means-end fusion.
Psychol. Rev. 125: 165-82
Kruglanski AW, Szumowska E. 2020. Habitual behavior is goal-driven. Psychol. Sci. 15:
1256-71
Kurdi B, Seitchik AR, Axt JR, Carroll TJ, Karapetyan A. et al. 2018. Relationship
between the Implicit Association Test and intergroup behavior: A meta-analysis.
Am. Psychol. 74: 569-86
Kurz T, Gardner B, Verplanken B, Abraham C. 2015. Habitual behaviors or patterns of
practice? Explaining and changing repetitive climate-relevant actions. WIREs Clim.
Change 6: 113-128
Labrecque JS, Lee K, Wood W. 2020. How habits stick. Manuscript in preparation.
Labrecque JS, Wood W, Neal DT, Harrington N. 2017. Habit slips: When consumers
unintentionally resist new products. J. Acad. Market. Sci. 45: 119-33
Lally P, Gardner B. 2013. Promoting habit formation. Health Psychol. Rev. 7: sup1,
S137-S158
Lally P, van Jaarsveld CHM, Potts HWW, Wardle J. 2010. How are habits formed:
Modelling habit formation in the real world. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 40: 998-1009

48
Lattarulo P, Masucci V, Pazienza MG. 2019. Resistance to change: Car use and routines.
Transp. Policy 74: 63-72
Le HTK, Buehler R, Hankey S. 2019. Have walking and bicycling increased in the US? A
13-year longitudinal analysis of traffic counts from 13 metropolitan areas.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport And Environment. 69:329-345
Lee K, Kwan MP. 2018. Physical activity classification in free-living conditions using
smartphone accelerometer data and exploration of predicted results. Comput.
Environ. Urban Syst. 67: 124-31
Lewin K. 1947. Frontiers in group dynamics: Concept, method and reality in social
science; social equilibria and social change. Hum. Relat. 1: 5-41
Lin P-Y, Wood W, Monterosso J. 2016. Healthy habits protect against temptations.
Appetite 103: 432-40
Luque D, Molinero S, Watson P, López FJ, Le Pelley ME. 2020. Measuring habit
formation through goal-directed response switching. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 149:
1449-59
Maki A, Burns RJ, Ha L, Rothman AJ. 2016. Paying people to protect the environment:
A meta-analysis of financial incentive interventions to promote proenvironmental
behaviors. J. Environ. Psychol. 47: 242-55
Mancuso C, Miltenberger RG. 2016. Using habit reversal to decrease filled pauses in
public speaking. Appl. Behav. Anal. 49: 188-92
Mantzari E, Vogt F, Shemilt I, Wei J, Higgins JPT, Marteau TM. 2015. Personal financial
incentives for changing habitual health-related behaviors: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Prev. Med. 75: 75-85

49
Marien H, Custers R, Aarts H. 2019. Studying human habits in societal context:
Examining support for a basic stimulus-response mechanism. Curr. Dir. Psychol.
Sci. 28: 614-18
Mazar A, Wood W. 2021. Illusory feelings, elusive habits: Behavioral attributions
overlook habit. Manuscript submitted for publication.
McCloskey K, Johnson BT. 2019. Habits, quick and easy: Perceived complexity
moderates the associations of contextual stability and rewards with behavioral
automaticity. Front. Psychol. 10: 1556
Milne S, Orbell S, Sheeran P. 2002. Combining motivational and volitional interventions
to promote exercise participation: Protection motivation theory and implementation
intentions. Brit. J. Health Psych. 7: 163-84
Moscovici S. 1963. Attitudes and opinions. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 14: 231-60
Murray KB, Häubl G. 2007. Explaining cognitive lock-in: The role of skill-based habits
of use in consumer choice. J. Consum. Res. 34: 77-88
Neal DT, Wood W, Drolet A. 2013. How do people adhere to goals when willpower is
low? The profits (and pitfalls) of strong habits. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 104: 959-75
Neal DT, Wood W, Labrecque JS, Lally P. 2012. How do habits guide behavior? Perceived
and actual triggers of habits in daily life. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48: 492-98
Neal DT, Wood W, Wu M, Kurlander D. 2011. The pull of the past: When do habits
persist despite conflict with motives? Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37: 1428-37
Nicosia N, Datar A. 2018. Neighborhood environments and physical activity: A
longitudinal study of adolescents in a natural experiment. Am. J. Prev. Med. 54: 67178

50
Orbell S, Lidierth P, Henderson CJ, Geeraert N, Uller C, et al. 2009. Social–cognitive
beliefs, alcohol, and tobacco use: A prospective community study of change
following a ban on smoking in public places. Health Psychol. 28, 753–61
Orbell S, Phillips LA. 2019. Automatic processes and self-regulation of illness. Health
Psychol. Rev. 13: 378-405
Orbell S, Verplanken B. 2010. The automatic component of habit in health behavior:
Habit as cue-contingent automaticity. Health Psychol. 29: 374-83
Orbell S, Verplanken B. 2018. Progress and prospects in habit research. In Verplanken B,
ed. 2018. The Psychology of Habit: Theory, Mechanisms, Change, and Contexts, ed
B Verplanken, pp.397-409. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Orbell S, Verplanken B. 2020. Changing behavior using habit theory. In The Handbook of
Behavior Change, ed. MS Hagger, LD Cameron, K Hamilton, N. Hankonen, T
Lintunen, pp. 178-92. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press
Oswald FL, Mitchell G, Blanton H, Jaccard J, Tetlock PE. 2013. Predicting ethnic and
racial discrimination: A meta-analysis of IAT criterion studies. J. Pers. Soc Psychol
105: 171-92
Ouellette JA, Wood W. 1998. Habit and intention in everyday life: The multiple
processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior. Psychol. Bull. 124: 54-74
Parkes SD, Jopson A, Marsden G. 2016. Understanding travel behaviour change during
mega-events: Lessons from the London 2012 Games. Transport Res. A 92: 104-19
Privitera GJ, Zuraikat FM. 2014. Proximity of foods in a competitive food environment
influences consumption of a low calorie and a high calorie food. Appetite 76: 175-79
Quinn JM, Pascoe A, Wood W, Neal, DT. 2010. Can't control yourself? Monitor those
bad habits. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 36: 499-511

51
Rebar A, Gardner B, Rhodes RE, Verplanken B. 2018. The measurement of habits. In
The Psychology of Habit: Theory, Mechanisms, Change, and Contexts, ed. B.
Verplanken, pp. 31-49. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Rebar A, Rhodes RE, Gardner B. 2019. How we are misinterpreting physical activity
intention-behavior relations and what to do about it. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phy 16: 71
Reber R, Schwarz N, Winkelman O. 2004. Processing fluency and aesthetic pleasure: Is
beauty in the perceiver's processing experience? Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 8: 364-82
Rhodes RE, Dickau L. 2012. Experimental evidence for the intention-behavior
relationship in the physical activity domain: A meta-analysis. Health Psychol. 31:
724-27
Rinck M, Wiers RW, Becker ES, Lindenmeyer J. 2018. Relapse prevention in abstinent
alcoholics by cognitive bias modification: Clinical effects of combining approach
bias modification and attention bias modification. J. Consult. Clin. Psych. 86: 100516
Sanghvi T, Haque R, Roy S, Afsana K, Seidel R, et al. 2016. Achieving behavior change
at scale: Alive and Trive's infant and young child feeding programme in Bangladesh.
Matern. Child Nutr. 12: 141-54
Schneider W, Shiffrin RM. 1977. Controlled and automatic human information
processing: I. Detection, search, and attention. Psychol. Rev. 84: 1-66
Sheeran P, Godin, G, Conner, M, Germain M. 2017. Paradoxical effects of experience:
Past behavior both strengthens and weakens the intention-behavior relationship. J.
Assoc. Consum. Res. 2: 309-18
Sheeran P, Maki A, Montanaro E, Avishai-Yitshak A, Bryan A, et al. 2016. The impact
of changing attitudes, norms, and self-efficacy on health-related intentions and
behavior: A meta-analysis. Health Psychol. 35: 1178-88

52
Sheeran P, Orbell S, Trafimow D. 1999. Does the temporal stability of behavioral
intentions moderate intention-behavior and past behavior-future behavior relations?
Pers. Soc. Psychol. B. 25: 721-30
Slovinec D'Angelo ME, Pelletier LG, Reid RD, Huta V. 2014. The roles of self-efficacy
and motivation in the prediction of short- and long-term adherence to exercise
among patients with coronary heart disease. Health Psychol. 33: 1344-53
Stawarz K, Cox AL, Blandford A. 2015. Beyond self-tracking and reminders: Designing
smartphone apps that support habit formation. CHI '15: Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems April: 2653-62
Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. 2008. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth and
happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
Thomas GO, Fisher R, Whitmarsh L, Milfont TL, Poortinga W. 2018. The impact of
parenthood on environmental attitudes and behaviour: A longitudinal investigation
of the legacy hypothesis. Popul. Environ. 39: 261-76
Thomas GO, Sautkina E, Poortinga W, Wolstenholme E, Whitmarsh L. 2019. The
English plastic bag charge changed behavior and increased support for other charges
to reduce plastic waste. Front. Psychol. 10: 266
Thürmer JL, McCrea SM, Gollwitzer PM. 2013. Regulating self-defensiveness: If-then
plans prevent claiming and creating performance handicaps. Motiv. Emot. 37: 71225
Trafimow D. 2018. The automaticity of habitual behaviours: Inconvenient questions. In
The Psychology of Habit: Theory, Mechanisms, Change, and Contexts, ed. B.
Verplanken, pp. 377-95. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Triandis HC. 1977. Interpersonal behavior. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole

53
Turton R, Bruidegom K, Cardi V, Hirsch CR, Treasure J. 2016. Novel methods to help
develop healthier eating habits for eating and weight disorders: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. R. 61: 132-55
Udall AM, de Groot JIM, De Jong SB, Shankar A. 2021. How I see me: A meta-analysis
investigating the association between identities and pro-environmental behaviour.
Front. Psychol. 12: 582421
Venema TAG, Kroese FM, Verplanken B, de Ridder DTD. 2020. The (bitter) sweet taste
of nudge effectiveness: The role of habits in a portion size nudge, a proof of concept
study. Appetite 151: 104699
Verplanken B, ed. 2018. The Psychology of Habit: Theory, Mechanisms, Change, and
Contexts. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Verplanken B, Aarts HAG. 1999. Habit, attitude, and planned behaviour: Is habit an
empty construct or an interesting case of automaticity? Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol 10:
101-34
Verplanken B, Aarts H, van Knippenberg A. 1997. Habit, information acquisition, and
the process of making travel mode choices. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol 27: 539-60
Verplanken B, Aarts H, van Knippenberg A, Moonen A. 1998. Habit versus planned
behaviour: A field experiment. Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 37: 111-28
Verplanken B, Friborg O, Wang CE, Trafimow D, Woolf K. 2007. Mental habits:
Metacognitive reflection on negative self-thinking. J. Per. Soc. Psychol. 92: 526-41
Verplanken B, Marks E, Dobromir AI. 2020. On the nature of eco-anxiety: How
constructive or unconstructive is habitual worry about global warming? J. Environ.
Psychol. 72: 101528
Verplanken B, Orbell S. 2003. Reflections on past behavior: A self-report index of habit
strength. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 33, 1313-30

54
Verplanken B, Roy D. 2016. Empowering interventions to promote sustainable lifestyles:
Testing the habit discontinuity hypothesis in a field experiment. J. Environ. Psychol.
45: 127-34
Verplanken B, Sui J. 2019. Habit and identity: Behavioral, cognitive, affective, and
motivational facets of an integrated self. Front. Psychol. 10: 1504
Verplanken B, Walker I, Davis A, Jurasek M. 2008. Context change and travel mode
choice: Combining the habit discontinuity and self-activation hypotheses. J.
Environ. Psychol. 28: 121-27
Verplanken B, Wood W. 2006. Interventions to break and create consumer habits. J.
Public Policy Mark. 25: 90-103
Verplanken B, Yang M, Sui J, Bentley J, Min A. (2021). Habit formation: The role of
performance frequency and self-identity. Unpublished data.
Walker I, Thomas GO, Verplanken B. 2015. Old habits die hard: Travel habit formation
and decay during an office relocation. Environ. Behav. 47: 1089-1106
Wakefield MA, Loken B, Hornik RC. 2010. Use of mass media campaigns to change
health behaviour. Lancet 376: 1261-71
Webb TL, Sheeran P. 2006. Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior
change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol. Bull. 132: 249-268
Wolf LJ, Haddock G, Manstead ASR, Maio GR. 2020. The importance of (shared)
human values for containing the COVID-19 pandemic. Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 59:
618-27
Wood, Mazar, Neal. 2021. Habits and goals in human behavior: Separate but interacting
systems. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. in press
Wood W, Neal DT. 2007. A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface. Psychol. Rev.
114: 843-63

55
Wood W, Rünger D. 2016. The psychology of habit. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 67: 289-314
Wood W, Tam L, Guerrero Witt M. 2005. Changing circumstances, disrupting habits. J.
Per. Soc. Psychol. 88: 918-33
Zlatevska, N, Dubelaar C, Holden SS. 2014. Sizing up the effect of portion size on
consumption: A meta-analytic review. J. Marketing 78: 110-54

56
FIGURE CAPTION

Figure 1
Schematic representation of ways in which attitudes and habits may relate. The upper larger arrow represents how attitudes may initiate habit
formation and a transition from attitude-driven to habit-driven. The lower larger arrow represents how habit disruption may initiate a transition
from habit-driven to attitude-driven behavior. The boxes on the far left and right represent influences on attitudes and habits, respectively. The
dotted arrow in the middle represents attitudinal inferences from habitual processes.

HABIT FORMATION
Repetition of behavior in stable contexts
Rewards
Planning, training

ATTITUDE IN OPERATION
Direct experience
Persuasion

Deliberate processes
Powered by motivation
Attitude strength

Self-perception
Confabulation
Ease, fluency

HABIT IN OPERATION
Automatic processes
Powered by habit architecture
Outcome insensitivity
Habit slips
Protective functions

HABIT DISRUPTION
Habit discontinuities
Monitoring, planning, training

Context/cue
manipulations
Friction increase/
decrease

