Journal of Consumer Research, Inc.

Brand Credibility, Brand Consideration, and Choice
Author(s): Tülin Erdem and Joffre Swait
Source: Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 31, No. 1 (June 2004), pp. 191-198
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/383434 .
Accessed: 10/06/2014 13:16

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The University of Chicago Press and Journal of Consumer Research, Inc. are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Consumer Research.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Brand Credibility, Brand Consideration, and
Choice

TU¨ LIN ERDEM
JOFFRE SWAIT*

We examine the role of brand credibility (trustworthiness and expertise) on brand
choice and consideration across multiple product categories that vary in regard to
potential uncertainty about attributes and associated information acquisition costs
and perceived risks of consumption. We ﬁnd that brand credibility increases prob-
ability of inclusion of a brand in the consideration set, as well as brand choice
conditional on consideration. We also ﬁnd that although credibility impacts brand
choice and consideration set formation more and through more constructs in con-
texts with high uncertainty and sensitivity to such uncertainty, credibility effects are
present in all categories. Finally, our results indicate that trustworthiness, rather
than expertise, affects consumer choices and brand consideration more.

O ne of the most important roles played by brands (un-

derstood to be “a name, term, sign, symbol or design,
or a combination of them which is intended to identify the
goods and services of one seller or a group of sellers and
to differentiate them from those of competitors”; Kotler
1997, p. 443) is their effect on consumer brand choice and
consideration.

In this article, we propose and test that one important
mechanism through which brands’ impact on choice and
consideration materializes is via brand credibility. When im-
perfect and asymmetric information characterize a market,
economic agents (i.e., consumers and ﬁrms) may use signals
(i.e., manipulable attributes or activities) to convey infor-
mation about their characteristics (Spence 1974). To be ef-
fective, such signals must be credible (Tirole 1990). Pre-
vious literature has studied the credibility of a brand as a
signal of quality or product positions (Erdem and Swait
1998; Rao and Ruekkert 1994; Wernerfelt 1988). The cred-
ibility of a brand as a signal (i.e., brand credibility) has been
conceptualized as the believability of the product position
information contained in a brand.

While previous research has explored the impact of cred-
ibility on product utility, we investigate brand credibility’s
effect on consideration and brand choice conditional on con-
sideration. We also research the differential mechanisms
through which credibility exerts its inﬂuence on choice and
consideration across categories that vary in regard to po-

*Tu¨lin Erdem is E.T. Grether Professor of Business Administration and
Marketing, Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720-1900; e-mail: erdem@haas.berkeley.edu. Joffre Swait is partner,
Advanis, Inc., and adjunct professor, Faculty of Business, University of
Alberta, 12 W. University Avenue, #205, Gainesville, FL 32601; e-mail:
Joffre_Swait@Advanis.ca.

tential uncertainty about attributes and associated informa-
tion acquisition costs and perceived risks of consumption.
This work extends previous work on brand credibility by
explicitly considering the two subdimensions of brand cred-
ibility (trustworthiness and expertise).

Our results indicate that brand credibility affects both
conditional brand choice and consideration. These effects
are found in a broad array of product classes we tested,
varying from simple fruit
juices to personal computers
(PCs). The products were selected to reﬂect different degrees
of consumer uncertainty with respect to product attributes
and associated information acquisition costs and to per-
ceived risks of consumption; this uncertainty is conﬁrmed
by this research to underlie the differential role of brand
credibility in consideration and choice. In general, it is found
that trustworthiness, the subdimension of brand credibility
relating to consumers’ perceptions of ﬁrms’ willingness to
carry through on promises made, exerts a more important
impact than expertise (ﬁrms’ perceived capability to deliver
on promises) on respondents’ brand consideration and
choice. However, there is considerable variation in the rel-
ative importance of
trustworthiness vis-a`-vis expertise
across product categories. The mechanisms whereby brand
credibility works its impacts, that is, via perceived quality,
perceived risk, and information costs saved constructs, are
explored in some detail, but speciﬁc results are left for later
sections.

BRAND CREDIBILITY’S IMPACT ON
BRAND CHOICE AND CONSIDERATION

Previous empirical work on how consumers may narrow
attention to a subset of brands out of a bigger set has focused

191

(cid:1) 2004 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 31 ● June 2004
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2004/3101-0016$10.00

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

192

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

on modeling consumer choices as the outcome of a two-
stage process of consideration set formation and conditional
brand choice (e.g., Andrews and Srinivasan 1995; Roberts
and Lattin 1991; Swait and Ben-Akiva 1987). The main
approach to conceptualizing consideration sets in the liter-
ature has been the cost-beneﬁt approach (Hauser and Wer-
nerfelt 1990). This approach employs the expected utility
maximization framework to advance the notion that con-
sumers weigh the cost of brand evaluation for membership
in this subset against the beneﬁts of adding or dropping the
brand. This implies consumer uncertainty about brands.

Brand Credibility

When consumers are uncertain about brands and the mar-
ket is characterized by asymmetric information (i.e., ﬁrms
know more about their products than do consumers), brands
can serve as signals of product positions (Wernerfelt 1988).
As a signal of product positioning, the most important char-
acteristic of a brand is its credibility. A ﬁrm can use various
marketing mix elements besides the brand to signal product
quality: for example, charging a high price, offering a certain
warranty, or distributing via certain channels. Each of these
actions may or may not be credible, depending on market
conditions including competitive and consumer behavior.
However, what sets brands apart from the individual mar-
keting mix elements as credible signals is that the former
embody the cumulative effect of past marketing mix strat-
egies and activities. This historical notion that credibility is
based on the sum of past behaviors has been referred to as
reputation in the information economics literature (see Her-
big and Milewicz 1995).

Credibility is broadly deﬁned as the believability of an
entity’s intentions at a particular time and is posited to have
two main components: trustworthiness and expertise. Thus,
brand credibility is deﬁned as the believability of the product
information contained in a brand, which requires that con-
sumers perceive that the brand have the ability (i.e., exper-
tise) and willingness (i.e., trustworthiness) to continuously
deliver what has been promised (in fact, brands can function
as signals since—if and when they do not deliver what is
promised—their brand equity will erode). Both the expertise
and trustworthiness of a brand reﬂect the cumulative impacts
of associated past and present marketing strategies and ac-
tivities. The credibility of a brand has been shown to be
higher for brands with higher marketing mix consistency
over time and higher brand investments, ceteris paribus
(Erdem and Swait 1998). Consistency refers to the degree
of harmony and convergence among the marketing mix
elements and the stability of marketing mix strategies and
attribute levels over time. The consistency of attribute lev-
els over time—for example, consistency in quality lev-
els—implies low “inherent product variability” (Roberts
and Urban 1988), which can be achieved by a dedication
to quality standardization. However, the consistency to
which we refer is that of the brand positioning in general.
Brand investments, on the other hand, are resources that
ﬁrms spend on brands to (1) assure consumers that brand

promises will be kept and (2) demonstrate longer-term com-
mitment to brands (Klein and Lefﬂer 1981). Furthermore,
it has also been shown that the clarity (i.e., lack of ambi-
guity) of the product information contained in a brand is an
antecedent to brand credibility (Erdem and Swait 1998).

As also suggested by Aaker (1991), higher perceived (or
expected) quality, lower information costs, and risk asso-
ciated with credible brands may increase consumer evalu-
ations of brands. Indeed, Erdem and Swait (1998) have
shown, using structural equation models, that expected util-
ity is increasing in perceived quality and decreasing in per-
ceived risk and information costs.

Brand Credibility, Brand Consideration, and
Choice

Such a signaling framework of brand effects on con-
sumer brand utility and choice also implies that when there
is consumer uncertainty about brands and information is
costly to obtain and/or process, the credibility of a brand
may be an important factor underlying the formation of
consideration sets. The cost-beneﬁt approach to consid-
eration and choice set formation suggests that the higher
perceived value and lower perceived risk associated with
a higher credibility brand are anticipated to increase ex-
pected beneﬁts (Hauser and Wernerfelt 1990). Addition-
ally, the lower information costs associated with credible
brands are likely to decrease expected costs, while the
credibility of a brand decreases perceived risk because it
increases consumers’ conﬁdence in a ﬁrm’s product
claims. Credibility also decreases information costs since
consumers may use credible brands as a source of knowl-
edge to save information gathering and processing costs
(e.g., reading Consumer Reports, doing online searches for
product reviews, seeking advice from experts; Erdem and
Swait 1998). Indeed, previous work has suggested that high
levels of cognitive effort needed to evaluate speciﬁc brands
may induce negative affect and may lead to lower choice
probabilities (Garbarino and Edell 1997). Consequently,
we expect that

H1: Higher credibility will both increase the proba-
bility of a brand being included in the consid-
eration set and the probability of its being chosen
from the consideration set.

However, there is evidence in the literature that different
variables may affect consideration and brand evaluation con-
ditional on consideration (Nedungadi 1990). Given that it
has been shown in previous research that brand credibility
effects on consumer utility materialize through perceived
quality, perceived risk, and information costs saved (Erdem
and Swait 1998), the next question would concern the dif-
ferential effects of these three brand credibility mediator
constructs on choice versus consideration.

More speciﬁcally, perceived risk can be used in the initial
screening before the brand choice stage. Furthermore, the
impact of perceived risk may be much less, or even neg-

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BRAND CREDIBILITY AND BRAND CHOICE

193

Construct

Expertise

Trustworthiness

Perceived Quality

Perceived Risk

Information Costs Saved

TABLE 1

MEASUREMENT MODEL ITEMS AND ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS

Item

Cronbach’s a

This brand reminds me of someone who’s competent and knows what

he/she is doing (+)

This brand has the ability to deliver what it promises (+)
This brand delivers what it promises (+)
This brand’s product claims are believable (+)
Over time, my experiences with this brand have led me to expect it to

keep its promises, no more and no less (+)

This brand has a name you can trust (+)
This brand doesn’t pretend to be something it isn’t (+)
The quality of this brand is very high (+)
In terms of overall quality, I’d rate this brand as a . . . (+)
I’d have to try it several times to ﬁgure out what this brand is like (+)
I never know how good this brand will be before I buy it (+)
I need lots more information about this brand before I’d buy it ((cid:1))
I know what I’m going to get from this brand, which saves time shop-

ping around (+)

I know I can count on this brand being there in the future (+)
This brand gives me what I want, which saves me time & effort trying

to do better (+)

.77

.89

.77

.64

.75

NOTES.—All scales formed as simple averages of component items, reverse scored for negative items. All items measured on nine-point agree/disagree scales

except second quality item, which was measured on nine-point scales with

1 p low

quality,

9 p high

quality. Signs (+/(cid:1)) indicate a priori sign expectation.

ligibly, important at the conditional brand choice stage due
to the exclusion of high-risk brands from the consideration
set during the earlier screening stage of the choice process.
Therefore, we expect

H2: Brand credibility’s impact through perceived risk
to be found mainly at the consideration set for-
mation stage, rather than at the brand choice con-
ditional on consideration stage.

Furthermore, quality and price trade-offs are more likely
to be made explicitly at the brand choice stage rather than
at the choice set formation stage (Nedungadi 1990). There-
fore, in the context of brand choice conditional on consid-
eration set, we expect

H3: Brand credibility’s impact

through perceived
quality to be more pronounced on brand choice
conditional on consideration set, rather than on
consideration set formation.

The third construct following brand credibility, infor-
mation costs saved, can have the same screening function
as perceived risk at the consideration set formation stage.
However, in most product categories in which potential in-
formation costs are above a certain threshold, or there is
relative brand uncertainty (Moorthy, Ratchford, and Taluk-
dar 1997), information costs saved are likely to continue to
be important at the brand choice stage. Hence, one needs
to test empirically whether brand credibility’s impact
through information costs saved can be found at both the
consideration set formation stage and brand choice condi-
tional on consideration set.

Brand Credibility’s Impact on Choice Processes
and Product-Category Speciﬁc Factors

In contexts where uncertainty levels and sensitivity to
uncertainty are higher (e.g., PCs, as compared to orange
juice), one would expect credibility to have a greater impact
on consumer choice processes; additionally, credibility’s im-
pact through perceived risk and information costs saved,
over and above its impact through perceived quality, should
be more pronounced.

EMPIRICAL TEST

In the data collection for this study we have used six
product classes: athletic shoes, cellular telecommunications
services, headache medication, juice, personal computers,
and hair shampoo. The survey we ﬁelded at a major North
American university had eight different versions, each cov-
ering three of the six product classes just enumerated. In
each product class, ﬁve brands were presented, selected so
that the brand set represents a wide range of market share.1
For each brand, respondents were asked to provide responses
to the items listed in table 1 for the Trustworthiness, Ex-
pertise, QUAL (Perceived Quality), RISK (Perceived Risk),
and ICS (Information Costs Saved) constructs. These items
are directly taken from Erdem and Swait (1998), who val-
idated the desired scales; we employed the same nine-point
agree/disagree scales used by them. In addition, three out-

1Brands utilized were for athletic shoes: Adidas, Asics, New Balance,
Nike, Reebok; cellular service providers: AT&T, Cingular, Nextel, Sprint
PCS, Verizon; headache medication: Advil, Bayer, Excedrin, Motrin IB,
Tylenol; juice: Dole, Minute Maid, Sunkist, Tropicana, Welch’s; personal
computers: Apple, Compaq, Dell, Gateway, IBM; hair shampoo: Alberto
VO5, Herbal Essence, Finesse, Pantene Pro V, Suave.

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

194

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

TABLE 2

BRAND CONSIDERATION BINARY LOGISTIC MODELS

Athletic
shoes

Cellular
provider

Headache
medication

1.44**
1.03**
2.09**
2.68**
.24
1.07**
.63**

(cid:1).48
.66
.55
(cid:1).42
.47

1.37**
1.35**
2.16**
2.09**
.03
.77**
(cid:1).23*
.88**
.45

2.50**
1.09**
.48*
.77**
1.21**
1.12**
.70**

(cid:1).06
(cid:1).52
.12
.13
.45

2.28**
1.38**
.49
.77**
1.19**
1.17**
.08
1.02**
.47

2.89**
.95**
1.10**
1.45**
2.53**
.96**
.72**

(cid:1)1.02

1.38**

(cid:1)1.23
(cid:1).46
.49

2.39**
1.06**
1.26**
1.72**
1.72**
1.56**
(cid:1).18
.26
.47

Juice

2.38**
2.19**
.71**
1.52**
1.41**
.83**
.77**

(cid:1).06
(cid:1).35
.38
.94
.42

2.23**
2.28**
1.07**
1.68**
1.53**
1.44**
.06
(cid:1).2
.46

Personal
computer

Shampoo

.41
1.18**
2.50**
1.25**
1.56**
1.56**
.38*
(cid:1)1.14

1.14**
1.88**

(cid:1)1.71
.48

.53*
1.41**
2.45**
1.04**
1.35**
1.09**
(cid:1).28**
.62**
.44

.94**
1.35**
.86**
1.73**
.77**
.73**
.62**
.22
(cid:1).12
(cid:1).94
(cid:1).24
.38

.97**
1.09**
1.02**
1.35**
1.07**
.88**

(cid:1).09

.62**
.36

A. Trustworthiness/Expertise models:

Brand 1
Brand 2
Brand 3
Brand 4
Brand 5
Trustworthinessa
Expertiseb
Trust # Uncer
Exper # Uncer
Trust # Uncer # Fam
Exper # Uncer # Fam
McFadden’s 2r

d

c

B. Perceived Quality/Risk/Information

Cost models:

Brand 1
Brand 2
Brand 3
Brand 4
Brand 5
Perceived Qualitye
Perceived Riskf
Information Costs Savedg
McFadden’s 2r

aTrustworthiness score calculated as the average on nine-point agree/disagree scales of ﬁve Trustworthiness items from table 1. This is then centered across

brands in the product category, within each subject.

bExpertise score calculated as the average on nine-point agree/disagree scales of two Expertise items from table 1. This is then centered across brands in the

product category, within each subject.

cUncertainty score is calculated as the sum of “Whenever one chooses in this product category, one never really knows whether that is the one that should have
been bought” and “When one makes purchases in this product category, one is never certain of one’s choice,” where association of the statement with the product
category results in a score of one, and zero otherwise. This is then centered across product categories, within each subject.

dFamiliarity score is deﬁned as one if “I consider myself familiar with this product category” is associated with the product class, and zero otherwise.
ePerceived Quality is calculated as the average of two Perceived Quality items in table 1, centered within subject.
fPerceived Risk is calculated as the average of two Perceived Risk items in table 1, centered within subject.
gInformation Costs Saved is the average of four Information Costs Saved items in table 1, centered within subject.
p ! .05
.
*
p ! .01
.
**

.

(Check all

come measures for each brand were elicited: consider-
ation—“Assuming prices are the same, I would seriously
consider buying this brand.
that apply.)”;
choice—“Assuming prices are the same, this is the one brand
I would be most likely to buy. (Check one only.)”; allo-
cation—“Assuming prices are the same, if you were to buy
.] at one time, how many of each brand
10 [units of .
would you buy?” (Both choice and allocation measures were
included for convergent validity purposes. We will report
only on the choice results, since the allocation models mirror
them closely.) Note the ceteris paribus equal price condition:
this was done to permit the omission of price (unknown to
us and the participants) from subsequent analyses. Respon-
dents also indicated whether they considered themselves fa-
miliar or not with each of the six product categories, as well
as whether or not they viewed their choices in each of the
product categories as being uncertain or not (i.e., the degree
of uncertainty about having made a good selection they
associate with a choice in a product category).

With each respondent providing data on three product

classes, our ﬁnal sample sizes are 83 for athletic shoes, 84
for cellular services, 83 for headache medication, 83 for
juice, 82 for personal computers, and 83 for shampoo. All
respondents received course credit as incentive for partici-
pation.

Construct estimates were obtained as follows for each
brand, product class, and individual: an average score over
the relevant items (as given in table 1) was calculated for
each product class, brand, and individual, and then centered
about the mean brand score of the individual in the product
class. For completeness we report in table 1 the Cronbach’s
alpha measures for the constructs thus deﬁned; all constructs
have alpha measures over .6. The deﬁnitions of Familiarity
and Uncertainty, as well as the other constructs, are detailed
in the notes of table 2. Centering of constructs is done to
eliminate ambiguity of interpretation: a signiﬁcant construct
estimate can only mean that within-respondent construct var-
iation underpins the result.

Table 2 presents two sets of models, per ﬁgure 1 (and
Erdem and Swait 1998), wherein Trustworthiness and Ex-

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BRAND CREDIBILITY AND BRAND CHOICE

195

FIGURE 1

STRUCTURAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BRAND
CREDIBILITY, PERCEIVED QUALITY, PERCEIVED RISK, AND
INFORMATION COSTS SAVED

pertise are posited as antecedents to QUAL, RISK, and ICS.
Thus, in turn, the binary logistic regressions relate brand
consideration (yes/no) to the two sets of constructs in each
of the six product classes: (1) Trustworthiness and Expertise,
the subcomponents of brand credibility, interacted with Fa-
miliarity and Uncertainty, and (2) QUAL, RISK, and ICS,
the downstream constructs reﬂecting brand credibility. Our
motivation in interacting Familiarity and Uncertainty (about
choices) with the core Trustworthiness and Expertise con-
structs is to aid our understanding about limits that may hold
to the main effects being considered here. We will explain
these in more detail subsequently.

Let us now examine the Trustworthiness/Expertise results
in table 2A. Clearly, across all product classes, as each of
these credibility components increases, so does the probability
that the brand is considered by the respondent. In all product
classes, estimated coefﬁcients for the main effects of these
two constructs are signiﬁcantly different from zero at the 95%
conﬁdence level. In this population of respondents, under-
graduate university students, it seems that Trustworthiness is
generally more impactful than Expertise perceptions; this is
particularly notable in PCs, where the main effect of Trust-
worthiness is about three times more important than that of
Expertise in terms of increasing brand consideration proba-
bilities (using log odds ratios as the comparison metric). In
two product classes, Headache Medication and Personal Com-
puters, the impact of Expertise on consideration probabilities
is moderated by Uncertainty: the more uncertain a respondent
perceived him/herself to be about choices made in these prod-
uct categories, the greater role their brand Expertise percep-
tion had in determining consideration. No systematic inter-
action between Uncertainty and Trustworthiness was found
in any of the product classes. However, the role of Trust-
worthiness is moderated by Uncertainty among respondents
that were familiar with the PC category, as captured through
the signiﬁcant third-order interaction (Trustworthiness #

Uncertainty # Familiarity
). These last results reﬂect the
intuition that individual difference variables (Uncertainty
and Familiarity, among many others, we are sure) are likely
to help establish boundary conditions for the applicability
of the theory presented.

It is noteworthy that in all product categories the main
effects of the centered Trustworthiness and Expertise con-
structs are statistically signiﬁcant, indicating that the prin-
cipal hypothesis 1 holds generally but becomes stronger or
weaker under certain conditions. Note again that the results
hold due to brand credibility differences at the individual
respondent level.

Table 2B also presents the logistic regression results for
brand consideration as a function of QUAL, RISK, and ICS.
These models are interesting to examine because they in-
dicate how brand credibility may work in impacting brand
consideration. (These models do not include individual dif-
ference variables since their main intent is to explore the
means whereby credibility impacts are generated.) We ﬁnd
that QUAL consistently shows up as a statistically signiﬁ-
cant explanator of brand consideration and is the most im-
pactful variable of the three constructs in all product cate-
gories save athletic shoes. The RISK model is statistically
signiﬁcant in athletic shoes and PCs, marginally signiﬁcant
in headache medication, and not signiﬁcant in juice, cellular
services, or hair shampoo. Finally, ICS is statistically sig-
niﬁcant in athletic shoes, cellular services, PCs, and hair
shampoo; thus, increased brand credibility allows these sub-
jects to simplify decision making by saving time and only
considering brands with high ICS (i.e., implying high Trust-
worthiness and/or Expertise as well as low RISK). These
combined results seem to suggest that overall perceived risk
and information costs saved play a bigger role in categories
with higher uncertainty and sensitivity to uncertainty.

Table 3 presents estimation results for multinomial logit
models of the choice response variable. Note that all these
models have choice sets that include only those brands that
the individual respondents indicated they would consider
buying, hence they are conditional on stated consideration.
This seemed to us a reasonable procedure to help isolate
the brand credibility effects that are found to those that occur
during product evaluation and not brand consideration (al-
ready captured in the models discussed in table 2). This
does, however, imply that the choice sets deﬁned for the
choice models in table 3 contain far fewer observations than
were available for the consideration analyses presented in
table 2 (each respondent provided one choice observation but
ﬁve consideration observations in each product category).

Table 3A generally demonstrates that brand credibility
(via Trustworthiness and Expertise) signiﬁcantly impacts the
stated choice behavior of our respondents across all product
classes used in the study, with the exception of the shampoo
product class. As mentioned above, due to smaller sample
sizes in the choice models compared to the consideration
models of table 2, several of the Trustworthiness and Ex-
pertise main effect coefﬁcients are not signiﬁcantly different
from zero, but all are directionally correct. Almost none of

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

196

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

BRAND CHOICE MULTINOMIAL LOGIT MODELS (CONDITIONAL ON STATED CONSIDERATION)

TABLE 3

A. Trustworthiness/Expertise models:

Brand 1
Brand 2
Brand 3
Brand 4
Brand 5
Trustworthinessa
Expertiseb
Trust # uncer
Expert # uncer
Trust # uncer # fam
Exper # uncer # fam
McFadden’s 2r

d

c

B. Perceived Quality/Risk/Information

Cost models:

Brand 1
Brand 2
Brand 3
Brand 4
Brand 5
Perceived Qualitye
Perceived Riskf
Information Costs Savedg
McFadden’s 2r

Athletic
shoes

Cellular
provider

Headache
medication

1.47**
.32
1.44**
1.36**
0

.54
.72**

(cid:1).69
.58
1.18
.73
.27

1.95**
.80
1.92**
1.66**
0
1.19**
(cid:1).07

.69**
.34

.64*
(cid:1).15
(cid:1).42
(cid:1).38
0

.33
1.15**
.66
(cid:1)1.06**
(cid:1)1.18*
1.07**
.27

.60
.25
(cid:1).60
(cid:1).20
0
1.29**
.07
(cid:1).20
.36

.12
(cid:1)1.12
0

.38

0
1.37**
.73
(cid:1).14
.5
.16
(cid:1).05
.39

.08
(cid:1).70
.17
.43

0

.93**

(cid:1).29
1.09**
.36

Juice

(cid:1).27
(cid:1).09
(cid:1)1.36
(cid:1).79
0
2.48**
1.02
(cid:1).94
(cid:1).24
2.11
1.1

.37

(cid:1).14
.23
(cid:1).77
(cid:1).12
0
3.09**
.19
.29
.58

Personal
computer

Shampoo

(cid:1)3.86**
(cid:1)1.07
.73*
(cid:1)1.55*
0
2.14**
.17
(cid:1)3.67*
6.31
2.29
(cid:1)4.76
.55

(cid:1)2.03
(cid:1).27
1.17**
(cid:1).76
0
1.53**
(cid:1).53
1.56**
.59

.24
.97
.23
1.14
0

.64
.96
.46
.02
(cid:1)1.07
(cid:1).07
.29

.65
.64
.04
.80

0
1.55**
(cid:1).35
.65
.41

aTrustworthiness score calculated as the average on nine-point agree/disagree scales of ﬁve Trustworthiness items from table 1. This is then centered across

brands in the product category, within each subject.

bExpertise score calculated as the average on nine-point agree/disagree scales of two Expertise items from table 1. This is then centered across brands in the

product category, within each subject.

cUncertainty score is calculated as the sum of “Whenever one chooses in this product category, one never really knows whether that is the one that should have
been bought” and “When one makes purchases in this product category, one is never certain of one’s choice,” where association of the statement with the product
category results in a score of one, and zero otherwise. This is then centered across product categories, within each subject.

dFamiliarity score is deﬁned as one if “I consider myself familiar with this product category” is associated with the product class, and zero otherwise.
ePerceived Quality is average brand scores calculated using items in table 1, which were then centered at the subject-brand level.
fPerceived Risk, average brand scores calculated using items in table 1, which were then centered at the subject-brand level.
gInformation Costs Saved is average brand scores calculated using items in table 1, which were then centered at the subject-brand level.
p ! .05
.
*
p ! .01
.
**

the Uncertainty and Familiarity interactions with the main
constructs are signiﬁcant, again likely due to sample size.
Table 3B also yields some information about the likely
routes whereby brand credibility works its impact on ﬁnal
choice via QUAL, RISK, and ICS. Across the six product
classes we examined, QUAL is always a statistically sig-
niﬁcant determinant of choice; ICS is found to be statisti-
cally signiﬁcant in athletic shoes, headache medication, and
PCs; and RISK is not found to be statistically signiﬁcant in
any of the product classes. These results seem again to sug-
gest that information costs saved affects the brand choice
stage more in categories with relatively higher levels of
uncertainty and sensitivity to such uncertainty. That RISK
is not inﬂuential in the conditional brand choice stage in-
dicates that this construct’s impact is likely limited to the
consideration set formation stage, consistent with hypothesis
2. However, it must be noted that the results from this table
are not very reliable due to small sample sizes, as we said
above.

Interesting comparisons can be made between tables 2

and 3, by product class. For instance, table 2A indicates that
consideration probabilities increase in Expertise for juice;
table 3A, on the other hand, shows that conditional choice
probabilities in this category are essentially unaffected by
Expertise. This may be a sign that in this population seg-
ment, and for this product class, perceptions of Expertise
are helpful in getting the brand to be considered, but Trust-
worthiness is likely the sine qua non of ﬁnal choice. How-
ever, the simple models underlying tables 2 and 3 make such
interpretations something of a guess, mainly because there
is no explicit relationship between consideration, choice set
formation, and ﬁnal choice.

We have presented above strong statistical evidence,
based on simple models of consideration and overall choice,
that brand credibility works its impact onto these stages of
the choice process through quality and risk perceptions, as
well as through perceptions of information costs saved (i.e.,
decision-making costs). The results from the empirical study
indicate that these results are likely to be found in a relatively
wide range of product classes; they also show that there is

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BRAND CREDIBILITY AND BRAND CHOICE

197

signiﬁcant heterogeneity in the overall mechanisms whereby
the impact of brand credibility ultimately works itself out.
For example, we found that brand consideration in the athletic
shoes category is affected by all three constructs (QUAL,
RISK, and ICS), whereas RISK does not seem to have an
impact on the consideration of different cellular providers.

Except for juice, a very low uncertainty and low sensitivity
to uncertainty (low-risk) category, brand credibility affects
consideration set formation (as well as brand choice); RISK
seems to be a factor only at the consideration set stage; if
ICS plays a role, it does so in both decision stages; and QUAL
effects are relatively more pronounced at the brand choice
stage. Finally, RISK determines more strongly the consid-
eration set stage in high-risk categories (PC and athletic
shoes); ICS affects all stages of choice processes in a broader
range of products but affects choice processes less in low-
risk categories (juice and to lesser extent headache medica-
tion). These results are consistent with our expectations in
regard to how potential uncertainty and sensitivity to it across
categories may moderate credibility impacts.

While table 2A supports somewhat the contention that
the differentiation of credibility impacts is likely to be a
function of individual differences (herein, familiarity with
and perceptions of uncertainty with respect to making good
choices in the product category), the most notable insight
afforded by that analysis is that across all product classes
examined the main hypothesis holds: brand credibility
(Trustworthiness and Expertise) is an important determinant
of brand consideration. The interactions of the credibility
components with Familiarity and Uncertainty indicate that
brand credibility will play an even greater role in deter-
mining consideration for certain product categories (here,
headache medication and PCs) and for certain individuals
(e.g. high Uncertainty and Familiarity). This greater role is
achieved not only by making brand credibility overall a more
important determinant of consideration but also by shifting
the relative importance of Trustworthiness and Expertise
within the overall credibility impact. For example, in PCs
the main effects of these component constructs indicate that
on average Trustworthiness is about three times more im-
portant than Expertise in determining brand consideration;
however, for individuals that associate low Uncertainty and
have Familiarity with the product class, Trustworthiness is
only half as important as Expertise perceptions in deter-
mining consideration probabilities.

DISCUSSION

In this article we present evidence for brand credibility’s
effect on the formation of consideration sets over and above
its effect on brand choice. We also shed light on the mech-
anisms through which brand credibility effects materialize
in the consideration set formation and brand choice stages.
In regard to the two subdimensions of credibility, we also
found that trustworthiness, rather than expertise, has the
bigger impact on consumer choices.

Furthermore, we established some boundary conditions
to our results. In the juice category, for example, our em-

pirical study indicates that neither perceived risk nor infor-
mation costs seem to matter in consumer choice processes.
However, we also found that credibility affects consumer
choices through perceived risk, information costs saved, and
perceived quality in most categories, even those with only
moderate levels of uncertainty. This result is found to hold
at the individual respondent level, indicating that it is brand
credibility differences that are driving consumer behavior.
Finally, we also found some evidence for stronger credibility
impacts for individuals who perceive higher uncertainty
when choosing in a given product category.

The simple analysis methods employed in this article
are unable to cleanly isolate and attribute brand credibility
impacts between choice process stages. Future research
should examine brand credibility impacts using structural
choice set formation models to allow a purer attribution of
impacts, leading to a better understanding of the mechanisms
whereby brand credibility impacts choice stages. Future re-
search should also extend our analyses to explore choice dy-
namics and thus explain the processes by which credibility
and consideration set formation evolve over time. Addition-
ally, and of great practical interest, more detailed analysis of
individual level and product category speciﬁc moderators of
credibility effects should be conducted.

[Dawn Iacobucci and David Glen Mick served as editors
and Joel Huber served as associate editor for this
article.]

REFERENCES

Aaker, David A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity, New York: Free

Press.

Andrews, Rick and T. C. Srinivasan (1995), “Studying Consid-
eration Effects in Empirical Choice Models Using Scanner
and Panel Data,” Journal of Marketing Research, 32 (1),
30–41.

Erdem, Tu¨lin and Joffre Swait (1998), “Brand Equity as a Signaling
Phenomenon,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7 (April),
131–57.

Garbarino, Ellen C. and Julie A. Edell (1997), “Cognitive Effort,
Affect, and Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research, 24 (Sep-
tember), 147–58.

Hauser, John and Birger Wernerfelt (1990), “An Evaluation Cost
Model of Consideration Sets,” Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 16 (December), 393–408.

Herbig, Paul and John Milewicz (1995), “The Relationship of Rep-
utation and Credibility to Brand Success,” Journal of Con-
sumer Marketing, 14 (Winter), 5–10.

Klein, Benjamin and Keith B. Lefﬂer (1981), “The Role of Market
Forces in Assuring Contractual Performance,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy, 89 (Fall), 615–39.

Kotler, Philip (1997), Marketing Management, 7th ed., Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Moorthy, Sridhar, Brain T. Ratchford, and Debebrata Talukdar
(1997), “Consumer Information Search Revisited: Theory and
Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research, 23
(March), 263–77.

Nedungadi, Prakesh (1990), “Recall and Consumer Consideration
Sets: Inﬂuencing Choice without Altering Brand Evalua-

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

198

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH

tions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (December),
263–76.

Rao, Akshay and Robert W. Ruekkert (1994), “Brand Alliances as
Signals of Product Quality,” Sloan Management Review, 36
(Fall), 87–97.

Roberts, John and Jim Lattin (1991), “Development and Testing
of a Model of Consideration Set Composition,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 28 (November), 429–40.

Roberts, John and Glenn Urban (1988), “Modeling Multiattribute
Utility, Risk and Belief Dynamics for New Consumer Durable
Brand Choice,” Management Science, 34 (February), 167–85.

Spence, Michael (1974), Market Signaling: Informational Transfer
in Hiring and Related Screening Processes, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Swait, Joffre and Moshe Ben-Akiva (1987), “Incorporating Random
Constraints in Discrete Choice Models of Choice Set Gener-
ation,” Transportation Research, 21B (April), 91–102.
Tirole, J. (1990), The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cam-

bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Wernerfelt, Birger (1988), “Umbrella Branding as a Signal of New
Product Quality: An Example of Signalling by Posting a
Bond,” Rand Journal of Economics, 19 (Autumn), 458–66.

This content downloaded from 86.0.148.195 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 13:16:17 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions