Intention versus behaviour: Integration of theories to curb food waste among
Spanish young consumers

Elena Fraj-Andrés
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Department of Marketing.
University of Zaragoza. Gran Vía, 2, 50005, Zaragoza (Spain). Email: efraj@unizar.es.
Carolina Herrando
Faculty of Behaviour, Management and Social Sciences, University of Twente.
Ravelijn, 2212 | P.O.box 217, 7500 AE Enschede (The Netherlands). Email:
c.herrando@utwente.nl.
Laura Lucia-Palacios
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Department of Marketing.
University of Zaragoza. Gran Vía, 2, 50005, Zaragoza (Spain). Email: efraj@unizar.es.
Raúl Pérez-López (corresponding author):
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Department of Marketing.
University of Zaragoza. Gran Vía, 2, 50005, Zaragoza (Spain). Email: raperez@unizar.es.
Tel: +34 876 554 722.

1

Intention versus behaviour: Integration of theories to help curb food waste among
young Spanish consumers

Abstract
Purpose – This study aims to find the most relevant variables for understanding the gap
between intention and behaviour in relation to food waste reduction among young
consumers, providing a theoretical framework that reveals what theories can explain this
gap.
Design/methodology/approach – A qualitative analysis based on two focus groups with
participants aged 18–35 was developed to examine young consumers’ intention–
behaviour gap.
Findings - Our results suggest that a combination of variables from different theories
(Theory of Planned Behaviour, Social Practice Theory, Value-Belief-Norm Theory, and
Stimuli-Organism-Response Theory) can better explain the gap. Our findings suggest that
awareness of food waste consequences and ascription of responsibility can bridge the
intention-behaviour gap. Some household routines, households’ leftovers management
and planning practices, some emotions, marketing activities, and the relevance of bestbefore and expiry dates can explain differences between intention and behaviour.
Moreover, price consciousness and situational factors do not belong to these theories but
can also influence the intention-behaviour gap.
Originality - The results offer a conceptual model that combines variables from diverse
theoretical streams with the aim of understanding food waste among young consumers
holistically, and identify new variables that had not been considered by previous research.
Practical implications – Our findings offer practical implications for consumers about
their household routines and plannings; for retailers, regarding packaging sizes and
promotions; and for governments, requesting further education on how to avoid food
waste.
Keywords: Theory of Planned Behaviour, Social Practice Theory, Value-Belief-Norm
Theory, food waste, intention–behaviour gap, focus group.

2

1. Introduction
Food waste constitutes one of the main social problems today. About 950 million tons of
food are lost and wasted in the world every year at (United Nations, 2020). While food
loss occurs at the production and distribution stages in the food supply chain, excluding
retailing, food waste occurs in the last two stages, retailing and consumption (Food and
Agricultural Organization, 2020; Rasool et al., 2021). This article focuses on food waste.
According to a UNEP study, carried out in collaboration with the British NGO WRAP,
the 17% of consumer food ends up in the garbage, being homes the main focus of waste
(UNEP, 2021), more than in businesses (Attiq et al., 2021). Therefore, it is not surprising
that food waste is also part of three of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) to be
achieved before 2030 (United Nations, 2020; SDG 2 “Zero Hunger”, SDG 12
“Responsible consumption and production” and SDG 13 “Climate action”).
Between 2018 and 2019, food waste emerged as a motor theme in the literature
(Schöggl et al., 2020), what demonstrates its recent interest. Two systematic literature
reviews have uncovered some key research themes and gaps in the state-of-the-art of food
waste (Chauhan et al., 2021; Dhir et al., 2020). On the one hand, Chauhan et al. (2021)
identified themes related to factors responsible for food loss and waste generation, and
also, revealed the digitalisation and food surplus redistribution as two emerging topics.
On the other hand, Dhir et al. (2020) collected, as potential research topics, the
consumer’s behaviour study explained through different behavioural theories and, the
influence of demographic factors in the quantity and composition of food waste.
Regarding the consumer’s behaviour literature, most research on food waste has
tried to identify the causes and consequences of food waste and the strategies that
consumers may apply to prevent and reduce it (Derqui et al., 2016; Russell et al., 2017;
Visschers et al., 2016). Research has acknowledged a gap between consumers’ intention

3

toward food waste and their final behaviour; they seem to be aware of the problem but do
not always behave accordingly (Díaz-Ruiz et al., 2018; Schanes et al., 2018). However,
relevant studies remain at the theoretical level and do not address any explanatory factors.
Therefore, we need further empirical research that allows us to identify the relevant
factors in the context of food waste.
The main theoretical framework applied in food waste research is the Theory of
Planned Behaviour (TPB; Heidari et al., 2020; Mondéjar-Jiménez et al., 2016; Russell et
al., 2017; Stancu et al., 2016), which seeks to explain individual behaviour from a rational
perspective. However, due to the low explanatory level of this theory in relation to food
waste behaviour, recent research has suggested complementing it with other theories,
such as Value-Belief-Norm (VBN) theory and Social Practice Theory (SPT). VBN theory
adds moral or personal norms as variables that can explain sustainable behaviour (Çakir
Yildirim and Karaarslan Semiz, 2019; Farr-Wharton et al., 2014). SPT takes account of
the social context and the material resources available to the individual, as these
determine many daily routines related to food, thereby allowing us to understand how and
why food is wasted (Schanes et al., 2018).
These issues are especially interesting in connection with demographic variables.
As aforementioned, the influence of demographic factors in food waste- related consumer
behaviour is a thematic focus to consider in future research (Dhir et al., 2020). For
instance, age has showed to be a significant controlling factor on the intention to reduce
food waste (Attiq et al., 2021). Thus, Heidari et al. (2020) showed that younger consumers
were more willing to reduce food waste. Young people are regarded as having a high
degree of environmental concern but who nevertheless tend to waste more food than older
generations (Ilakovac et al., 2020; Principato et al., 2015). In this line, a recent Spanish
study affirms that people under 34 (83%) is the segment that produces the most waste

4

compared to other age groups because they regularly throw fruit and vegetables in the
garbage (Too Good To Go, 2022). Therefore, it is worth exploring the food waste-related
consumer behaviour in this segment.
The current study addresses both of these gaps in prior literature. For it, we
propose a model based on the results of qualitative research, that combines three
consumer behaviour theories (TPB, VBN theory and SPT), to define the main variables
that influence the intention–behaviour gap. To achieve this purpose, we conducted two
focus groups with young consumers aged between 18 and 35. With this objective, this
study aims to answer the following research questions:
RQ1: What are the most relevant variables for understanding the gap between
intention and behaviour regarding to food waste reduction among young consumers?
RQ2: What theories should be combined to understand consumers’ food waste
reduction in a holistic way?
This study contributes to the food waste literature by offering a theoretical model
in which theories are combined to better explain food waste behaviour and reduce the
intention–behaviour gap. The model includes the variables of each theory alongside new
variables that should be considered when analysing food waste behaviour.
For it, the rest of the paper is organized as follows. Next section presents the
integration of three of the most used theoretical bases that try to explain food waste
behaviour. The third section explains the methodology employed and data collection by
means of two focus groups. The fourth section described the main results. And finally,
the discussion, main conclusions and contributions are displayed.
2. Integration of theories for a better understanding of food waste behaviour
To understand why there is a gap between intention and behaviour in relation to reducing
food waste, it is necessary to identify the factors that determine consumer behaviour.
5

Accordingly, here we integrate three of the most used theoretical bases, which
complement each other very well: TPB, VBN theory and SPT.
TPB (Ajzen, 1991) proposes that behaviour is determined by previous intentions,
which in turn depend on attitude, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control.
This theory offers one of the best motivational models for predicting intention (Conner
and Norman, 2005). However, previous research has pointed to several limitations of this
theory to address the gap between intention and behaviour. First, TPB emphasizes
subjective norms without taking account of the components, such as moral norms, that
can influence them (Conner and Norman, 2005). Second, TPB assumes that all
behaviours are rational, to the exclusion of other variables, such as emotions or affects,
which are important for predicting the intention to carry out a certain behaviour (Conner
and Armitage, 1998; Conner and Norman, 2005). Third, in TPB, the repetition of a past
behaviour denotes the importance that the individual accords to that behaviour, but it does
not entail that it will become a habit in the future (Conner and Armitage, 1998).
Despite these limitations, a prolific stream of research has added further aspects
to the core of TPB in different fields of knowledge. For example, in the food waste
domain, studies have proposed factors that can affect the intention–behaviour path, such
as emotions, moral norms, planning strategies, habits, government stimuli, price
consciousness, household size and food taste (Coskun and Özbük, 2020; Graham-Rowe
et al., 2015; Russell et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019). Despite these advances and the
addition of new variables to make TPB more comprehensive, explanations of consumer
behaviour toward food waste remain incomplete.
VBN theory overcomes one of the main limitations of TPB, increasing its
explanatory power with the inclusion of the variable “moral norms”, also called “personal
norms”. Whereas TPB emphasizes the intention of the individual to act, VBN theory

6

focuses on the moral obligation to act (Aguilar-Luzón et al., 2012). Personal norms
constitute the characteristic dimension of VBN theory and explain the individual’s beliefs
about what is right or wrong for a positive self-evaluation. VBN states that environmental
behaviour is guided by ecological values (Dunlap and Van Liere, 1978), which activate
moral norms that are explained by two other variables: awareness of the consequences of
an action (AC), and ascription of responsibility (AR), defined as the degree of
responsibility that a person assumes over his/her acts toward the environment.
This model has been empirically validated for general pro-environmental
behaviours (Çakir Yildirim and Güliz Karaarslan, 2019). However, few studies have
sought to explain food consumption and food waste through the VBN theory (Farr‐
Wharton et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2020). We found an exploratory study that compared and
contrasted TPB and VBN theory as predictors of household food waste and concluded
that TPB was better as an intervention for reducing food waste (Sigurðardóttir, 2017).
Further research is therefore needed.
SPT prioritizes practice as the basis of a social world (Ariztía, 2017) and focuses
on the internal trajectory of a practice, its relationship with other practices, its evolution
and its progressive transformation. SPT is often referred to in the context of food waste,
as eating is usually a social activity, with food practices taking place in the company of
others and helping to structure food routines, such as planning and shopping (Dyen et al.,
2018). Devaney and Davies (2017) studied enduring and transformative change in eating
practices in terms of acquisition, storage, preparation and waste recovery. Schanes et al.
(2018) analysed food waste because of social household practices, such as the planning
of food shopping, shopping routines, cooking practices, eating habits and
disposal/recycling. This approach, too, has limitations, including an inability to explain
why some practices are more relevant than others, and to clarify the relationships between

7

the components of these practices or the people who carry them out. Moreover, SPT is
better suited to explaining everyday practices developed by individuals than the largerscale practices developed by administrations or governments and provides an original
conceptual framework in which to explain processes of transformation and social change
(Ariztía, 2017).
Finally, according to the arguments of Whitmarsh (2011), food waste is an
important social problem today, and it is appropriate to approach it from different
perspectives that will allow us to gain a more complete understanding.
3. Methodology
We conducted two focus groups to examine young consumers’ intention–
behaviour gap in relation to food waste and to develop a theoretical framework for
addressing that gap. Young consumers are regarded as a segment that wastes more food
and presents different patterns from older individuals, such as a preference for eating out
and for pre-cooked food (Mondéjar-Jiménez et al., 2016; Principato et al., 2015). As
young consumers are the future of the planet, it is particularly important to understand
their habits and patterns and how to modulate them in order to promote environmental
protection and sustainability (Ghinea and Ghiuta, 2019).
The focus group method was appropriate given the exploratory nature of the
research (Bray et al., 2011), and has been recommended for its high validity and ability
to provide in-depth analysis of complex consumer behaviour, being particularly common
in studies that explore sustainable consumption (Fernqvist et al., 2015; Michelini et al.,
2020; Soma et al., 2021).
The focus groups were audio- and video-recorded. First, participants were
informed of the study procedure, its confidentiality and their right to withdraw at any
time. If they agreed to take part, they were asked to sign a consent form. We formed two
8

groups. One consisted of eight participants aged between 20 and 25, and the other group
consisted of ten participants aged between 27 and 35, according to the size of groups
recommended by previous research (Michelini et al., 2020; Soma et al., 2021) (Table 1).
Each focus group lasted between 120 and 130 minutes.
Focus
group
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

Participant

Age Gender

1A
1B
1C
1D
1E
1F
1G
1H
2A
2B
2C
2D
2E
2F
2G
2H
2I
2J

23
21
23
22
25
22
25
23
32
34
35
27
32
34
29
34
33
34

Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Female

Higher
education
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Student
today
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Has
children
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

Table 1. Focus group participants

We used a semi-structured interview model to facilitate the exploration of
interviewees’ thoughts and intentions freely (Olavarria-Key et al., 2021). It consisted of
two sections. In the first section, a task about responsible consumption was set, followed
by a debate on the same issue. In the task, the participants were asked to produce words
and idioms related to responsible consumption and to organize these according to the
relationships they perceived among them. In the second section, images of food waste
were shown to the participants to raise questions about this behaviour, its consequences
and causes, and their own conduct. A long discussion ensued around these questions.
9

The recording of each focus group was listened to and transcribed. Then, three
researchers working independently were employed to code the data separately. Following
the procedure used by Kang et al. (2019), the researchers aggregated codes and identified
themes that emerged from the data. After coding transcription, researchers compared their
coding lists and themes and discussed them until the researchers reached a consensus
(Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The same methodology has been extensively used in previous
research (Dreyer; Lichtenstein and Heil, 2022; Olavarria-Key et al, 2021; Stangherlin,
Ribeiro and Barcellos, 2019).
4. Results
Here, we present the main results from the two focus groups, regrouping the themes
highlighted within and outside the theories adopted in this study, and proposing a
conceptual model.
4.1 TPB variables: determinants of the intention to reduce food waste
4.1.1 Attitude toward reducing food waste
The focus groups began with the researchers asking the participants to write down what
they understood as responsible consumption and to provide examples of behaviours that
they consider responsible, with the aim of seeing whether the issue of food waste would
emerge at some point. Only one of the 18 participants referred explicitly to the reduction
of food waste, when indicating “use of the TooGoodToGo app” (1A) (see Table 1 for
coding) as a responsible behaviour. However, six participants considered the topic
indirectly when they mentioned “avoiding unnecessary consumption” (1C), “be
conscientious when buying” (1F and 1H), “unnecessary purchases” (1G), “plan what you
will need, so as not to throw away” (2G) and “without excesses there is no waste. Buy
what you need” (2B). Two of them (1A and 1E) stated that they had not considered food
waste in this connection because they did not usually waste food.
10

In relation to the images of food waste, all the participants showed an
unfavourable attitude, expressed in words or by shaking their heads in disapproval: “A
complete disaster” (2F); “If we start throwing away food at home … we start badly. I
don’t like to see food in the garbage” (2A); “at first, I didn’t include food waste as a
priority, but now that you have asked me about it, I think it is a big problem, because
there are people dying due to not having food to eat and we throw away a lot of food. I
feel embarrassed” (1F).
4.1.2 Perceived behavioural control
In our focus groups, five participants appeared to control their food waste behaviour,
stating that “I buy what I think I will eat” (1H) when doing the shopping, and “I ask for
the quantity I will eat” (1F) when going to a restaurant. Three participants made the effort
to avoid waste by calculating amounts: “I try to eat what I need and not to put excessive
dishes, I try to calculate a little … I always ask how much [meat, fish] do I need for one
or two people” (2J); and “do not put on the plate what you are not going to eat” (1E). Two
participants described buying products in bulk to avoid waste, although one “had to walk
and carry her own container” (2J); the other noted that “I buy the fruit in bulk instead of
in a bag, although it is more expensive, because I know I’m going to eat it, the ones from
the bag maybe not” (1H). It seems that these young consumers’ perceptions of control
over their food waste practices can help to explain their intentions, since they explicitly
mentioned taking steps to buy the appropriate amount for what they were going to eat.
4.2 SPT variables
4.2.1 Household routines and habits
Over the two focus groups, five of the participants said that they repeated their parents’
food behaviour, including behaviours relating to food purchases, cooking, the use of
leftovers and food storage, such that they behaved today as they used to in the parental
home: “I already do my best not to throw away food, as my parents showed me in all the
11

years I lived with them” (1F); “My shopping, cooking and storing food routines are very
similar to my mum’s” (1G); “If we cook too much food, then the leftovers are reused as
a meal for another day. That’s what I saw at home, and I do it without thinking about it”
(1B); “I do not throw away food at home, and my parents don’t either” (1D); and “At [my
parents’] home, food was not wasted. That is what I have always seen, so now I act in the
same way” (2B).
4.2.2 Planning and management of leftovers
Regarding the causes of food waste, five interviewees suggested that the main reasons
were a lack of meal planning, the need to pre-plan purchases, the need to learn how to
manage leftovers, and bad fridge management: “In my house, if we throw away food, it
is due to very bad fridge management” (1B); and “Due to bad fridge management, some
groceries become damaged. I throw away groceries when the part that is not good is so
big that the taste of the whole piece is not good” (1C).
The lack of prior planning was mentioned as hindering the fight against food waste and
reflecting the domination of convenience over the effort to make things a little better.
Other participants agreed that bad meal planning and bad shopping planning were the
main reasons for wasting food in their homes: “Waste at home means that you have not
planned well what you have bought, then the problem is ours” (1A); “… to plan the
purchase, the meals you are going to make. Do not buy more than necessary so as not to
throw away” (2F); and “Plan what you will need so you don’t have to throw away later”
(2G).
4.3 VBN theory variables
4.3.1 Awareness of the consequences of food waste
Five participants from the more mature focus group suggested that most young people
consider mainly the social and economic aspects of food waste and focus less on the
environmental impact: “It is a social problem because, in the first world, we are used to
12

throwing food away” (2J); “It is an economic problem, since it is cheap it does not matter
to throw it away” (2D); and “The origin of the problem is social, but the consequences
are on the environment” (2G).
Two participants added that because of the lack of food value or price
consciousness, consumers do not feel that they are losing money and do not notice any
substantial negative effect on their pockets: “Raise the price! They should charge more
per plate” (2J); and “the price goes up and they won’t waste so much food” (2G).
These perceptions lead us to think that the consequences (individual and global)
of food waste are not visible enough to consumers. Despite the available information,
there is a lack of visibility of the consequences, especially among young people:
“Consequences? Probably none. That’s why we do not care about it” (2C); “If they do
not explain them, they are unknown … then, of course you are not aware” (2J).
4.3.2 Ascription of responsibility
Throughout the supply chain, responsibility for both loss and waste can be attributed to
different agents for different reasons. In the case of food waste at the consumption stage,
the fault is usually attributed to consumers (although also to retailers and restaurants). In
this study, when the discussion focused on food waste and the barriers to preventing or
reducing it, three of the younger participants referred to the responsibility of retailers and
the packaging they use to present and sell food products: “The distribution channel makes
promotions for 30, 40 and 70% reduction for products that are close to expiry. The
consumer will buy the product and then, as it was cheap, has no ethical challenges to
throw it away” (1H); “In the groceries when the product is a bit ugly or it has a small
defect, it has to be thrown away because the consumer will not buy it” (1E); “It is true
that your activity is limited to what governments allow you, but in what they allow you
to do, do what you can to be responsible…” (2G). One participant also referred to food
loss, occurred at previous stages in the supply chain: “The distribution channels and their
13

price strategies are abusive for producers of groceries. For producers it is better to throw
away their groceries than sell them to the distribution channel” (1F).
When the topic focused on food waste behaviour, three of the participants tried to
convince their peers that we should not blame others and not ourselves in cases where we
have control over our decisions: “Again, we blame the supermarkets” (2C); “But in the
end, we are the ones who decide where we are going” (2G); and “I have a feeling that it
is very easy sometimes to throw the ball out of play and say that the company is bad, but
in the end, we are responsible... ” (1C).
4.4 Other factors that influence actual food waste behaviour
From the focus groups, several factors emerged that can help us to understand the extent
of the gap between intention and behaviour in relation to food waste.
4.4.1 Convenience: time and effort
Throughout the focus groups, three participants (from both groups) suggested that one of
the main barriers to reducing food waste is purchase or consumption convenience, as the
costs of responsible food purchases exceed the benefits; most of the other participants
agreed with this point. For example, sometimes a concern with convenience leads people
to buy larger amounts of food, which increases the probability of waste and prevents more
responsible behaviour in this regard: “I would like not to waste food, but sometimes, I
have not got the time to cook the leftovers and even to eat the cooked food” (1H); “Young
people buy online because they prefer speed, they want to have the product as soon as
possible” (2B); and “Sometimes your pocket allows you to choose the organic one and
you don’t choose it, or you can buy in bulk, so you don’t. You prefer the cheap and the
fast” (2G).
4.4.2 Situational factors
Two participants observed it was difficult to manage leftovers in certain situations, such
as trips, celebrations and family gatherings, where food management is difficult. Almost
14

all of the participants agreed with this point: “At Christmas, we rent a rural house to spend
the holidays with all the family. Planning and storing food for 20 persons is really
difficult. Furthermore, leftovers are difficult to manage” (1A); and “At family
celebrations, it is the time when most is wasted” (2G).
Some additional factors seemed to encourage more responsible behaviours, such
as employment status, income level, family size and having children at home. It is worth
noting that these variables were mentioned by the older participants only. For example,
they reported that if they were unemployed, they considered their buying decisions more
thoroughly; similarly, a larger family size and less available income could also influence
their decisions in line with avoiding food waste. Participants who had children also felt
the responsibility of being good models for them, indicating that the desire to show their
children how to reduce food waste was a motivation for themselves to avoid behaviours
associated with waste. Some examples are: “Now, I’ve been unemployed for almost one
year and look more at what I buy, trying not to waste food, as it costs me money” (2A);
“I usually buy what is 50% cheaper, for reasons of economy. Many times, I buy things
that I don’t normally buy because they are expensive, but I say, ‘tonight I’ll eat it’” (2A);
and “Do you have children? Anyone have children? I have three, so my vision is different
… and I influence them, and nothing is wasted in my house” (2I).
4.4.3 Emotions
Certain emotions were mentioned in connection with food waste, namely guilt and shame.
Five participants commented that people, especially older people, feel that asking for a
doggy bag is embarrassing: “When I’ve been to a restaurant with older people, they ask
me if I am not ashamed of asking for a doggy bag” (1C); “When I am with friends and
have to throw away food because we cannot manage to reuse the leftovers, I feel guilty,
bad” (1F and 1H); “I do not ask for a doggy bag – I am very shy” (2J); “My father thinks
badly of asking for leftovers in a restaurant” (1D); and “If the waiters themselves offered
15

you a doggy bag … it would be the best. The image you give is that you are greedy. We
don’t do it because we are ashamed” (2B).
4.4.4 Relevance of best-before and expiry dates
According to the results from our focus groups, young people are well-informed about
what best-before and expiry dates mean, and they use their senses of smell and taste to
determine whether a product is still fresh. Therefore, a best-before date is not a reason for
food waste. Four of the participants spoke about the expiry dates of yogurts and dairy
products in general, indicating that they pay less attention to the best-before date for
certain kinds of products and will eat them even if the expiry date has passed: “I first
smell the product and if I think that the product is good, I eat it. With dairy products, I do
it very often” (1D); “There is a psychosis about health and illnesses. I eat expired yogurts,
and nothing happens to me” (2J); “I throw away products that have passed their bestbefore dates” (1D); and “If something has expired, I throw it away because I could
become ill” (1A).
One of the participants emphasized that he paid more attention to expiry dates for
products that were more expensive than for cheaper products. He confessed that he did
not choose products that were about to expire, even if he was going to consume them
immediately, preferring products with a longer shelf life: “I look at the expiry date when
the product is expensive; if it is cheap, people almost do not look at it. But for meat and
fish, like I said before, people take the one at the bottom, which is the one that expires
later … even if you are going to eat it now” (2G).
4.4.5 Marketing activities: packaging and promotions
Three of the participants suggested that although they tried not to waste food, sometimes
this was difficult because of promotions in the distribution channels or big product
packages. Three of them mentioned that it was often cheaper to buy a 5 kg pack of
potatoes than a 1 kg pack. Hard-discount promotions lead consumers to undervalue both
16

the product and the money spent on it, indicating that promotions do not help to reduce
food waste: “The distribution channel offers promotions with 30, 40 and 70% reductions
for products that are close to their best-before dates. The consumer will buy the product
and then, as it was cheap, have no ethical problem about throwing it away” (1H); “In the
past, we bought the big size of the tomato sauce, and after two weeks we had to throw it
away” (1G); and “I usually have to throw away sauces. The size is too big, and you use
just a small portion” (1C).
Two of the more mature participants considered the lack of opportunity to make
bulk purchases in many stores as a barrier to reducing food waste, which indicates that
food packaging can be an obstacle: “The issue of packaging often conditions you. In the
supermarket, you can only buy things in certain packages” (2G); and “I walk to the
Almozara [a market that is a few minutes from the participant’s house] to buy in bulk. I
go with my container: a carafe” (2J).
4.4.6 Price consciousness
Over the focus groups, the comments of four of the participants frequently suggested that
young people do not value food and instead shop for fun. The low price of food is another
factor to consider, as some qualitative studies have pointed out (Geffen et al., 2016;
Mallinson et al., 2016). Three participants agreed that because food is cheap, wasting it
is not a big problem. Thus, it seems that for young people, higher price consciousness
may lead to a lower probability of wasting food: “The individual economic impact is not
seen at that moment. The value of the product is not important [big] enough” (1D); “In
my company, employees can eat for €1.60 a day and have several starters, seconds …
people leave a lot of food on the plate. And they throw away and throw away” (2J); and
“Maybe it’s the company’s problem. Raise the price! If they charge more per plate …
then, they won’t throw away so much food” (2G).
4.5 Actual food waste behaviour
17

According to nine of the interviewees, young consumers avoid generating food waste
through preventive measures, such as not buying more than they need, cooking only the
amount they intend to eat, buying smaller package sizes and buying in bulk, among other
responsible actions. They also seemed to know how to deal with leftovers to avoid
throwing food away, for example by including them in other meals or eating them another
day, as well as taking home leftovers from restaurant meals (i.e., asking for a doggy bag).
In terms of cooking at home, the following points were made: “If we cook too much food,
then the leftovers are reused as a meal for another day” (1B); “In my home, there is no
food waste” (2I); and “Try to prevent the generation of leftovers” (2G). In terms of
restaurant leftovers, the following points were made: “Sometimes they asked me: aren’t
you embarrassed about asking for a doggy bag? But at the end of the day, this behaviour
is very common for me, and I always ask for one” (1C); “I always ask for a doggy bag,
and I haven’t had any problems in restaurants” (2B); and “We must ensure that there is
no food left, but if it remains, I ask to take it away” (2G).
The results of the focus groups allow us to propose the following model to explain
the intention–behaviour gap (Figure 1) and to compare the variables from TPB, VBN
theory and SPT with the variables emerging from our research.

18

Figure 1. Proposed theoretical model

5. Discussion
The objective of this study was to examine the gap between intention and actual food
waste behaviour for young consumers and to propose a model that combines several
theories to identify the main variables of relevance.
The most striking result of this research is that the gap between the intention to
reduce food waste and actual food waste behaviour can be explained more clearly by
integrating different theoretical streams along with other factors that emerged with
varying degrees of intensity in our focus groups.
TPB is one of the theories most commonly used in this context (e.g., GrahamRowe et al., 2015; Stancu et al., 2016; Visschers et al., 2016). In line with TPB, our
findings show that, although subjective norms were not mentioned as relevant to
explaining the intention–behaviour gap among young consumers regarding food waste,
perceived behavioural control was mentioned. This variable seems to influence intention
to avoid food waste, since four of the participants indicated that they took steps to control
their food consumption. This is in line with previous research that has found a positive
association between this factor and the intention to avoid food waste (e.g., MondéjarJiménez et al., 2016; Stancu et al., 2016; Visschers et al., 2016). Similarly, our results
indicate that food waste, although not a priority, is nevertheless a concern for young
people. Our participants’ attitude to reducing food waste was positive; they tried to avoid
it by planning their purchases and purchasing only what they needed. Although our results
require confirmation in quantitative studies, these kinds of attitudes seem to lead to a
greater intention to reduce food waste and ultimately to more responsible behaviour.

19

Our results are also consistent with the predictions of SPT, indicating that social
practices could be useful in reducing the intention–behaviour gap in the context of food
waste (Díaz-Ruiz et al., 2018; Schanes et al., 2018). Specifically, household routines,
including the planning of food shopping, food management and use of leftovers, and
habits (family routines), such as checking the real condition of a product before throwing
it away, can explain young consumers’ motivations to avoid food waste. These results are
in line with those obtained by Schanes et al. (2018). Five of our participants tended to
repeat actions they had seen at the parental home in relation to routines for shopping,
cooking and storing food. In this connection, Sorokowska et al. (2020) suggested that
children aged between 6 and 9 are especially receptive to education about preventing food
waste and to consolidating a negative attitude toward this behaviour. Therefore, parents
should do their best to set a good example at home. Moreover, five of our participants
noted a lack of meal planning, bad shopping planning and the need to learn how to manage
leftovers as the main reasons for food waste.
VBN theory is also represented in this study, since awareness of the consequences
of food waste and the ascription of food waste responsibility emerged as two important
topics for the participants. These variables can help us better understand the intention–
behaviour gap, thus complementing the TPB variables. In our focus groups, our older
informants believed that greater awareness of the consequences and greater visibility of
the problem would increase food waste concern and foster strategies to reduce it, which
is consistent with previous research (Graham-Rowe et al., 2015; Principato et al., 2015).
They recognized that although awareness of the consequences of food waste should lead
to its avoidance, this association does not always hold. They indicated that convenience
and certain circumstances, such as trips and celebrations, could explain why awareness
does not always lead to corresponding behaviour. With regard to the second variable, in

20

both focus groups there was a tendency to blame others for the problem of food waste
(retailers) and loss (administration and governments); only three participants highlighted
the importance of assuming our share of responsibility and acting accordingly.
Beyond these theories, the following factors also emerged: convenience (time and
effort), situational factors (family size, employment situation, celebrations, trips and
income), relevance of best-before and expiry dates, emotions, marketing activities and
price consciousness. Some of these factors could be included in the widely consumer
behaviour theory of Stimuli-Organism-Response (Mehrabian and Russell, 1974). This
theory has been used in retailing and online consumer behaviour (Lian, 2021; Chopard et
al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021a; 2021b; Konuk, 2019), but it has scarcely used in household
food waste research (Talwar et al., 2022). On the other hand, this theory has been widely
used in social marketing research to test the effectiveness of social marketing initiatives
(Wanget al., 2021; Phang et al., 2021; Suet al., 2020), where emotions are the central role
of the organism factor and consumers are exposed to external stimuli. Although few
previous research has examined food waste under this theory (Talwar et al., 20022), the
results suggest that it can be applied together with TPB, Value-Belief-Norm theory or
Social Practice Theory. Celebrations, trips, best-before dates, price consciousness and
marketing activities and promotions of retailers would be part of the Stimuli, while
emotions are the key of the Organism. Response is related to consumer behaviour, in our
case, food waste reduction.
Convenience and lack of time are two reasons why younger consumers opted for
food purchase options that are less responsible (such as large purchases for the whole
week or the whole month, pre-cooked products and ready meals). These results are in line
with previous studies (e.g., Papaoikonomou et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2019). Similarly,
some situational circumstances were identified as influencing food waste behaviours in

21

different ways; these included family size and the individual’s employment situation.
Although previous research has assumed that sociodemographic factors influence food
waste (Qian et al., 2021; Stancu et al., 2016), there are few studies that analyse their
influence in real settings where the interaction with previous beliefs or other situational
circumstances creates complexity.
Emotions and knowledge of best-before dates can also make consumers more
responsible regarding food waste (Russell et al., 2017; White et al., 2019). Emotional
factors have been included in previous research (Russell et al., 2017). Young consumers
feel shame and sadness about food waste when there are so many people suffering from
hunger. Furthermore, they believe that consumers are embarrassed to ask for a doggy bag
in restaurants and that it would be easier if restaurants took the initiative to offer leftovers
to take away. Other solutions could be to give consumers influence over the size of the
serving they really want (Matzembacher et al., 2020).
Our findings suggest that young consumers’ behaviour is also affected by different
marketing activities in the distribution channel (Papaoikonomou et al., 2011; Setti et al.,
2016). Thus, packaging size, promotional strategies and lack of ethical alternatives (such
as the possibility of buying in bulk) are factors that made our participants act less
responsibly by buying more than they needed. This suggests, in line with previous
research, that marketing activities such as promotions make it more difficult to avoid food
waste (e.g., Mondéjar- Jiménez et al., 2016; Setti et al., 2016).
Finally, price consciousness has been included in more recent food waste research
(Coskun and Özbük, 2020), and our results confirm its importance. Lack of awareness of
the value of food and how cheap food is may be an important element in explaining food
waste among younger consumers. It seems necessary to analyse in greater depth the

22

measures that should be taken to enable consumers to understand the value of any food,
no matter how cheap it is.
Through this quick review we are answering to our two research questions. The
first related to the most important variables to understand the intention-behaviour gap
regarding to food waste reduction among Spanish young consumers. And the second,
showing that a combination of four theoretical streams (TPB, VBN theory, SPT and SO-R theory) is recommended to better understand this type of behaviour.
6. Conclusions
This study sets out to propose a theoretical model that includes all the main variables that
influence the intention-behaviour relationship. To achieve this, we combined variables
from the TPB, VBN theory and SPT. Moreover, some new variables have emerged what
also suggests the consideration of the Stimuli-Organism-Response theory. Thus, within
the food waste context, our research shows that selecting just one theory does not provide
a real picture of how young consumer behaviour can be explained.
6.1. Theoretical contributions
The findings allow us to provide some theoretical contributions to food waste research.
First, this research contributes to the food waste literature by providing a theoretical
model that includes the most relevant factors for influencing consumer behaviour and
reducing the intention–behaviour gap. We combined variables from TPB, VBN theory
and SPT, as our research shows that reliance on one theory does not allow a realistic
picture of how consumer behaviour can be explained or how the intention–behaviour gap
can be reduced in the context of food waste. Our findings also contribute to the literature
by adding new variables that are not included in these theories but that are relevant in this
context. Emotional factors and marketing activities have previously been included in an
extended TPB model. Routines and habits, shopping planning and management of
23

leftovers are often included in SPT models. Awareness of the consequences of food waste
and ascription of responsibility have been considered in VBN theory. However, other
factors, such as convenience, situational factors and price consciousness, have rarely been
considered in previous research. These factors could be included in food waste research
under the Stimuli-Organism-Response theory (S-O-R), a theory scarcely used in this
context, but widely used in the retailing and online research lines. Our results offer
evidence of the suitability of this theory to explain food waste.
6.2. Implications for practice
Food waste represents a critical problem for national economies; therefore, knowing how
food waste is originated in households is relevant for governments and other institutions
in order to create initiatives or nudging strategies for reducing it. This research offers
young consumers’ perspective about this problem and provides some insights about what
strategies to use to change their behaviour and become more socially responsible. First,
the results show that family and habits are important for reducing food waste as young
consumers do what their parents have done and what they have learned at school. Food
waste is very often originated due to the lack of food value and the lack of awareness
about food waste consequences. Education is the way to show young consumers the value
of food and the social and environmental consequences of food waste. Second, planning
meals is important to buy only what is necessary. However, results show that sometimes
supermarkets put offers that make them buy more quantity. In this sense, managers of
supermarkets should know the negative effect that they create with those sales and
promotions. Supermarkets should make offers on products that can be purchased by bulk
to reduce the negative effect of buying too much product. Furthermore, young consumers
accept offers on products with a close best-before date. Related to that aspect, young
consumers are flexible with the best-before date and they smell and taste the product

24

before throwing it away. Then, more initiatives should be addressed to this aspect to
inform about its real meaning due to the positive effect that previous initiatives about this
topic have created in young consumers’ mind. This is important as consumers behave by
routines and habits.

6.3 Limitations and future research
This paper is not free of limitations. First, the number of focus groups was small,
and so the representativeness of our sample is limited. Therefore, the findings and the
proposed model, as well as the recommendations, cannot be generalized. Second, the
participants were Spanish; consumers from other countries and cultures may provide
different information because of different habits and food culture. A replication of the
study using a larger sample and from different countries could be interesting to test the
possible generational and cultural effect. Third, the model proposed in this study needs
to be tested through quantitative analysis, which is a task for future research. Furthermore,
the results show a new theory (S-O-R theory) that could be applied in food waste research.
Therefore, future research should use this theory as theoretical background to increase
the explanation of food waste behaviour.

References
Aguilar-Luzón, M. C., García-Martínez, J. M. A., Calvo-Salguero, A. and Salinas J. M.
(2012), “Comparative Study Between the Theory of Planned Behaviour and the Value–
Belief–Norm Model Regarding the Environment, on Spanish Housewives’ Recycling
Behaviour”, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Vol. 42 No. 11, pp. 2797–2833.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2012.00962.x.

25

Ajzen, I. (1991), “The Theory of Planned Behaviour”, Organizational Behaviour and
Human Decision Processes, Vol. 50 No. 2, pp. 179-211. https://doi.org/10.1016/07495978(91)90020-T.
Ariztía, T. (2017), “Social Practice Theory: Particularities, possibilities and limits”, Cinta
Moebio, Vol. 59, pp. 221-234. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0717-554X2017000200221.
Attiq, S., Habib, M. D., Kaur, P. and Hasni, M. J. S. (2021). “Drivers of food waste
reduction behaviour in the household context”. Food Quality and Preference, Vol. 94,
104300, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2021.104300.
Bray, J., Johns, N., and Kilburn, D. (2011), “An exploratory study into the factors
impeding ethical consumption”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 98 No. 4, pp. 597-608.
Calvo-Porral, C., Faiña-Medín, A. and Losada-López, C. (2016), “Can Marketing Help
in Tackling Food Waste?: Proposals in Developed Countries”, Journal of Food Products
Marketing, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 42-60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10454446.2017.1244792.
Chauhan, C., Dhir, A., Akram M. U. and Salo, J. (2021). “Food loss and waste in food
supply chains. A systematic literature review and framework development approach”.
Journal

of

Cleaner

Vol.

Production,

295,

126438.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126438.
Chopdar, P. K., Paul, J., Korfiatis, N. and Lytras, M. D. (2021). “Examining the role of
consumer impulsiveness in multiple app usage behavior among mobile shoppers”,
Journal

of

Business

Research,

Vol.

140,

pp.

657-669.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.11.031.
Conner, M., and Armitage, C. J. (1998), “Extending the Theory of Planned Behaviour: A
Review and Avenues for Further Research”, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Vol.
28 No. 15, pp. 1429–1464. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01685.x.
26

Conner, M., and Norman, P. (2005), Predicting Health Behaviour. Open University
Press, McGraw-Hill Education, London.
Coşkun, A., and Özbük, R. M. Y. (2020), “What influences consumer food waste
behaviour in restaurants? An application of the extended theory of planned behaviour”,
Waste Management, Vol. 117, pp. 170-178.
Derqui, B., Fayos, T., and Fernandez, V. (2016), “Towards a More Sustainable Food
Supply Chain: Opening up Invisible Waste in Food Service”, Sustainability, Vol. 8 No.
7, pp. 693. https://doi.org/103390/su8070693.
Devaney, L., and Davies, A. R. (2017), “Disrupting household food consumption through
experimental HomeLabs: Outcomes, connections, contexts”, Journal of Consumer
Culture, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 823-844.
Dhir, A., Talwar, S., Kaur, P. and Malabari A. (2020). “Food waste in hospitality and
food services: A systematic literature review and framework development approach”.
Journal

of

Cleaner

Production,

Vol.

270,

122861.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122861.
Díaz-Ruiz, R., Costa-Font, M., and Gil, J. M. (2018), “Moving ahead from food-related
behaviours: an alternative approach to understand household food waste generation”,
Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 172, pp. 1140-1151.
Dreyer, J.O., Lichtenstein, S. and Heil, E.A. (2022), "Consumer awareness of food waste,
best before dates and food appreciation – a model project in the food retailing sector",
British Food Journal, Vol. 124 No. 13, pp. 81-92. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-05-20210545

27

Dunlap, R. E., and Van Liere, K. D. (1978), “The New Environmental Paradigm: A
proposed measuring instrument and preliminary results”, Journal of Environmental
Education, Vol. 9, pp. 10-19. https://doi.org/10.1080/00958964.1978.10801875.
Dyen, M., Sirieix, L., Costa, S., Depezay, L., and Castagna, E. (2018), “Exploring the
dynamics of food routines: a practice-based study to understand households’ daily life”,
European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 52 No. 12, pp. 2544-2556.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). (2020), Food Loss and Waste Must Be
Reduced for Greater Food Security and Environmental Sustainability, available at:
http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/1310271/icode/.
Farr‐Wharton, G., Foth, M., and Choi, J. H. J. (2014), “Identifying factors that promote
consumer behaviours causing expired domestic food waste”, Journal of Consumer
Behaviour, Vol. 13 No. 6, pp. 393-402.
Fernqvist, F., Olsson, A., and Spendrup, S. (2015), “What’s in it for me? Food packaging
and consumer responses, a focus group study”, British Food Journal, Vol. 117 No. 3, pp.
1122-1135.
Geffen, L., van Sijtsema, S.J., Újhelyi, K., Eisenhauer, P., Diedrich, A. C., Brumbauer,
T.,Díaz-Ruiz, R., L_opez-i-Gelats, F., Reinoso Botsho, D., van Winter, M. H., and van
Herpen, E., (2016), National, Qualitative Insight on Household & Catering Food Waste,
Netherlands Wageningen Univ. Econ. Res. 193, Wageningen.
Ghinea, C., and Ghiuta, O. A. (2019), “Household food waste generation: young
consumers behaviour, habits and attitudes”, International Journal of Environmental
Science and Technology, Vol. 16 No. 5, pp. 2185-2200.

28

Graham-Rowe, E., Jessop, D. C., and Sparks, P. (2015), “Predicting household food waste
reduction using an extended theory of planned behaviour”, Resources, Conservation and
Recycling, Vol. 101, pp. 194-202.
Heidari, A., Mirzaii, F., Rahnama, M., and Alidoost, F. (2020), “A theoretical framework
for explaining the determinants of food waste reduction in residential households: a case
study of Mashhad, Iran”, Environmental Science and Pollution Research, Vol. 27 No. 7,
pp. 6774-6784.
Ilakovac, B., Voca, N., Pezo, L., and Cerjak, M. (2020), “Quantification and
determination of household food waste and its relation to sociodemographic
characteristics in Croatia”, Waste Management, Vol. 102, pp. 231-240.
Kang, A. Y., Legendre, T. S. and Cartier, E. A. (2019). “Personality congruence among
brands, recruiters, and applicants during the anticipatory socialization process”. Journal
of

Hospitality

&

Tourism

Research, Vol.

43

No.

8,

pp.

1302-1325.

https://doi.org/10.1177/1096348019861746.
Konuk, F. A. (2019). “The influence of perceived food quality, price fairness, perceived
value and satisfaction on customers’ revisit and word-of-mouth intentions towards
organic food restaurants”. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 50, pp. 103110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2019.05.005
Kumar, S., Dhir, A., Talwar, S., Chakraborty, D. and Kaur, P. (2021b). “What drives
brand love for natural products? The moderating role of household size”. Journal of
Retailing

and

Consumer

Services, Vol.

58,

102329.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2020.102329
Kumar, S., Murphy, M., Talwar, S., Kaur, P. and Dhir, A. (2021a). “What drives brand
love and purchase intentions toward the local food distribution system? A study of social
29

media-based REKO (fair consumption) groups”. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Services, Vol. 60, 102444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2021.102444
Lai, A. El, Tirotto, F. A., Pagliaro, S. and Fornara, F. (2020), “Two Sides of the Same
Coin: Environmental and Health Concern Pathways Toward Meat Consumption”,
Frontiers in Psychology, Vol. 16. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.578582
Lian, J. W. (2021). “Determinants and consequences of service experience toward small
retailer platform business model: Stimulus–organism–response perspective”. Journal of
Retailing

and

Consumer

Services, Vol.

62,

102631.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2021.102631
Mallinson, L. J., Russell, J. M., and Barker, M. E. (2016), “Attitudes and behaviour
towards convenience food and food waste in the United Kingdom”, Appetite, Vol. 103,
pp. 17-28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2016.03.017.
Matzembacher, D. E., Brancoli, P., Maia, L. M., and Eriksson, M. (2020), “Consumer’s
food waste in different restaurants configuration: A comparison between different levels
of incentive and interaction”, Waste Management, Vol. 114, pp. 263-273.
Mehrabian, A. and Russell, J. A. (1974). An approach to environmental psychology. the
MIT Press.
Michelini, L., Grieco, C., Ciulli, F., and Di Leo, A. (2020), “Uncovering the impact of
food sharing platform business models: a theory of change approach”, British Food
Journal, Vol. 122 No. 5, pp. 1437-1462.
Mondéjar-Jiménez, J. A., Ferrari, G., Secondi, L., and Principato, L. (2016), “From the
table to waste: An exploratory study on behaviour towards food waste of Spanish and
Italian youths”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 138, pp. 8-18.

30

Olavarria-Key, N., Ding, A., Legendre, T. S., and Min, J. (2021), “Communication of
food waste messages: The effects of communication modality, presentation order, and
mindfulness on food waste reduction intention”, International Journal of Hospitality
Management, Vol. 96, 102962.
Papaoikonomou, E., Ryan, G., and Ginieis, M. (2011), “Towards a Holistic Approach of
the Attitude Behaviour Gap in Ethical Consumer Behaviours: Empirical”, International
Advances in Economic Research, Vol. 17, pp. 77-88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11294-0109288-6.
Phang, G., Balakrishnan, B. K. and Ting, H. (2021). “Does sustainable consumption
matter? Consumer grocery shopping behaviour andthe pandemic”. Journal of Social
Marketing. Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 507-522. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-12-2020-0245
Principato, L., Secondi, L., and Pratesi, C. A. (2015), “Reducing food waste: An
investigation on the behaviour of Italian youths”, British Food Journal, Vol. 117 No. 2,
pp. 731-748. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-10-2013-0314.
Qian, K., Javadi, F., and Hiramatsu, M. (2020), “Influence of the COVID-19 pandemic
on household food waste behaviour in Japan”, Sustainability, Vol. 12 No. 23, pp. 9942.
Rasool, S., Cerchione, R., Salo, J., Ferraris, A., & Abbate, S. (2021). Measurement of
consumer awareness of food waste: construct development with a confirmatory factor
analysis. British

Food

Journal,

Vol.

123

No.

13,

pp.

337-

361. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-02-2021-0160.
Russell, S. V., Young, C. W., Unsworth, K. L., and Robinson, C. (2017)., “Bringing
habits and emotions into food waste behaviour”, Resources, Conservation & Recycling,
Vol. 125, pp. 107–114. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.06.007.

31

Schanes, K., Dobernig, K., and Gözet, B. (2018), “Food waste matters-A systematic
review of household food waste practices and their policy implications”, Journal of
Cleaner Production, Vol. 182, pp. 978-991.
Schöggl, J-P., Stumpf, L. and Baumgartner, R. J. (2020). The narrative of sustainability
and circular economy - A longitudinal review of two decades of research. Resources,
Conservation

&

Recycling,

Vol.

163,

105073.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105073.
Schwartz, S.H. (1970). “Awareness of interpersonal consequences, responsibility denial
and volunteering”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 30, pp. 57-63.
Schwartz, S.H., and Bilsky, W. (1987), “Toward a universal psychological structure of
human values”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 53, pp. 550-562.
Setti, M., Banchelli, F., Falasconi, L., Segrè, A., and Vittuari, M. (2016), “Consumers'
food cycle and housPorehold waste. When behaviours matter”, Journal of Cleaner
Production, Vol. 185, pp. 694-706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.03.024.
Sigurðardóttir S. (1990), Predicting Household Food Waste Reduction: An exploratory
study comparing and contrasting the Theory of Planned Behaviour and Value Belief
Norm theory. Thesis (Master). http://hdl.handle.net/1946/26754.
Soma, T., Li, B., and Maclaren, V. (2021), “An evaluation of a consumer food waste
awareness campaign using the motivation opportunity ability framework”, Resources,
Conservation

and

Recycling,

Vol.

168,

105313.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105313.
Sorokowska, A., Marczak, M., Misiak, M., Stefanczyk, M. M., and Sorokowski, P.
(2020), “Children older than five years do not approve of wasting food: An experimental
study on attitudes towards food wasting behaviour in children and adults”, Journal of
32

Environmental

Psychology,

Vol.

71,

October,

101467.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2020.101467.
Stancu, V., Haugaard, P., and Lahteenmaki, L. (2016), “Determinants of consumer food
waste behaviour: Two routes to food waste”, Appetite, Vol. 96, pp. 7-17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2015.08.025.
Stangherlin, I. d. C., Duarte Ribeiro, J. L. and Barcellos, M. (2019), "Consumer behaviour
towards suboptimal food products: a strategy for food waste reduction", British Food
Journal, Vol. 121 No. 10, pp. 2396-2412. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-12-2018-0817.
Stern, P. C., Dietz, T., Abel, T., Guagnano, G. A., and Kalof, L. (1999), “A value-beliefnorm theory of support for social movements: the case of environmentalism”, Human
Ecology Review, Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 81–97. https://cedar.wwu.edu/hcop_facpubs/1.
Strauss A. L., and Corbin J. M. (1998), Basics of qualitative research: techniques and
procedure for developing grounded theory, 2nd ed., Sage, London.
Su, L., Hsu, M. K. and Boostrom Jr, R. E. (2020), “From recreation to responsibility:
Increasing environmentally responsible behavior in tourism”. Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 109, pp. 557-573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.12.055
Talwar, S., Kaur, P., Kumar, S., Salo, J. and Dhir, A. (2022), “The balancing act: How
do moral norms and anticipated pride drive food waste/reduction behaviour?”. Journal
of

Retailing

and

Consumer

Services, Vol.

66,

102901.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2021.102901
Too Good To Go (2022), “Food waste at Christmas in Spain”. https://toogoodtogo.es/es
(accessed 28 February 2022).

33

United

Nations.

(2020),

Sustainable

development

Goals,

available

at

https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/es/sustainable-consumption-production/,
(accessed 22 September 2020).
United Nations Environmental Programme (2021), UNEP food waste index report
2021.https://drive.google.com/file/d/1KTB1mq9sSWXx38bDfvF0PQy0sEKYsgrn/view
(accessed 1 March 2022).
Visschers, V. H. M., Wickli, N., and Siegrist, M. (2016), “Sorting out food waste
behaviour: A survey on the motivators and barriers of self-reported amounts of food waste
in households”, Journal of Environmental Psychology, Vol. 45, pp. 66-78.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.11.007.
Wang, C., Zhang, X. and Sun, Q. (2021), “The influence of economic incentives on
residents’ intention to participate in online recycling: An experimental study from
China”. Resources,

Conservation

and

Recycling, Vol.

169,

105497.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105497
White, K.; Habib, R., and Hardisty, D. J. (2019), “How to SHIFT Consumer Behaviours
to be More Sustainable: A Literature Review and Guiding Framework”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 83 No. 3, pp. 22-49.
Whitmarsh, L. (2011), Commentary. Environment and Planning A, Vol. 43, pp. 258-261.
https://doi.org/10.1068/a43359.
Yildirim, Ç. B., and Karaarslan G. S. (2019), "Future Teachers’ Sustainable Water
Consumption Behaviour: A Test of the Value-Belief-Norm Theory", Sustainability, Vol.
11 No. 6, pp. 1558. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11061558.
Zhang, B., Lai, K-H., Wang, B., and Wang, Z. (2019), “From intention to action: How do
personal attitudes, facilities accessibility, and government stimulus matter for household
34

waste sorting?” Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 233, pp. 447-458.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.12.059.

35

