International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Business Review
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ibusrev

Managing the consumer-based brand equity process: A cross-cultural
perspective

T

Kalliopi Chatzipanagiotoua, George Christodoulidesb, , Cleopatra Veloutsoua
⁎

a
b

University of Glasgow, Adam Smith Business School, The Gilbert Scott Building, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK
American University of Sharjah, School of Business Administration, PO Box 26666, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Brand equity
Consumers
Culture
Price premium
Recommendation
Individualism/collectivism

Most consumer-based brand equity (CBBE) models are linear and fail to capture the complexity of the brand
equity construct and its benefits in terms of key consumer behavioral outcomes. More complex and dynamic
models focusing on CBBE as a process often lack empirical support particularly from more than one country. This
study builds on and extends previous research by empirically examining the configural nature of the CBBE
building process cross-nationally, and by investigating differences vis-a-vis key consumer behavioral outcomes
(namely, willingness to pay a price premium, brand recommendation and repurchase intention). These differences are postulated and explained through culture theory particularly the cultural dimension of individualism/
collectivism. Using fuzzy-set/Qualitative Comparative Analysis (fs/QCA), survey data from Greece and Germany
support the robustness of the extended CBBE model. The model shows that overall brand equity and consumer
behavioral outcomes are created through the brand building, brand understanding, and brand relationship
blocks, and identifies core causes and common patterns across countries providing a useful diagnostic tool for
international brand management.

1. Introduction
Building strong brands and understanding their effect on consumer
behavior is one of the most challenging tasks facing firms in today’s
dynamic international environment (Talay, Townsend, & Yeniyurt,
2015). Typically, the overall strength of a brand operating in one or
more national markets is measured by its brand equity (Hsieh, 2004).
Identifying the most effective strategy to maximize their brand equity
across countries constitutes a strategic priority for international businesses who want to build their products’ global brand architecture (e.g.,
Townsend, Yeniyurt, & Talay, 2009) and make concomitant decisions
about the standardization/adaptation of branding activities (e.g., Ford,
Mueller, Taylor, & Hollis, 2011; Schmid & Kotulla, 2011).
The brand equity concept reflects a brand name’s value added to an
offer relative to an identical but unbranded offer (Farquhar, 1989) and
thus is an important diagnostic tool for managing brands. However,
brand equity is not the end goal in itself as this value needs to translate
into benefits for firms, for example, in terms of consumer behaviors
(Cobb-Walgren, Ruble, & Donthu, 1995). This intangible asset leads to a
plethora of desirable consumer outcomes, including brand preference,
positive word-of-mouth, (re)purchase intention, reduced switching

intention and acceptance of higher-price premium and brand extensions
(Buil, Martínez, & de Chernatony, 2013; Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995;
Keller, 2001; Rambocas, Kirpalani, & Simms, 2018), which ultimately
allow a brand to earn greater volume or margins (Christodoulides & de
Chernatony, 2010). Although research has examined brand equity from
various stakeholders’ perspectives, such as firms or employees, consumer-based brand equity (CBBE) dominates the pertinent literature
because consumers are key stakeholders around whom actionable
strategies can be devised (Keller, 1993).
A review of the pertinent literature demonstrates that: (a) despite
the rich literature on CBBE, a lack of consensus on its conceptualization
and operationalization remains (Christodoulides & de Chernatony,
2010; Datta, Ailawadi, & van Heerde, 2017); (b) there are relatively few
studies that empirically explain the specificities of the CBBE formation
process in an international environment (Broyles, Leingpibul, Ross, &
Foster, 2010; Hsieh, 2004; Zhang, van Doorn, & Leeflang, 2014) and/or
examine the role of culture in this process (Erdem, Swait, & Valenzuela,
2006; Yoo & Donthu, 2002) (c) most of the studies focus on a limited
number of CBBE facets (Aaker, 1991; Buil, Martínez, & de Chernatony,
2008; Christodoulides, Cadogan, & Veloutsou, 2015; Çifci et al., 2016;
Yoo & Donthu, 2001) thus failing to provide a more holistic view of the

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Kalliopi.Chatzipanagiotou@glasgow.ac.uk (K. Chatzipanagiotou), gchristodoulides@aus.edu (G. Christodoulides),
Cleopatra.Veloutsou@glasgow.ac.uk (C. Veloutsou).
⁎

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2018.10.005
Received 23 November 2017; Received in revised form 30 August 2018; Accepted 8 October 2018
Available online 15 November 2018
0969-5931/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

CBBE formation process. Attempts to understand this phenomenon
more holistically have, so far, resulted in models which are purely
conceptual (Keller, 2001) or lack empirical support from more than one
country (Chatzipanagiotou, Veloutsou, & Christodoulides, 2016); (d)
there is a scarcity of studies that integrate key consumer behavioral
outcomes into the CBBE formation process (Buil et al., 2013; Rambocas
et al., 2018); and finally (e) the majority of the studies adopt regressionbased methods and their basic assumptions (e.g., uniformity of causal
effects, unit homogeneity, additivity, causal symmetry) (Vukasović,
2016, Heinberga, Ozkayab, & Taubec, 2018; Lehmann, Keller, & Farley,
2008), which arguably cannot fully capture the admittedly complex,
idiosyncratic, and multiple-faced nature of CBBE (Lehmann et al.,
2008).
In line with the critical gaps in the literature, this article adopts a
holistic approach and recognizes CBBE as a complex system of three
building blocks, the brand building block (BBB), the brand understanding block (BUB), and the brand relationship block (BRB)
(Chatzipanagiotou et al., 2016) to empirically assess the CBBE formation process in two different national contexts. In addition, the study
aims to illuminate the link between the CBBE formation process and the
key consumer behavioral outcomes of consumers’ willingness to pay a
price premium, brand recommendation and repurchase intention
identifying cross-cultural similarities and differences. Furthermore, this
work leverages the advantages of fs/QCA, which is a ‘synthetic’ methodological approach that bridges qualitative and quantitative research
(Ragin, 1987, p. 84), and is particularly suited to the complex, idiosyncratic, and dynamic nature of international CBBE.
Therefore, the study aims to make four theoretical and managerial
contributions to the international branding literature. First, it responds
to calls for research on the development and testing of holistic, advanced tools to successfully build and manage brands globally (e.g.,
Ford et al., 2011) by providing a fine-grained assessment of the CBBE
formation process and some of its key outcomes across countries
(Broyles et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2014). Second, the study delineates
the diagnostic capabilities to monitor and manage international brands
by helping businesses identify core causes and common patterns among
different countries while also unfolding the idiosyncrasies in each
country. Third, it demonstrates the potential applicability of the model
in explaining, in branding terms, key consumer behavioral outcomes.
Fourth, it identifies differences in regard to the CBBE formation process
and its key consumer behavioral outcomes on the basis of culture,
specifically the cultural dimension of individualism/collectivism, which
constitutes a key indicator of cross-country differences in consumer
perceptions and behavior in regard to brands (De Mooij & Hofstede,
2010, 2011).
The paper begins with a review of the literature on CBBE and the
way national and international studies have captured it. Next it unfolds
the need for a process-based approach to conceptualize the creation of
overall CBBE in a multi-country context and presents details of the
methodology used to test the configural nature of CBBE cross-nationally. Finally, it discusses the findings together with the theoretical and
managerial implications of the research.

Research has spawned several approaches to CBBE’s measurement,
including direct, indirect, and practitioner measures (Agarwal & Rao,
1996). Direct measures attempt to gauge the phenomenon directly by
focusing on consumer preferences (Park & Srinivasan, 1994) or utilities
(Erdem & Swait, 1998), while indirect measures operationalize CBBE
through its demonstrable sources and are deemed superior from a diagnostic perspective. Parallel to the academic measures, several proprietary models based on worldwide market research seek to measure
brand equity (e.g., Young & Rubicam’s Brand Asset Valuator) (Mizik &
Jacobson, 2008), but again these share little in common in terms of
their constituent dimensions.
The issue of operationalizing CBBE in an international context is
even more challenging for managers who aim to capture the complexity
of CBBE through their tracking systems while producing comparable
diagnostic results to manage their brands across countries. A small
number of studies focus on the operationalization of CBBE in more than
one country (see Table 1) and these studies are not free of limitations.
As Table 1 demonstrates, a group of researchers adopt a unidimensional approach to capture CBBE (i.e., Heinberga et al., 2018;
Lieven & Hildebrand, 2016; Zhang et al., 2014); an approach that is not
in line with the multifaceted nature of the phenomenon. Another group
of researchers deviate from unidimensional measures and, instead,
gauge CBBE through multiple dimensions commonly based on Aaker’s
conceptualization (i.e. Buil et al., 2008; Christodoulides et al., 2015;
Çifci et al., 2016; Yoo & Donthu, 2001) which, however, is not void of
critique. For instance, prior research points out the lack of a unifying
theory to bring Aaker’s dimensions together (McWilliam, 1993) and
lack of discriminant validity amongst key dimensions namely awareness and associations (Christodoulides et al., 2015). In addition, the
majority of studies focus on preselected brands (Vukasović, 2016;
Broyles et al., 2010) an approach which encompasses difficulties in
relation to the generalization of findings. Finally, all existing studies
examining CBBE in a cross-national context employ a linear approach to
its operationalization, thus failing to capture the complexity surrounding the phenomenon.
In addition, and while the effect of consumers’ OBE on behavioral
outcomes has long been acknowledged (Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995;
Keller, 2001) there remains a lack of studies allowing a thorough understanding of this relationship, especially under particular cultural
variations. Most of the studies focus on specific aspects of the brand or
brand equity and consumers’ behavioral outcomes. For instance, a
limited number of studies empirically examine the relationship of CBBE
with behavioral outcomes, such as brand preference (Cobb-Walgren
et al., 1995; Buil et al., 2013), positive word-of-mouth (Buil et al., 2013;
Rambocas et al., 2018), repeat purchase (Rambocas et al., 2018), purchase intentions (Buil et al., 2013; Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995), and
price premium (Buil et al., 2013; Rambocas et al., 2018).
The lack of consensus regarding the conceptualization and operationalization of CBBE and its effect on consumer behavioral outcomes
has left many questions unanswered as to how strong brands can be
built and consequently managed, especially in different national contexts (Hsieh, 2004). This issue highlights the need to move beyond the
examination of CBBE measures or different aspects of it to a more
holistic, advanced, and actionable CBBE model that (a) can be successfully operationalized in different countries and (b) is versatile enough in design to enable the examination of the idiosyncrasies of brands
and industries in different national contexts (Keller, 2001).

2. Literature review
2.1. CBBE’s conceptualization, measurements and behavioral outcomes
The literature on CBBE is dense, and most studies approach the
concept as a complex construct (Keller & Lehmann, 2006) that consists
of multiple dimensions (Datta et al., 2017; Lehmann et al., 2008). Despite overall consensus that the concept of CBBE is multidimensional,
little agreement exists on its dimensionality (Christodoulides & de
Chernatony, 2010). Most empirical studies employ Aaker (1991) conceptualization, in which brand awareness, brand associations, perceived quality, and brand loyalty constitute the consumer-based dimensions of brand equity.

2.2. The configural nature of the CBBE process
Academic theorizing increasingly argues that, overall, CBBE should
be conceptualized as a multistage phenomenon that should be approached as a process rather than a construct (Keller, 1993, 2001;
Lehmann et al., 2008). Several studies have focused on CBBE as a
process -consisting of specific development stages and multifaceted
factors (Keller, 1993, 2001; Mishra, Dash, & Cyr, 2014) - that is
329

330

India and China

Slovenia and Croatia

Turkey and Spain

Australia, Brazil, China, Germany, France, India, Japan, Russia,
Sweden, USA
UK, Germany and Greece

China and the Netherlands

USA, China, Moldova, and Cyprus

US and China

US and China

UK and Spain

Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany,
India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, The Netherlands, Russia, South
Korea, Spain, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, UK and US
US and South Korea

Heinberga et al. (2018)

Vukasović (2016)

Çifci et al. (2016)

Lieven and Hildebrand
(2016)
Christodoulides et al.
(2015)

Zhang et al. (2014)

Ioannou and Rusu (2012)

Broyles et al. (2010)

Lehmann et al. (2008)

Buil et al. (2008)

Hsieh (2004)

Yoo and Donthu (2001)

Country

Study

Table 1
Summary of International Studies on CBBE.

Preselected brands (athletic shoes,
film and colour TV sets)

Study 1: Preselected brands (Soft
drinks)
Study 2: Preselected brands (Soft
drinks, Toothpaste, Fast Food)
Preselected brands (soft drinks,
sportswear, cars, consumer
electronics)
Preselected brands (Cars)

Preselected brand (KFC)

36 brands in China and 55 brands
in
India
Six preselected brands from the
food industry
Global fashion retailer (Turkey),
Private Labels (Spain)
20 preselected brands across eight
product categories
Free choice of most/least favorite
brand of: goods, services and
Internet
Unspecified banks and
supermarkets
Unspecified brands of cars

Product Category

Adapted Aaker’s dimensions (Brand Loyalty, Perceived Quality,
Awareness/associations)

Brand image, brand associations, perceived value, trustworthiness,
performance, perceived quality, social image, brand loyalty)
Functional aspect (perception of a brand’s performance, perceived
performance, perceived quality)
Experiential component (brand’s resonance, imagery)
27 dimensions of brand performance were suggested. They were
generated from the literature and reports from commercial brand
tracking approaches, including Young and Rubicam’s Brand Asset
Valuator (BAV), Millward Brown and Research International.
Adapted Aaker’s dimensions (Brand awareness, Perceived quality, Brand
loyalty, Brand associations: perceived value, Brand associations: brand
personality, Brand associations: organization)
Data from a data set owned by MORPACE International, a multinational
research firm (Brand recognition, Brand attachment, Market size)

Confirmatory factor analysis

Modeling aiming to measure
Global Brand Equity

Multi-group confirmatory
factor analysis

Correlations, t-tests, factor
analysis, regression analysis

Structural equation modeling

Descriptive

Regression

Confirmatory factor analysis

Aaker’s dimensions (Brand Loyalty, Perceived Quality, Awareness and
Associations)
One dimension of brand equity

Linear mixed effect models

Confirmatory factor analysis

Structural equation modeling

Structural equation modeling

Data analysis

One dimension adopted from Brady, Cronin, Fox, and Roehm, (2008)

Aaker’s dimensions (Brand Loyalty, Perceived Quality, Awareness and
Associations) and overall brand equity
Used Yoo and Donthu (2001) and Nam et al.'s (2011) measures

One dimensional overall brand equity adopted from Yoo, Donthu, & Lee,
2000

Conceptualization of CBBE

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

underpinned by a hierarchy comprising several types of ordering
(Lehmann et al., 2008).
Keller (2001) was the first to provide the idea of brand building
blocks in the CBBE process, whereby different interrelated brand concepts coexist. The architecture of this block modeling follows a hierarchical structure, a “brand pyramid,” in which the success of each
block depends on the successful attainment of the previous block. Despite its usefulness, the model focuses on the description of the process
itself and lacks empirical validation. Although the complex interdependencies within and among the brand blocks are implied, it is
unclear how this process takes place to allow the transition and evolving transformation from one brand building block to the next and,
eventually, to overall brand equity. The model, though constructive,
still lacks empirical documentation and thus has limited applicability to
explain the CBBE building process in different countries.
In addition, other researchers operationalize CBBE as a memoryassociative model or network of the multitude of consumer associations
with the brand (e.g., Christensen & Olson, 2002; Henderson, Iacobucci,
& Calder, 2002; John, Loken, Kim, & Monga, 2006; Teichert &
Schöntag, 2010). The idea of memory-associative models is widely
accepted and adopted in the branding (Keller, 1993) and global
branding (Hsieh, 2002; Madden, Roth, & Dillon, 2012; Özsomer &
Altaras, 2008; Özsomer, 2012) literature streams. These studies employ
several methods, ranging from free associations and free response
(Krishnan, 1996) to more structured and analytical techniques (e.g.,
repertory grid, brand concept mapping; Henderson, Iacobucci, &
Calder, 1998, 2002; John et al., 2006; Schnittka, Sattler, & Zenker,
2012). However, they tend to elicit consumers’ idiosyncratic associations with specific brands and do not easily permit generalization of
their results in different brand, national, and especially international
contexts. Much of the work that adopts the process approach has centered mostly on mapping specific brand structures or on an array of
branding structures and effects (e.g., cobranding, brand confusion,
cannibalization; Henderson et al., 1998, 2002) rather than on the CBBE
creation process itself.
Capitalizing on the idea of block modeling and the operationalization of CBBE as a memory-associative network, Chatzipanagiotou et al.
(2016) identify CBBE as a complex system comprising the three
building blocks of BBB, BUB, and BRB (e.g., Henderson et al., 1998;
Keller, 1993, 2001). The model adopts a high level of abstraction and
includes a parsimonious set of well-known brand concepts as central
structural ingredients or “nodes” in each building block. Specifically,
the BBB comprises both imagery (e.g., brand personality, heritage,
nostalgia) and functional attributes of the brand (e.g., quality,

competitive advantage, leadership), which serve as structurally interrelated components of the brand’s initial building. The BUB consists of
brand awareness, reputation, associations, and brand–self connection as
essential knowledge structures that reflect consumers’ cognitive responses to the brand. The BRB subsumes the closely interconnected,
relational nodes of relevance, intimacy, partnership quality, and trust to
capture the different aspects of consumers’ overall relationship with the
brand. By including well-established brand concepts as central nodes,
the model is arguably applicable to all brands, industries, and national
contexts for both constructive and, especially, comparative purposes.
The model builds on the notion of multiple conjectural causation,
which is context sensitive and emphasizes a combination (configuration) of causes included in each of the three building blocks that can
predict the outcome of interest in the next stage (‘recipe’ principle)
(Ragin & Rihoux, 2004; Ragin, 2008; Rihoux & Marx, 2013). Premised
on the idea of equifinality, in which “a system can reach the same final
state from different initial conditions and by a variety of different
paths” (Katz & Kahn, 1978, p. 30), the model detects all the theoretical
causal combinations that can explain an outcome of interest and
therefore embraces the idiosyncrasies of both consumers and brands.
Managers can then identify various design choices that can lead to the
same desired outcome (e.g., Fiss, 2011; Short, Payne, & Ketchen, 2008).
Furthermore, the role of each of the causes included in the derived
causal combinations that can predict an outcome is conjecture sensitive
and thus is explained in relation to the context of the other included
causes. This model can explain, for example, why the same brand positioning elements may have a differential effect on different consumers
(Lieven & Hildebrand, 2016; Özsomer, 2012) or on the strength of the
brand in different countries (Broyles et al., 2010). Thus, by design, the
configural nature and the operationalization of the CBBE model embody the inevitable variations that emerge from consumers, brands, and
different contexts, in recognition that it is not only the structurally
powerful brand concepts per se that can explain the phenomenon but
also the manner in which these brand ingredients are linked to explain
CBBE under the reflections of the aforementioned variations and idiosyncrasies. However, the real power of CBBE comes from its ability to
motivate consumers’ favorable responses (Aaker, 1991; Buil et al.,
2013; Keller, 2001). From the various behavioral outcomes, the consumers’ repurchase intention (Buil et al., 2013; Rambocas et al., 2018),
the willingness to pay a price premium (Buil et al., 2013; Rambocas
et al., 2018), and to speak positively or recommend the brand to others
(Buil et al., 2013; Rambocas et al., 2018), are of significant importance
for managers. Therefore, these are the three behavioral outcomes that
this study examines.

Fig. 1. The study’s conceptual framework.
Adapted from Chatzipanagiotou et al. (2016)

331

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

2.3. The structural power of the model in different countries

2.4. The role of national culture (individualism/collectivism) in the
formation of consumers’ OBE and behavioral outcomes

Fig. 1 depicts the rationale of the model using Venn diagrams to
demonstrate the combinatorial nature of the causes within the different
blocks; the arrows indicate the major flows of configural relationships
among them. The first building block in the model, BBB, embodies
brand imagery and functional attributes of brands. Brand managers use
various marketing tools and activities to create and promote both types
of brand characteristics. Proper management of these characteristics
affects brands’ differential positioning and shapes consumers’ responses: opinions (BUB) and feelings (BRB) (Keller, 2001). For example,
both imagery and functional attributes of the brand can evoke different
levels of consumers’ brand awareness and brand associations. According to the model, high levels of awareness arise when consumers
clearly recognize and conceive the brand using the set of characteristics. Part of consumers’ understanding of the brand lies in the way
they identify themselves in relation to the brand characteristics (brandself connection) (Smit, Bronner, & Tolboom, 2007).
Understanding is also achieved by “the overall value, esteem and
character of a brand as seen or judged by people in general”
(Chaudhuri, 2002, p. 34). Thus, consumers’ cognitive responses work
together to capture their understanding and appreciation of the features
of a brand (Lehmann et al., 2008), thus enabling them to understand
brand meaning—that is, what the brand is characterized by and stands
for (Keller, 2001). Therefore, we propose that the underlying process
explaining BUB components also takes place in different countries.

Culture could be viewed as the metaphorical lens through which
consumers perceive brands, decide information processing strategies
and cognitive structures that shape their choices (Hofstede, 1980;
McCort & Malhotra, 1993), especially in the form of means-ends brand
value hierarchies (Bock, 1994; Kim, Park, & Park, 2000; Overby,
Woodruff, & Gardial, 2005).
A large number of studies in international business explain the
impact of cultural variations and unveil the dominant role of individualism/collectivism in decoding consumers’ brand perceptions
(Aaker & Maheswaran, 1997; De Mooij & Hofstede, 2010, 2011;
Laroche, Kalamas, & Cleveland, 2005; Sung & Tinkham, 2005), brand
understanding (Monga & John, 2006; Roth, 1995) and brand relationships (Samaha, Beck, & Palmatier, 2014). Despite agreement from researchers that a configuration of brand-related structures could provide
a better understanding of brands in international contexts (Aaker &
Maheswaran, 1997; Torres, Augusto, & Godinho, 2017), there is a
scarcity of studies regarding the mechanisms by which these brandrelated structures are combined in order to lead to consumers’ OBE and
behavioral outcomes.
Consumers’ brand perceptions play a critical role in the way consumers recognize and understand brands. Researchers highlight that
cultural differences modify the way consumers perceive, categorize and
attach to objects. For instance, in individualistic cultures consumers
categorize objects/brands based on rules and properties (Choi, Nisbett,
& Smith, 1997). They recognize easily the abstract values that are related with brands while jointly considering their functional attributes
following a more analytic thinking (Nisbett, Kaiping, Incheol, &
Norenzayan, 2001). Their attachment with the brand revolves around
their self-image, which is built on the basis of self as an autonomous
entity independent of general social groups and norms (Markus &
Kitayama, 1991). They tend to focus on brands which are consistent
with their self-image and could reflect their individuality and parts of
the social discourse (Tuškej, Golob, & Podnar, 2013; Aaker & Schmitt,
1997). Individualists build relationships primarily for self-serving reasons (Steensma, Kevin, Marino, Weaver, & Dickson, 2000) rather than
for mutually beneficial purposes (Wuyts & Geyskens, 2005). They develop, maintain, and value relationships that can better serve and demonstrate their individual ideas, goals, and achievements (1995,
Triandis, 1989).
In contrast, collectivists typically engage in closer or more profound
and longer lasting relationships compared to their individualist counterparts (Triandis, 1995). They are receptive to social bonding
(Triandis, 1995) and their identity is intertwined with the values of the
social system to which they belong (Steensma et al., 2000). They could
be characterized as holistic thinkers, who focus on relationships
(Masuda & Nisbett, 2001) rather than abstract brand values whilst they
prioritize the relational, social product benefits rather than the functional ones (Paul, Hennig-Thurau, Gremler, Gwinner, & Wiertz, 2009).
Hence, culture influences not only the meaning or the relevant
importance of each of the aforementioned brand components, but also
the structure in which these elements are combined toward consumers’
OBE (Overby et al., 2005). Thus, we hypothesize that:

H1. Sufficient configurations of the components constituting the BBB
lead to high scores in the individual components of BUB in different
countries.
Brand imagery and functional attributes (BBB) as well as the establishment of consumers’ understanding of the brand meaning (BUB)
lead consumers to another critical stage in the CBBE building process:
the relationship with the brand (BRB) (Keller, 1993, 2001). Researchers
have recognized consumers’ relational bonds with brands as an essential stage in the CBBE building process (Christodoulides, de Chernatony,
Furrer, & Abimbola, 2006; Lehmann et al., 2008). The BRB includes
closely interrelated brand concepts, including brand trust, intimacy,
relevance, and partner quality, to capture the different aspects and
consumers’ feelings about the brand. We further propose that the
structural power of the model to explain BRB components holds in
different countries.
H2. Sufficient configurations of the components constituting BBB lead
to high scores in the individual components of BRB in different
countries.
H3. Sufficient configurations of the components constituting BUB lead
to high scores in the individual components of BRB in different
countries.
Each of the building blocks contributes to the formation of overall
brand equity. In contrast with Keller (2001), who identifies “brand
resonance” as the broader and final stage in the CBBE building process
(including brand relationships but also behavioral aspects, such as
loyalty), the proposed model identifies overall brand equity as the
overall strength of the brand (Yoo & Donthu, 2001) and the final stage
in the CBBE process. The measurement of overall brand equity includes
indicators of the relative strength of the brand in relation to other
brands that have been established in previous studies (e.g. Rambocas
et al., 2018; Yoo & Donthu, 2001). Thus, each brand building block
contributes to the formation of overall brand equity in different countries.

H4. Different configurations (core/periphery models) of BBB, BUB and
BRB components contribute directly to produce high scores in OBE in
countries with different cultural dimensions (individualism/
collectivism).
The literature on CBBE appreciates that strong brands lead consumers to react more favorably toward them (Cobb-Walgren et al.,
1995; Keller, 2001). However, a limited number of studies empirically

332

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

examine the direct relationship of CBBE with behavioral outcomes,
such as brand preference, positive word-of-mouth, repeat purchase, and
price premium (Buil et al., 2013; Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995; Rambocas
et al., 2018), especially in different countries (Buil et al., 2013;
Rambocas et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2014). Instead, more studies focus
on individual components of CBBE and their link with specific consumers’ behavioral outcomes. For instance, prior research highlights
the role of brand self-identification and brand relationships in consumers’ behavior and empirically shows that consumers tend to repurchase a brand that they strongly identify with (Aaker & Schmitt,
1997). In addition, previous research demonstrates that in the context
of brand relationships consumers follow reciprocity norms and cycles,
which lead them to express extra-role behaviors (Elbedweihy,
Jayawardhena, Elsharnouby, & Elsharnouby, 2016) including positive
brand recommendations to others (Stokburger-Sauer, Ratneshwar, &
Sen, 2012; Tuškej et al., 2013) and willingness to pay more (Davvetas &
Diamantopoulos, 2017; Haumann, Quaiser, Wieseke, & Rese, 2014;
Park, Eisingerich, & Park, 2013). Despite the importance of the above
studies, to our knowledge none of these provides a holistic explanation
as to how consumers in different cultures organize CBBE structures
(brand perceptions, knowledge and relationships) toward specific behavioral outcomes.
Several researchers highlight that consumers in individualistic cultures need a consistency among their brand perceptions, feelings and
behaviors (De Mooij & Hofstede, 2011), which is in line with their more
analytic way of thinking (Nisbett et al., 2001). They seem to follow
more structured decision-making models including consciousness regarding the brand, price, and quality (De Mooij & Hofstede, 2011). For
individualists, brand self-identification serves mostly individualistic
purposes and, therefore, their brand recommendations are motivated
on the basis of their opinion leadership to others (Hennig-Thurau,
Gwinner, Walsh, & Gremler, 2004; Samaha et al., 2014). On the contrary, brand feelings and relationships mostly drive collectivistic consumers’ behavior (De Mooij & Hofstede, 2011) as they focus highly on
the social product benefits in order to make repurchase decisions (Paul
et al., 2009). For collectivists, positive brand recommendation is arguably the result of a mutually beneficial relationship developed with
the brand, which generates reciprocity in the form of gratitude toward
the brand/company (Hennig-Thurau et al., 2004; Samaha et al., 2014).
Therefore, culture not only unpacks the salient components of the CBBE
formation process in different national contexts, it may also modify the
way that these CBBE structures are organized toward significant behavioral outcomes. Based on the above discussion, we hypothesize that:

Zhang et al., 2014). Furthermore, the two countries are dissimilar not
only in terms of culture, but also in terms of size and economic environment, which further serves the purposes of this study since it may
drive consumers to respond differently to brands.
The data were collected face-to-face with the help of trained fieldworkers. We asked the fieldworkers to recruit respondents who were
residents in each of the countries and resided in multiple areas in each
country. To collect data that represented the national population of the
two countries, we set quotas for age and gender using census data from
Germany and Greece. Table A1 in the Appendix lists the consumers’
demographic profiles.
Each respondent was asked to pick a product category from a provided list (shampoo, consumers’ electronics, coffee houses, mobile
networks, banks, and internet retailers) and to identify their favorite
brand from that category. Table A2 in the Appendix provides consumers’ responses regarding the different product categories. Consumers were then invited to respond to subsequent questions about
their chosen brand. Different types of brands emerged from this exercise. The data collection took place simultaneously in Germany and
Greece over a two-week period and produced 301 responses from
Germany and 312 responses from Greece. To increase their willingness
to participate, survey respondents in each country had the chance to
win one of two gift cards worth $130 (€100).
We adopted all items for the brand building blocks and the overall
brand equity from previous research in line with Chatzipanagiotou
et al. (2016), the willingness to pay a premium was measured with
three items adapted from Netemeyer et al. (2004), brand recommendation intentions was measured with three items adapted from
Arnett, German, and Hunt, (2003) and purchase intention was measured with one item consistent with Graeff (1997). The study items
were measured on seven-point scales (see Table A3 in the Appendix). To
ensure the accuracy of the translation, the questionnaire was translated
from English to Greek and German by bilingual speakers and then backtranslated into English by colleagues fluent in both languages (Brislin,
1980). We secured the clarity of the wording in German and Greek
through pilot tests in both settings and made minor modifications when
appropriate. The study items were measured on seven-point scales (see
Table A3 in the Appendix). To ensure the accuracy of the translation,
the questionnaire was translated from English to Greek and German by
bilingual speakers and then back-translated into English by colleagues
fluent in both languages (Brislin, 1980). We secured the clarity of the
wording in German and Greek through pilot tests in both settings and
made minor modifications when appropriate.
We assessed the common method bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee,
& Podsakoff, 2003) through the shorter version of the social desirability
scale (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960). Specifically, we used the scale Fischer
and Fick (1993) developed as a marker variable in the first part of the
questionnaire (Lindell & Whitney, 2001; Williams, Hartman, &
Cavazotte, 2010). Furthermore, we checked all the study’s measures for
configural, metric, and factor invariance (Steenkamp & Baumgartner,
1998). The results of the multi-group confirmatory factor analysis show
evidence of configural, metric, and factor invariance (Brown, 2000;
Steenkamp & Baumgartner, 1998) between the German and Greek
samples (Cheung & Rensvold, 2002) for all the study’s constructs of
interest. Next, we employed a marker variable confirmatory factor
analysis for the independent measures; the results provide evidence that
common method variance does not pose a serious threat in this study.1
Finally, we assessed the internal consistency of the scales for both
samples (see Table A3 in the Appendix), ensuring the internal consistency of the study’s measures.

H5. Different configurations (core/periphery models) of the CBBE
components constituting of BBB, BUB and BRB contribute directly to
produce high scores in consumers’ (a) willingness to pay price premium
(b) brand recommendation (c) repeat purchase in countries with
different cultural dimensions (individualism/collectivism).
3. Methodology
3.1. Data collection
This project was part of a wider funded project focusing on a
European context and the selected countries represented different
backgrounds within the wider context. Data were collected from Greece
and Germany; two countries which, even though they belong to Europe,
have been categorized as countries with clear cultural differences
(Brodbeck et al., 2000; House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, & Gupta,
2004). In addition, these countries demonstrate significant differences
in relation to the cultural dimensions of Hofstede’s model (Hofstede,
1984; Hofstede Insights, 2018), especially in terms of individualism/
collectivism (GR = 35; GE = 67), which constitutes one of the most
relevant dimensions for understanding cross-national variation in CBBE
formation process and consequent consumer behavior (Hsieh, 2004;

1
We do not present the analyses results because of space constraints, but they
are available on request.

333

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Table 2
Core Periphery Models of BBB Predicting High Scores in BUB (H1).

Note: The black circles indicate the presence of a condition, and circles with “x” indicate its absence. The large circles indicate core conditions; the
small circles indicate peripheral conditions. Blank spaces in a pathway indicate “don't care.” The analysis of necessary conditions (NC) does not
confirm the existence of any NC.

3.2. Fuzzy Set/Qualitative comparative analysis (fs/QCA)

identification of core causes, or the conditions with a strong causal relationship to the outcome of interest, and periphery causes, in which the
evidence of the causal relationship to the outcome is weaker, and thus
these causes can be characterized as less important conditions. Accordingly, the results are grouped in solutions based on the core causal
conditions (Fiss, 2011).

The study adopts fs/QCA, which is uniquely suited for examining
the configurational nature of the model’s research hypotheses (2008,
Ragin, 1987). By embodying key strengths of both qualitative and
quantitative methods, QCA has received considerable attention in the
business literature (e.g., Gounaris, Chatzipanagiotou, Boukis, & Perks,
2016; Ordanini, Parasuraman, & Rubera, 2014; Woodside, 2013, 2014).
Fs/QCA, as a set theoretic method, allows for a holistic approach that
identifies each individual case as a complex entity of causes and outcomes of interest in terms of set memberships (Berg-Schlosser & De
Meur, 2009; 2008, Ragin, 1987). It uses set logic and fuzzyset algorithms (e.g., “truth table”) to model relationships among the
causes and the outcomes of interest in a systematic, cross-case analysis.
The first step in fs/QCA is calibrating the measures, so that transformation of the variable raw scores into set measures occurs. We calibrate
the data on the basis of the direct method of calibration and use three
qualitative anchors (1.0 = full membership, 0 = full non-membership,
and 0.5 = the crossover point of maximum ambiguity regarding
membership) in each of the samples and in a similar way for each of the
model’s conditions.
Next, we identify the property space, or truth table, to examine each
of the study’s research hypotheses; doing so allows us to detect all the
logically possible combinations of relevant causal conditions that can
lead to the outcome of interest. Construction of the truth table is based
on the formula of 2k (where k represents the number of the antecedent
conditions we assume can predict the outcome of interest) and allows
the detection of “necessary” and “sufficient” causal configurations that
can predict the outcome of interest (for a detailed discussion of the
fuzzy-set algorithm of the truth table, see Ragin (2008); Rihoux &
Ragin, 2008; Goertz & Starr, 2003). In addition, the estimation of these
set relationships is based on consistency and coverage indices (Ragin,
2008; Wagemann & Schneider, 2010; Woodside, 2013). The measures
of consistency and coverage are analogous to the correlation coefficient
and coefficient of determination, respectively (Ragin, 2008). We employ 0.80 as the minimum threshold for consistency consideration and
use two cases to be included in a truth table for further analysis. Alternative tests of cases frequencies (one, three) and levels of consistency
(ranged from 0.81 to 90) were performed (Skaaning, 2011). The
number of the derived solutions did not warrant substantively different
interpretations.
In addition, to further understand the empirical relevance of each of
the antecedent conditions to the outcome of interest, we follow Fiss
(2011) and Ragin and Fiss (2008) rationale in the identification of core
and periphery models. Specifically, the analysis allows for the

4. Data analysis
Table A4 in the Appendix provides the descriptive statistics of the
conditions included in the study’s configural model and the symmetrical results of the correlation among them. The results indicate that
the correlation coefficients among these conditions do not meet the
0.80 threshold, leading us to infer that these relationships are not
symmetrical (Woodside, 2013, 2014). Next, we performed quintile
analysis between the causal conditions and the outcomes of interest to
further enlighten the nature of these relationships. In both samples the
phi coefficient indicates a positive effect size among antecedent conditions and the outcomes of interest, though both positive and negative
cases occurred. Thus, we proceeded with fs/QCA as the most appropriate way to investigate the study’s research hypotheses (Woodside,
2014).
4.1. Results from the investigation of the structural power of the proposed
model
Tables 2 and 3 summarize the results of H1 and H2, which suggest
that configurations of the antecedent conditions included in the BBB
(brand personality, heritage, nostalgia, quality, competitive advantage,
and leadership) sufficiently lead to each of the components of BUB (H1)
and BRB (H2) in both the German and Greek samples. Specifically, the
results show that consumers use imagery and functional attributes of
the brand which, in either core or peripheral role, sufficiently lead to
consumers’ brand understanding and brand relationships in both samples (the consistency in all solutions is above 0.80).
As expected due to idiosyncrasies of consumers, brands, and national contexts, few common causal patterns are detected at this level of
analysis and are shaded for emphasis. Table 2 identifies two common,
causal patterns with regard to brand awareness and brand reputation.
Specifically, solution 1 in both Greece and Germany indicate that high
scores in brand personality and heritage in combination with the
functional characteristics of the brand (quality, competitive advantage,
and leadership) predict high scores in consumers’ brand awareness in
both countries. In addition, solution 1 in Greece and solution 2 in
Germany demonstrate that a constellation of the functional
334

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Table 3
Core Periphery Models of BBB Predicting High Scores in BRB (H2).

Note: The black circles indicate the presence of a condition, and circles with “x” indicate its absence. The large circles indicate core conditions; the
small circles indicate peripheral conditions. Blank spaces in a pathway indicate “don't care”. The analysis of necessary conditions (NC) does not
confirm the existence of any NC.

characteristics of the brand (quality, competitive advantage, and leadership) lead to high scores in brand reputation.
Furthermore, Table 3 demonstrates another common causal pattern
with regard to consumers’ brand relevance (solution 1 for both Greece
and Germany), which indicates that a combination of brand nostalgia
and quality can lead consumers to build their relevance toward brands
in both countries.
The results also detect common core causes between the Greek and
the German samples for each outcome of interest. For example, in the
case of brand associations (Table 2), in which brand personality plays a
core causal role in all configurations, consumers from both countries
build their brand associations mainly on brand personality. In addition,
brand nostalgia which, in combination with other BBB conditions,
contributes to consumers’ brand-self connection in both countries. The
results further stress that despite the existence of common causal conditions, it is the ‘recipe’ and not solely the brand ingredients that can
successfully lead to consumers’ brand understanding and brand relationship in different countries.
The consistent way that BBB predicts consumers’ BUB and BRB for
different brands and in different countries highlights the proposed
model’s ability to embrace both common and idiosyncratic patterns of
consumers’ understanding and relationship building, providing a bridge
between cross-national and case-study analysis.
Table 4 summarizes the results of H3, which indicates that consumers’ understanding in terms of brand awareness, associations, reputation, and brand–self connection can sufficiently (all the solutions’
consistency scores are above 0.80) lead to a relationship with the brand.

Consumers’ brand–self connection plays a dominant role as a core cause
in both countries, such that, in combination with their brand awareness, favorable brand associations and brand reputation in either the
core or peripheral role produce consumers’ relationship with the brand,
in support of H3.
4.2. Predicting high scores in OBE and consumers’ behavioral outcomes:
similarities and differences between countries
Table 5 summarizes the results for H4, which suggests that the three
building blocks of BBB, BUB, and BRB sufficiently predict consumers’
OBE. In both countries, a configuration of the elements of BBB, BUB and
BRB (Greece: overall coverage = 0.50, overall consistency = .83, Germany: overall coverage = .49, overall consistency = .87) leads to high
scores in consumers’ OBE providing support to H4.
Multiple combinations of BBB, BUB and BRB elements lead to high
scores in consumers’ OBE in both countries highlighting the idiosyncratic nature of the phenomenon. The results detect three solutions in
both Greece and Germany that lead to high scores in consumers’ OBE in
both countries. More importantly, the first solution in both Greece and
Germany constitutes the most empirically relevant one with high consistency (Greece = 0.88; Germany = 0.86), coverage (Greece = 0.44;
Germany = 0.42),
and
unique
coverage
(Greece = 0.19;
Germany = 0.16). Solution 1 demonstrates that the OBE building process remains the same in both countries in terms of the contribution of
brand elements from BBB, BUB and BRB blocks. However, the detection
of the core and periphery models further inform us about the

Table 4
Core Periphery Models of BUB Predicting High Scores in BRB (H3).

Notes: The black circles indicate the presence of a condition, and circles with “x” indicate its absence. The large circles indicate core conditions; the
small circles indicate peripheral conditions. Blank spaces in a pathway indicate “don't care”. The analysis of necessary conditions (NC) does not
confirm the existence of any NC.

335

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Table 5
Core Periphery Models of BBB, BUB, and BRB Predicting High Scores in consumers’ OBE and consumers’
behavioral outcomes (H4, H5).

Note: The black circles indicate the presence of a condition. The large circles indicate core conditions; the
small circles indicate peripheral conditions. Blank spaces in a pathway indicate “don't care”. The analysis of
necessary conditions (NC) does not confirm the existence of any NC.

substantial differences in the OBE building process between Greece and
Germany. Fig. 2 provides a diagrammatical representation of these results. Specifically, in Greece brand-self connection and consumers’ relationship with the brand in terms of brand trust, intimacy, relevance
and partner quality constitute core causes towards high scores in consumers’ OBE. The results further suggest that Greek consumers recognize as strong those brands that have a personal meaning to them
and have, over time, developed a relationship with them.
In contrast, the CBBE building process in Germany highlights the
core role of brand functional characteristics, consumers’ brand- self
connection, brand reputation and the relational components of brand
trust and relevance. In other words, building strong brands in Germany
is based on the functional brand characteristics of quality, competitive
advantage and leadership around which consumers’ perceptions revolve. Thus, the CBBE building process in Germany is grounded on
consumers’ attention to the superiority of the brand’s functional characteristics, which signal reputable brands that consumers’ find closer to
the way they recognize themselves and build their relationship with the
brand in terms of brand trust and relevance.
In addition, Table 5 summarizes the results for H5, which suggest
that OBE in terms of the elements included in the aforementioned CBBE
processes can sufficiently predict consumers’ behavioral outcomes in

both Greece and Germany. Two solutions in Greece and three in Germany can sufficiently explain consumers’ intention to pay a premium
price. As Fig. 2 demonstrates, solution 1 in both countries is the most
empirically relevant with high consistency (Greece = 0.83; Germany = .82), coverage (Greece = .55; Germany = .35), and unique
coverage (Greece = .38; Germany = .11) explaining the majority of
consumers’ intention to pay more for a brand in both countries. The
results demonstrate that consumers’ intention to pay a premium price
presupposes the development of a close relationship with the brand in
terms of brand intimacy and relevance in both countries.
Specifically, the results show that Greek consumers are willing to
pay a premium price only for brands they have already developed a
relationship with in terms of brand relevance and intimacy. In contrast,
German consumers are willing to pay a premium price only for wellregarded brands with superior functional characteristics, which have a
personal meaning to them and with which they have developed relational ties in terms of brand trust, intimacy and partner quality. The
latter demonstrates another aspect in their relationship with the brand,
which highlights that the majority of German consumers’ need to feel
that the brand treats them as valued customers and that they haven’t
felt dissatisfied with any brand episodes for a long time (partner
quality).

336

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Fig. 2. Diagrammatic representation of the most empirically relevant Core Periphery Models of BBB, BUB, and BRB Predicting High Scores in consumers’ OBE and
consumer behavioral outcomes in Greece and Germany (H4, H5).
Notes: The large circles and letters represent core causal conditions whilst the small circles and letter demonstrate peripheral conditions.
IM= Imagery brand characteristics; F= Brand functional characteristics; R=Brand reputation; AW=Brand awareness; ASS=Brand favorable associations;
SC=Brand-self connection; T=Brand trust; REL=Brand relevance; I= Brand intimacy; PQ=Brand partner quality.

In addition, brand recommendation has a different building process
in both countries. The results detect three solutions in Greece and two
in Germany that can sufficiently explain consumers’ brand recommendation. Solution 1 in Greece (consistency = 0.89; coverage =
0.45; and unique coverage = 0.14) demonstrates that Greek consumers
recommend brands that they can strongly rely on and feel that they
continually treat them as valued customers. Therefore, Greek consumers’ recommendations could be viewed as an action of appreciation
and gratitude towards a brand/company that has treated them as valued customers over time. In contrast, solution 1 (consistency = 0.83;
coverage = .31; and unique coverage = .23) in Germany indicates that

the majority of German consumers engaged in a recommendation activity only for brands that have a personal meaning for them, especially
in terms of the brand abstract and imagery characteristics (brand personality, nostalgia and heritage).
Finally, two solutions in Greece (overall consistency = 0.80; overall
coverage = 0.66) sufficiently explain Greek consumers’ intention to repurchase the brand. Specifically, the results demonstrate that consumers in Greece decide to re-purchase a brand based either on a
combination of brand reputation and their favorable associations with
the peripheral role of brand-self connection (solution 1, raw consistency = 0.84; raw coverage = 0.47; unique coverage = 0.13) or base
337

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

their re-purchasing decisions on the fact that these products are personally relevant to them and they feel emotionally attached to them
(solution 2, raw consistency = 0.80; raw coverage = .52; unique coverage = .18). In Germany solution 1 constitutes the most empirically
relevant solution (raw consistency = .83; raw coverage = .37; unique
coverage = .11), which explains that German consumers make a repurchase decision for highly regarded brands in terms of their functional characteristics, with which they have also developed relational
ties in terms of brand trust and relevance.
In a nutshell, the results demonstrate the way that consumers’
perceptions regarding different brand qualities interact in order to
produce OBE and behavioral outcomes. Greek consumers focused
mainly on their relational bonds with the brand in order to make brand
–related decisions, demonstrating the importance of their personal attachment with the brand in any effort to build OBE and behave in a
favorable way towards the brand. In contrast, German consumers use,
in most cases, a combination of BBB, BUB and BRB elements in order to
build OBE and make brand decisions demonstrating a well-structured,
integrated cognitive-affective-conative approach in all their decisions,
except brand recommendation. Recommending a brand in Germany is
seen as an expression and enhancement of consumers’ self-image which
is grounded mainly on the abstract characteristics of the brand.

different constellations of brand concepts emerge as core causes for
each outcome (and in each country) further attesting to the complexity
of the phenomenon. Greek consumers, consistent with collectivistic
cultures, are more willing to pay a premium for brands they have a
close relationship with. German consumers follow a more integrated
pathway to price premium intention that combines elements from all
three CBBE building blocks, suggesting a more rational and informed
way of making this type of decision consistent with individualistic nations (Choi et al., 1997; Stern & Resnik, 1991). Similar to price premium intention, Greek consumers intend to recommend brands based
on relational CBBE elements. Interestingly, the role of functional
characteristics is less pivotal in German consumers’ intention to recommend a brand where imagery brand characteristics and brand- self
connection are key considerations. Brand recommendation arguably
occurs as an action of a personal statement for Germans since they are
willing to recommend brands that portray and reinforce their identity
through brand imagery, symbolic characteristics, which are perceived
by them to be similar to their own self-image (Tuškej et al., 2013).
Finally, Greek consumers follow one of two pathways to repurchase a
brand – one relational, and one more cognitive pathway based on brand
associations and reputation. Consistent with individualistic cultures
who are more likely to gravitate on information and the properties of
brands (Laroche et al., 2005), German consumers once again anchor on
the functional characteristics of the brand via which the reputation of
the brand is built which ultimately leads to a relationship.
This research also contributes to the debate on standardization
versus adaptation by showing that when it comes to brand strategies,
standardization and adaptation could harmoniously coexist
(Theodosiou & Leonidou, 2003) for high levels of overall brand equity.
The results provide theoretical substantiation to the fundamental issue
that researchers have recognized but so far neglected to investigate by
insisting on a “one-size-fits-all” linear solution. The findings complement and extend previous research that suggests that it is irrational for
brands to totally standardize their approach, except under a clearly
defined set of circumstances and in certain contexts and product categories (Alashban, Hayes, Zinkhan, & Balazs, 2002; Douglas & Wind,
1987; Vrontis, Thrassou, & Lamprianou, 2009).

5. Discussion
5.1. Theoretical implications
This study builds on and extends a recently published, process-focused CBBE model in a cross-national context with a view to (a) test its
robustness in an international environment and assess its usefulness as a
diagnostic tool for monitoring and managing brands internationally;
and (b) illuminate the underlying mechanism by which the CBBE process results in key consumer outcomes and identify cross-country differences. We tested the proposed CBBE model with data from two national contexts (i.e., Germany and Greece). The results show that the
model remains robust in explaining CBBE across the two countries. The
confirmation of the research hypotheses underlying the model’s rationale underscores the structural power and operationalization of each of
the three building blocks—BBB, BUB, and BRB—throughout the entire
CBBE building process in relation to different national contexts. The
findings indicate that the architecture of this process is not necessarily
stepwise but rather dynamic, allowing the effects of each building block
to contribute directly to the building of overall CBBE.
The study’s results, which reveal the differences and similarities
between the national contexts and among consumers within these
contexts, highlight the idiosyncratic nature of the various brand equity
components and overall CBBE in an increasingly global environment.
Specifically, brand-self connection, relevance and trust are identified as
common core causes of CBBE in both Greece and Germany.
Nonetheless, Greek consumers follow a more relational pathway to
CBBE whilst German consumers kick off the CBBE process with an
evaluation of the brand’s functional characteristics that subsequently
informs the brand’s reputation assessment. This is consistent with previous research (e.g., Laroche et al., 2005) highlighting that collectivistic
cultures, such as Greece, tend to pay attention to relationships and base
their purchase decisions more on feelings and trust while individualistic
cultures, such as Germany, are more information-focused (Choi et al.,
1997) and gravitate toward a brand’s added values and abstract personality traits (Laroche et al., 2005).
Acknowledging that CBBE is rarely an end goal in itself, this study
shows that the CBBE building process is capable of predicting significant consumer behavioral outcomes (i.e., intention to pay a price
premium, to recommend, and to purchase). Nonetheless, no single
theoretical solution is able to predict all three outcomes; instead,

5.2. Managerial implications
The proposed model provides a pre-eminence in terms of managerial implications, indicating multiple solutions to manage strong brands
at both the national and international levels. Specifically, this study is
the first to empirically show that though strong brands have some ingredients of brand success in common (e.g., brand- self connection,
relevance, and trust), it is the ‘recipe’ and not the ingredients per se that
allow them to build their own brand success story. Thus, the study
significantly contributes to international businesses’ strategic objectives
to build a global, strong brand on the basis of international core elements of success (i.e., common patterns among different national contexts) and to sustain a successful competitive brand positioning by
identifying and managing their own ‘recipe’ of success.
The rationale of the CBBE model can also help brand managers
overcome the difficulties in implementing the mission of globally successful brands (e.g., “think globally, act locally”) by providing an optimum diagnostic tool. By supporting the idea of brand success uniqueness under the prism of global common patterns, the CBBE can aid
managers in mapping and designing new international and national
brand landscapes, including specificities of the national context, competitive brands, and their own brand. This is essential and can further
support brand managers’ desire to achieve brand success in the international business environment. Differences between Greek and German
consumers, as suggested by the findings, necessitate brand managers to
(a) highlight the relational elements of the CBBE process in

338

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

collectivistic cultures, and (b) emphasize the functional brand characteristics in individualistic cultures.
Finally, the study contributes to building and managing global
brand architecture by offering a tool that can inform decisions about
the management of brand portfolios across countries. Applying the
model to different units of analysis, for example product category, helps
brand managers identify common patterns or their brands’ differential
positioning. In addition, brand managers could detect brands within
their portfolio that are probably too similar in terms of their brand
equity structure and, as such, could cannibalize each other. At the same
time, managers could use this tool to structure international brand
management teams in a customer-centric way by identifying and
grouping markets on the basis of similarities of their brand equity
composition.

Another limitation of the present study concerns the focus on a
single cultural dimension (individualism/collectivism) to explain cross
country differences vis-à-vis the CBBE development process and the
configurations that lead to key consumer behavioral outcomes. Other
dimensions of culture, such as uncertainty avoidance and power distance previously linked to cross-cultural patterns of brand perceptions
and choices may further illuminate the role of culture in the development of CBBE and consumer behavioral outcomes. While we recognize
that different approaches exist to capture culture, this study employs
Hofstede (1984), Hofstede Insights (2018) scores to classify Greece and
Germany as two countries with dissimilar scores on individualism/
collectivism. Other studies are encouraged to replicate these findings by
measuring culture at the individual consumer level.
Furthermore, the potential applicability of the proposed model’s
rationale in other branding phenomena (e.g., negative CBBE, corporate
branding, cobranding, brand cannibalization) would provide insightful
ideas toward the substantial improvement of brand theory and practice.
This study focuses on consumers’ favorite brands (i.e., successful
brands). Of relevant interest would be to examine negative CBBE to
determine whether this is an outcome of poor scores in the building
blocks or whether a different process underlies the construct in both
national and international markets.
Finally, research could adopt the same methodology to develop similar frameworks to understand brand equity from the perspective of
other stakeholders, such as employees. This would be particularly
useful for multinational enterprises as it could help inform adaptations
to internal branding programs and other human resource initiatives
delivered to internal stakeholders in different countries.

5.3. Limitations and suggestions for further research
The study’s results advance the discussion on brand equity by encouraging researchers to rethink CBBE as a complex and dynamic
process that leads to significant consumer behavioral outcomes and by
providing insights into its applicability in the international environment. However, given that the focus of this study is on consumers’ most
favorable brand choice, replicating the study using a group of specific
competitive brands or particular brand cases would be beneficial and
add to the model’s robustness and usefulness in offering managerial
implications. This study focuses on a cross-sectional research design.
However, the dynamic nature and longer-term perspective of CBBE
makes a longitudinal assessment of the initial CBBE building process of
new brands in the market an essential future research priority. How
stable is this process over time, and what elements in the environment
other than national culture affect the significance of the ingredients
within each block? Which ‘recipes’ are stable over time, and which are
more temporal or prone to environmental or situational factors?

Funding
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research
Council [RES-000-22-3431].

Appendix A

Table A1
Samples’ Demographic Profiles.
Germany (n = 301)

Gender
Age

Education

Income

Male
Female
18–24
25–44
45–64
65+
Higher degree
and postgraduate
qualification
Degree or degree
equivalent
School leaving
certificate
Other
Lower than
€10,000
€10,000–20,000
€20,001–30,000
€30,001–40,000
€40,001–50,000
€50,001–60,000
€60,001–70,000
€70,000+

Greece (n = 312)

Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Percentage

138
163
46
94
87
74
10

45.8
54.2
15.3
31.2
28.9
24.6
3.3

159
153
54
113
85
60
25

51
49
17.3
36.2
27.2
19.2
8.0

71

23.6

120

38.5

187

62.1

107

34.3

33
74

11.0
24.6

57
122

18.3
39.1

71
39
29
38
32
17
1

23.6
13.0
9.7
12.6
10.6
5.6
.3

97
49
22
11
6
5
–

31.1
15.7
7.1
3.5
1.9
1.6
–

339

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Table A2
Consumers’ Responses to Different Product Categories.
Germany (n = 301)

Shampoos
Consumer Electronics
Coffee Houses
Mobile Networks
Banks
Internet Retailers
Total

Greece (n = 312)

Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Percentage

109
35
40
53
46
18
301

36.2
11.6
13.3
17.6
15.3
6.0
100

79
48
30
75
60
20
312

25.3
15.4
9.6
24.0
19.2
6.4
100

Table A3
Study’s Measures.
Constructs
Brand
Building
Block (BBB)

Items
Brand Heritage
Brand Personality

Brand Nostalgia
Brand Perceived Quality

Brand Leadership
Brand Competitive Advantage
Brand
Understanding
Block (BUB)

Brand Awareness
Brand Associations
Brand Reputation
Brand-Self Connection

Brand
Relationship
Block (BRB)

Partner Quality
Brand Intimacy
Brand Trust
Brand Relevance

Overall brand equity

Intention to pay more

Brand
Recommendation
Intention to re-purchase

This is a brand whose history is important.
This brand has a long history.
This brand has been around for a long time GE = .915; GR = .906
This brand has a strong personality.
This brand has a distinct personality.
I can describe this brand with adjectives I would use to describe a person.
GE = .828; GR = .788
This brand reminds me of things I have done or places I have been.
This brand reminds me of a certain period of my life. GE = .865; GR = .872
This brand is good quality.
This brand has excellent features.
Compared to other brands in its category, this brand is of very high quality.
GE = .831; GR = .854
This brand is a leading brand in its category.
This brand is leading its category.
This brand tends to outperform its competitors. GE = .814; GR = .885
This brand has a clear advantage over competitive brands.
There is a distinct benefit from using this brand over other brands.
This brand is superior to other brands in its category. GE = .898; GR = .899
I have heard of this brand.
I am quite familiar with this brand.
I can recognize this brand among other brands. GE = .754; GR = .737
This brand has strong associations.
This brand has favorable associations.
It is clear what this brand stands for. GE = .842; GR = .890
This brand is highly regarded.
This brand has status.
This brand has a good reputation. GE = .820; GR = .843
This brand and I have lots in common.
This brand reminds me of who I am. GE = .908; GR = .880
This brand has always been good to me.
This brand treats me as important and valuable customer/user GE = .802; GR = .786
I really empathize with this brand.
It feels like I know this brand for a long time. GE = .810; GR = .807
This brand delivers what it promises.
This brand's product claims are believable.
This brand has a name you can trust. GE = .852; GR = .880
This brand is relevant to my family and/or close friends.
This brand fits my lifestyle.
This brand has personal relevance to me. GE = .858; GR = .903
It makes sense to buy this brand instead of any other brand, even if they are the same.
Even if another brand has the same features as this, I would prefer to buy this brand.
If there is another brand as good as this, I prefer to buy this brand.
If another brand is not different from this in any way, it seems smarter to purchase/use this one. GE = .918; GR = .921
The price of this brand would have to go up quite a bit before I would switch to another brand in this category
I am willing to pay a higher price for this brand than for other brands in this category
I am willing to pay a lot more for this brand than other brands in this category
GE = .870; GR = .801
I would recommend this brand to friends and relatives
I will speak positively about this brand
I intend to encourage other people to buy this brand GE = .894; GR = .911
It is very unlikely/very likely to repurchase this brand

340

341

1.23
1.15
1.87
1.05
1.24
1.07
.97
1.12
1.74
1.52
1.52
1.52
1.71
1.00
1.44
1.50
1.26
1.41

1.68
1.45
1.81
.94
1.27
1.16
1.06
1.29
1.58
1.45
1.61
1.66
1.66
1.01
1.61
1.56
1.33
1.25

SD

1
.545**
.341**
.487**
.551**
.592**
.356**
.619**
.409**
.424**
.469**
.460**
.452**
.533**
.504**
.445**
.462**
.370**

1
.286**
.252**
.388**
.393**
.370**
.133*
.511**
.370**
.265**
.490**
.427**
.497**
.421**
.410**
.262**
.224**
.065

1

1
.307**
.528**
.604**
.614**
.466**
.659**
.367**
.537**
.520**
.433**
.414**
.575**
.542**
.397**
.538**
.349**

1
.372**
.342**
.491**
.384**
.210**
.531**
.471**
.467**
.440**
.421**
.485**
.275**
.419**
.337**
.471**
.147*

2

1
.282**
.326**
.303**
.147**
.342**
.688**
.380**
.558**
.599**
.651**
.356**
.440**
.550**
.394**
.169**

1
.154**
.210**
.238**
.089
.301**
.684**
.348**
.471**
.446**
.529**
.209**
.407**
.496**
.338**
.090

3

1
.700**
.660**
.471**
.702**
.367**
.486**
.515**
.476**
.449**
.742**
.503**
.337**
.390**
.362**

1
.627**
.538**
.264**
.510**
.278**
.317**
.453**
.452**
.465**
.656**
.503**
.420**
.407**
.347**

4

1
.756**
.424**
.733**
.375**
.520**
.502**
.493**
.481**
.673**
.587**
.517**
.584**
.411**

1
.645**
.246**
.665**
.287**
.343**
.466**
.464**
.472**
.536**
.529**
.474**
.389**
.313**

5

1
.492**
.701**
.345**
.471**
.455**
.491**
.424**
.641**
.551**
.468**
.605**
.439**

1
.292**
.602**
.285**
.339**
.443**
.439**
.415**
.495**
.515**
.370**
.302**
.204**

6

1
.454**
.142*
.465**
.264**
.266**
.235**
.476**
.278**
.207**
.347**
.382**

1
.180**
.040
.497**
.274**
.159**
.176**
.417**
.266**
.222**
.196**
.156**

7

1
.403**
.507**
.549**
.502**
.472**
.688**
.481**
.416**
.555**
.381**

1
.434**
.403**
.485**
.490**
.539**
.487**
.494**
.380**
.364**
.138*

8

1
.333**
.747**
.654**
.736**
.406**
.515**
.524**
.486**
.276**

1
.300**
.634**
.597**
.581**
.258**
.506**
.497**
.495**
.175**

9

1
.460**
.364**
.441**
.517**
.445**
.390**
.501**
.376**

1
.369**
.357**
.384**
.394**
.348**
.330**
.325**
.256**

10

1
.691**
.716**
.538**
.574**
.504**
.521**
.296**

1
.627**
.591**
.467**
.606**
.492**
.398**
.238**

11

1
.701**
.601**
.571**
.539**
.581**
.299**

1
.673**
.469**
.617**
.529**
.469**
.277**

12

1
.535**
.640**
.598**
.608**
.364**

1
.485**
.621**
.509**
.454**
.250**

13

1
.611**
.502**
.728**
.539**

1
.516**
.369**
.411**
.406**

14

1
650**
.690**
.516**

1
.642**
.570**
.349**

15

1
.586**
.368**

1
.394**
.280**

16

1
.525**

1
.319**

17

Notes: OBE = Overall brand equity; Price_p = consumers’ intention to pay more; Recomm. = consumers’ intention to recommend the brand; Re-purchase = consumers’ intention to re-purchase the brand.
* Correlations are significant at the 0.05 level.
** Correlations are significant at the 0.01 level.

5.64
5.59
3.79
5.79
5.36
5.63
6.07
5.80
4.05
5.01
4.72
4.81
4.38
5.74
5.03
4.24
5.44
5.91

4.55
4.57
2.92
5.57
5.00
5.17
6.05
4.76
2.87
4.89
3.82
4.18
4.08
5.52
4.13
3.46
4.59
6.05

Heritage
Personality
Nostalgia
Quality
Comp_adv
Leadership
Awareness
Reputation
Self_con.
Associations
Intimacy
Partner_q
Relevance
Trust
OBE
Price_p
Recomm.
Re-purchase

Heritage
Personality
Nostalgia
Quality
Comp_adv
Leadership
Awareness
Reputation
Self_con.
Associations
Intimacy
Partner_q
Relevance
Trust
OBE
Price_p
Recomm.
Re-purchase

Mean

Germany

Table A4
Correlations among the Study’s Conditions.

1

1

18

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

References

Elbedweihy, A., Jayawardhena, C., Elsharnouby, M. H., & Elsharnouby, T. H. (2016).
Customer relationship building: The role of brand attractiveness and consumer-brand
identification. Journal of Business Research, 69, 2901–2910.
Farquhar, P. H. (1989). Managing brand equity. Marketing Research, 1(3), 24–33.
Fischer, D. G., & Fick, C. (1993). Measuring social desirability: Short forms of the marlowe-crowne social desirability scale. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
53(2), 417–424.
Fiss, P. C. (2011). Building better casual theories: A fuzzy set approach to typologies in
organizational research. Academy of Management Journal, 54(2), 393–420.
Ford, J., Mueller, B., Taylor, C., & Hollis, N. (2011). The tension between strategy and
execution: Challenges for International advertising research—Globalization is much
more than universal branding. Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 27–41.
Goertz, G., & Starr, H. (2003). Necessary conditions: Theory, methodology, and applications.
Lanham, Md. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gounaris, S., Chatzipanagiotou, K., Boukis, A., & Perks, H. (2016). Unfolding the recipes
for conflict resolution during the New service development effort. Journal of Business
Research, 69(10), 4042–4055.
Graeff, T. R. (1997). Consumption situations and the effects of brand image on consumers’
brand evaluations. Psychology & Marketing, 14(1), 49–70.
Haumann, T., Quaiser, B., Wieseke, J., & Rese, M. (2014). Footprints in the sands of time:
A comparative analysis of the effectiveness of customer satisfaction and customercompany identification over time. Journal of Marketing, 78(6), 78–102.
Heinberga, M., Ozkayab, E., & Taubec, M. (2018). Do corporate image and reputation
drive brand equity in India and China? - Similarities and differences. Journal of
Business Research, 86, 259–268.
Henderson, G., Iacobucci, D., & Calder, B. (1998). Brand diagnostics: Mapping branding
effect using consumer associative networks. European Journal of Operational Research,
111(2), 306–327.
Henderson, G., Iacobucci, D., & Calder, B. (2002). Using network analysis to understand
brands. In S. Broniarczyk, & K. Nakamoto (Vol. Eds.), Advances in consumer research:
Vol. 29, (pp. 397–405). Valdosta, GA: Association for Consumer Research.
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic wordof-mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate
themselves on the internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52.
Hofstede Insights, https://www.hofstede-insights.com/product/compare-countries/ (visited 21 May 2018).
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE.
Hofstede, G. (1984). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values
(2nd ed.). Beverly Hills CA.
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (2004). Culture,
leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Hsieh, M. H. (2002). Identifying brand image dimensionality and measuring the degree of
brand globalization: A cross-national study. Journal of International Marketing, 10(2),
46–67.
Hsieh, M. H. (2004). Measuring global brand equity using cross-national survey data.
Journal of International Marketing, 12(2), 28–57.
Ioannou, M., & Rusu, O. (2012). Consumer-based brand equity: A cross-cultural perspective. Journal of Promotion Management, 18(3), 344–360.
John, D. R., Loken, B., Kim, K., & Monga, A. B. (2006). brand concept maps: A methodology for identifying brand association networks. Journal of Marketing Research,
43(4), 549–563.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. (1978). The social psychology of organizations (2d ed.). New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Keller, K. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand
equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Keller, K. (2001). Building customer-based brand equity: A blueprint for creating strong
brands. Marketing Management, (July/August), 15–19.
Keller, K., & Lehmann, D. (2006). Brands and branding: Research findings and future
priorities. Marketing Science, 25(6), 740–759.
Kim, U., Park, Y.-S., & Park, D. (2000). The challenge of cross-cultural psychology. Journal
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31(January), 63–75.
Krishnan, S. (1996). Characteristics of memory associations: A consumer-based brand
equity perspective. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 13(4), 389–405.
Laroche, M., Kalamas, M., & Cleveland, M. (2005). “I” versus “we” how individualists and
collectivists use information sources to formulate their service expectations.
International Marketing Review, 22(3), 279–308.
Lehmann, D., Keller, K., & Farley, J. (2008). The structure of survey-based brand metrics.
Journal of International Marketing, 16(4), 29–56.
Lieven, T., & Hildebrand, C. (2016). The impact of brand gender on brand equity.
International Marketing Review, 33(2), 178–195.
Lindell, M., & Whitney, D. (2001). Accounting for common method variance in crosssectional research designs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 114–121.
Madden, T., Roth, M., & Dillon, W. (2012). Global product quality and corporate social
responsibility perceptions: A cross-national study of halo effects. Journal of
International Marketing, 20(1), 42–57.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition,
emotion and motivation. Psychological Review, 98(6), 224–253. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0033-295X.98.2.224.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically versus analytically: Comparing
the context sensitivity of Japanese and americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81(5), 922–934.
McCort, D. J., & Malhotra, N. K. (1993). Culture and consumer behavior: Toward an
understanding of cross-cultural consumer behavior in international marketing.
Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 6(2), 91–127.
McWilliam, G. (1993). Tale of Two gurus: Aaker and kapferer on brands: Review of D.A.

Aaker, D. (1991). Managing brand equity: Capitalizing on the value of a brand name. New
York: The Free Press.
Aaker, J. L., & Maheswaran, D. (1997). The effect of cultural orientation on persuasion.
Journal of Consumer Research, 24(3), 315–328.
Aaker, J. L., & Schmitt, B. H. (1997). The influence of culture on the self-expressive use of
brands. In J. W. Alba, & J. W. Hutchinson (Vol. Eds.), Advances in consumer research,
association for consumer research, provo, UT: Vol. 25, (pp. 12–). .
Agarwal, M., & Rao, V. R. (1996). An empirical comparison of consumer-based measures
of brand equity. Marketing Letters, 7(3), 237–247.
Alashban, A. A., Hayes, L. A., Zinkhan, J. M., & Balazs, A. L. (2002). International brandname Standardization/Adaptation: antecedents and consequences. Journal of
International Marketing, 10(3), 22–48.
Arnett, D., German, B., & Hunt, S. D. (2003). The identity salience model of relationship
marketing success: The case of nonprofit marketing. Journal of Marketing, 67(2),
89–105.
Berg-Schlosser, D., & De Meur, G. (2009). Comparative research design: Case and variable
selection. In B. Rihoux, & C. Ragin (Eds.). Configurational comparative methods:
Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) and related techniques (pp. 19–32). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bock, P. K. (1994). Introduction: Universal and particular. In P. K. Bock (Ed.). Handbook
of psychological anthropology (pp. x–xix). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Brady, M. K., Cronin, J. J., Jr, Fox, G. L., & Roehm, M. L. (2008). Strategies to offset
performance failures: The role of brand equity. Journal of Retailing, 84(2), 51–164.
Brislin, R. (1980). Translation and content analysis of oral and written material. In H. C.
Triandis, & J. W. Berry (Eds.). Handbook of Cross-cultural psychology (pp. 389–444).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Brodbeck, F. C., Frese, M., Akerblom, S., Audia, G., Bakacsi, G., Bendova, H., et al. (2000).
Cultural variation of leadership prototypes across 22 European countries. Journal of
Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 73(1), 1–29.
Brown, R. (2000). Social identity theory: Past achievements, current problems and future
challenges. European Journal of Social Psychology, 30, 745–778.
Broyles, A., Leingpibul, T., Ross, R., & Foster, B. (2010). Brand equity’s Antecedent/
Consequence relationships in cross-cultural settings. Journal of Product & Brand
Management, 19(3), 159–169.
Buil, I., Martínez, E., & de Chernatony, L. (2008). A Cross-national validation of the
consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 17(6),
384–392.
Buil, I., Martínez, E., & de Chernatony, L. (2013). The influence of brand equity on
customer responses. Journal of Customer Marketing, 30(1), 62–74.
Chatzipanagiotou, K., Veloutsou, C., & Christodoulides, G. (2016). Decoding the complexity of the consumer-based brand equity process. Journal of Business Research,
69(11), 5479–5486.
Chaudhuri, A. (2002). How brand reputation affects the advertising-brand equity link.
Journal of Advertising Research, 42(2), 33–43.
Cheung, G., & Rensvold, R. (2002). Evaluating goodness-of-fit indexes for testing measurement invariance. Structural Equation Modeling, 9(2), 233–255.
Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Smith, E. E. (1997). Culture, category salience, and inductive
reasoning. Cognition, 65, 15–32.
Christensen, G., & Olson, J. (2002). Mapping consumers’ mental models with ZMET.
Psychology & Marketing, 19(6), 477–501.
Christodoulides, G., & de Chernatony, L. (2010). Consumer-based brand equity conceptualisation and measurement. International Journal of Market Research, 52(1),
43–66.
Christodoulides, G., Cadogan, J., & Veloutsou, C. (2015). Consumer-based brand equity
measurement: Lessons learned from an International study. International Marketing
Review, 32(3/4), 307–328.
Christodoulides, G., de Chernatony, L., Furrer, O., & Abimbola, T. (2006).
Conceptualising and measuring the equity of online brands. Journal of Marketing
Management, 22(7/8), 799–825.
Çifci, S., Ekinci, Y., Whyatt, G., Japutra, A., Molinillo, S., & Siala, H. (2016). A cross
validation of consumer-based brand equity models: Driving customer equity in retail
brands. Journal of Business Research, 69(9), 3740–3747.
Cobb-Walgren, C. J., Ruble, C. A., & Donthu, N. (1995). Brand equity, brand preference,
and purchase intent. Journal of Advertising, 24(3), 25–40.
Crowne, D., & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of
psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24, 349–354.
Datta, H., Ailawadi, K., & van Heerde, H. (2017). How well does consumer-based brand
equity align with sales-based brand equity and marketing-mix response? Journal of
Marketing, 81(3), 1–20.
Davvetas, V., & Diamantopoulos, A. (2017). “Regretting your brand-self?” The moderating role of consumer-brand identification on consumer responses to purchase regret. Journal of Business Research, 80, 218–227.
De Mooij, M., & Hofstede, G. (2010). The Hofstede model: Applications to global branding
and advertising strategy and research. International Journal of Advertising, 29(1),
85–110.
De Mooij, M., & Hofstede, G. (2011). Cross-cultural consumer behavior: A review of research findings. Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 23(3-4), 181–192.
Douglas, S., & Wind, Y. (1987). The myth of globalization. Columbia Journal of World
Business, 22(4), 19–29.
Erdem, T., & Swait, J. (1998). Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 7(2), 131–157.
Erdem, T., Swait, J., & Valenzuela, A. (2006). Brands as signals: A cross-country validation study. Journal of Marketing, 70(January), 34–49.

342

International Business Review 28 (2019) 328–343

K. Chatzipanagiotou et al.

Short, J., Payne, T., & Ketchen, D. (2008). Research on organizational configurations: Past
accomplishments and future challenges. Journal of Management, 34(6), 1053–1079.
Skaaning, S. E. (2011). Assessing the robustness of crisp-set and fuzzy-set QCA results.
Sociological Methods & Research, 40(2), 391–408.
Smit, E., Bronner, F., & Tolboom, M. (2007). Brand relationship quality and its value for
personal contact. Journal of Business Research, 60(6), 627–633.
Steenkamp, J. B., & Baumgartner, H. (1998). Assessing measurement invariance in crossnational research. Journal of Consumer Research, 25(1), 78–90.
Steensma, H., Kevin, L., Marino, K., Weaver, M., & Dickson, P. H. (2000). The influence of
national culture on the formation of technology alliances by entrepreneurial firms.
Academy of Management Journal, 43(5), 951–973.
Stern, B. L., & Resnik, A. J. (1991). Information content in television advertising: A replication and extension. Journal of Advertising Research, 31(3), 36–46.
Stokburger-Sauer, N. E., Ratneshwar, S., & Sen, S. (2012). Drivers of customer-brand
identification. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29(4), 406–418.
Sung, Y., & Tinkham, S. F. (2005). Brand personality structures in the United States and
Korea: Common and culture-specific factors. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(4),
334–350.
Talay, B., Townsend, J., & Yeniyurt, S. (2015). Global brand architecture position and
Market-based performance: The moderating role of culture. Journal of International
Marketing, 23(2), 55–72.
Teichert, T., & Schöntag, K. (2010). Exploring consumer knowledge structures using associative network analysis. Psychology & Marketing, 27(4), 369–398.
Theodosiou, M., & Leonidou, L. (2003). Standardization versus adaptation of
International marketing strategy: An integrative assessment of the empirical research.
International Business Review, 12(2), 141–171.
Torres, P., Augusto, M., & Godinho, P. (2017). Predicting high consumer-brand identification and high repurchase: Necessary and sufficient conditions. Journal of Business
Research, 79, 52–65.
Townsend, J., Yeniyurt, S., & Talay, B. (2009). Getting to global: An evolutionary perspective of brand expansion in International markets. Journal of International Business
Studies, 40(2), 301–320.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Triandis, H. C. (1989). The self and social behavior in differing cultural contexts.
Psychological Review, 96(3), 506–520.
Tuškej, U., Golob, U., & Podnar, K. (2013). The role of consumer–brand identification in
building brand relationships. Journal of Business Research, 66(1), 53–59.
Vrontis, D., Thrassou, A., & Lamprianou, I. (2009). International marketing adaptation
versus standardisation of multinational companies. International Marketing Review,
26(4/5), 477–500.
Vukasović, T. (2016). An empirical investigation of brand equity: A cross-country validation analysis. Journal of Global Marketing, 29(5), 251–264.
Wagemann, C., & Schneider, C. (2010). Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) and
fuzzy-sets: Agenda for a research approach and a data analysis technique.
Comparative Sociology, 9(3), 376–396.
Williams, L., Hartman, N., & Cavazotte, F. (2010). Method variance and marker variables:
A review and comprehensive CFA marker technique. Organizational Research Methods,
13(3), 477–514.
Woodside, A. (2013). Moving beyond multiple regression analysis to algorithms: Calling
for a paradigm shift from symmetric to asymmetric thinking in data analysis, and
crafting theory. Journal of Business Research, 66, 463–472.
Woodside, A. (2014). Embrace•Perform•Model: Complexity theory, contrarian case analysis, and multiple realities. Journal of Business Research, 67(12), 2495–2503.
Wuyts, S., & Geyskens, I. (2005). The formation of Buyer–Seller relationships: Detailed
contract drafting and close partner selection. Journal of Marketing, 69(October),
103–117.
Yoo, B., & Donthu, N. (2001). Developing and validating a multidimensional consumerbased brand equity scale. Journal of Business Research, 52(1), 1–14.
Yoo, B., & Donthu, N. (2002). Testing cross-cultural invariance of the brand equity
creation process. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 11(6), 380–398.
Yoo, B., Donthu, N., & Lee, S. (2000). An examination of selected marketing mix elements
and brand equity. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(2), 195–211.
Zhang, S., van Doorn, J., & Leeflang, P. (2014). Does the importance of value, brand and
relationship equity for customer loyalty differ between Eastern and Western cultures?
International Business Review, 23(1), 284–292.

Aaker ‘Managing brand equity’ and J-N kapferer ‘Strategic brand management’.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10(1), 105–111.
Monga, A. B., & John, D. R. (2006). Cultural differences in brand extension evaluation:
The influence of analytic versus holistic thinking. Journal of Consumer Research,
33(4), 529–536.
Mishra, A., Dash, S. B., & Cyr, D. (2014). Linking user experience and consumer-based
brand equity: The moderating role of consumer expertise and lifestyle. Journal of
Product & Brand Management, 23(4/5), 333–348.
Mizik, N., & Jacobson, R. (2008). The financial value impact of perceptual brand attributes. Journal of Marketing Research, 45(1), 15–32.
Netemeyer, R., Krishnan, B., Pullig, C., Wang, G., Yagci, M., Dean, D., Ricks, J., & Wirth,
F. (2004). Developing and validating measures of facets of customer-based brand
equity. Journal of Business Research, 57(2), 209–224.
Nisbett, R. E., Kaiping, P., Incheol, C., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and systems of
thought: Holistic ver- sus analytic cognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 291–310.
Ordanini, A., Parasuraman, A., & Rubera, G. (2014). When the recipe Is more important
than the ingredients: A Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) of service innovation
configurations. Journal of Service Research, 17(2), 134–149.
Overby, J. W., Woodruff, R. B., & Gardial, S. F. (2005). The influence of culture upon
consumers’ desired value perceptions: A research agenda. Marketing Theory, 5(2),
139–163.
Özsomer, A. (2012). The interplay between global and local brands: A closer look at
perceived brand globalness and local iconness. Journal of International Marketing,
20(2), 72–95.
Özsomer, A., & Altaras, S. (2008). Global brand purchase likelihood: A critical synthesis
and an integrated conceptual framework. Journal of International Marketing, 16(4),
1–28.
Park, C. W., Eisingerich, A. B., & Park, J. W. (2013). Attachment–aversion (AA) model of
customer–brand relationships. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23(2), 229–248.
Park, C. S., & Srinivasan, V. (1994). A survey-based method for measuring and understanding brand equity and its extendibility. Journal of Marketing Research, 31(2),
271–288.
Paul, M., Hennig-Thurau, T., Gremler, D. D., Gwinner, K. P., & Wiertz, C. (2009). Toward
a theory of repeat purchase drivers for consumer services. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 37(2), 215–237.
Podsakoff, P., MacKenzie, S., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.
Ragin, C. (1987). The comparative method: Moving beyond qualitative and quantitative
strategies. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ragin, C. (2008). Redesigning social inquiry: Fuzzy sets and beyond. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Ragin, C., & Fiss, P. (2008). Net effects analysis versus configurational analysis: An empirical demonstration. In C. C. Ragin (Ed.). Redesigning social inquiry: Fuzzy sets and
beyond (pp. 190–212). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ragin, C., & Rihoux, B. (2004). Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA): State of the art
and prospects. Qualitative Methods, 2(2), 3.
Rambocas, M., Kirpalani, V., & Simms, E. (2018). Brand equity and customer behavioral
intentions: A mediated moderated model. International Journal of Bank Marketing,
36(1), 19–40.
Rihoux, B., & Marx, A. (2013). QCA, 25 years after “The comparative method” mapping,
challenges, and innovations. Mini-symposium. Political Research Quarterly, 66(1),
167–235.
Rihoux, B., & Ragin, C. C. (2008). Configurational comparative methods: Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) and related techniques, Vol. 51. Sage Publications.
Roth, M. S. (1995). The effects of culture and socioeconomics on the performance of
global brand image strategies. Journal of Marketing Research, 163–175.
Samaha, S. A., Beck, J. T., & Palmatier, R. W. (2014). The role of culture in international
relationship marketing. Journal of Marketing, 78(5), 78–98.
Schmid, S., & Kotulla, T. (2011). 50 years of research on International standardization
and adaptation - From a systematic literature analysis to a theoretical framework.
International Business Review, 20(5), 491–507.
Schnittka, O., Sattler, H., & Zenker, S. (2012). Advanced brand concept maps: A new
approach for evaluating the favorability of brand association networks. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 29(3), 265–274.

343

