International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark. 16: 291–297 (2011)
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/nvsm.428

Testing Mechanisms for Philanthropic
Behaviour
René Bekkers1* and Pamala Wiepking2
1

Center for Philanthropic Studies, VU University Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Department of Sociology & Erasmus Centre for Strategic Philanthropy (ECSP), Erasmus University Rotterdam, the
Netherlands
2

Introduction
This special issue of the International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing presents a collection of nine papers testing mechanisms
that drive philanthropic behaviour. These mechanisms are based on our literature review studying
philanthropic donation behaviour (Bekkers &
Wiepking, 2007, 2011). From over 500 scholarly
papers, we distilled eight mechanisms that we
consider the main drivers of philanthropic donation
behaviour: (1) awareness of need; (2) solicitation;
(3) costs and benefits; (4) altruism; (5) reputation;
(6) psychological benefits; (7) values; and (8) efficacy. The overarching question all papers in this special issue contribute to answering is: What
motivates people to display philanthropic behaviour? By testing one or more specific mechanisms
that were derived from the philanthropic literature,
the authors of the papers in this special issue increase
our understanding of philanthropic behaviour. The
majority of the papers in this special issue study donation behaviour. Two papers examine volunteering,
and one paper studies blood donations. Interestingly,
the papers on these other forms of philanthropic behaviour show that mechanisms driving different
types of philanthropic behaviour are similar.
We are thankful for the opportunity to be the guest
editors for a special issue on the understanding of
*Correspondence to: René Bekkers, Center for Philanthropic
Studies, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
E-mail: r.bekkers@vu.nl
†
Contract/grant sponsor Wiepking: Netherlands Organization for
Scientiﬁc Research (NWO); contract/grant number: 451-09-022.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

philanthropic behaviour. In the past decades, the academic philanthropy literature has been dominated
by analyses of (cross-sectional) survey data. This body
of research has resulted in a wealth of knowledge
about the characteristics of donors and volunteers.
However, the reasons why these characteristics are
associated with philanthropic behaviour have been
less clear. We firmly believe that progress in philanthropic studies can be made by a more specific focus
on studying the actual mechanisms that drive philanthropic behaviour. We would like to use this opportunity to call on our colleague researchers to also
contribute to this progress by studying specific
mechanisms that drive philanthropic behaviour.
This special issue has enabled us to bring together
talented researchers who have contributed to the understanding of the mechanisms that drive philanthropic behaviour. These international researchers
come from a variety of academic backgrounds and
have conducted their research within different paradigms and use different research methods. This is also
something we feel is important to increase the understanding of philanthropic behaviour. Philanthropic behaviour is a diverse and complex phenomenon and is
affected by such a large range of individual and contextual (including cultural) factors that an interdisciplinary and international approach is warranted. In order
for an interdisciplinary approach to be successful,
researchers have to respect differences in research
paradigms and research methods. Also, it is important
to acknowledge cultural differences when studying
philanthropic behaviour. We feel the authors in this
special issue set a good example for an interdisciplinary and international approach of philanthropy research. Through the review process, authors with
different disciplinary origins have provided each other
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

with constructive feedback, which, in our opinion,
has resulted in an interesting set of papers.
The papers in this special issue do not only contribute to the academic literature, they can also be
relevant for philanthropy professionals working in
the third sector. Each of the mechanisms discussed
can be manipulated. Philanthropy professionals
can make more informed decisions about communication with donors and volunteers when they know
which ‘buttons’ to push in order to influence giving
and volunteering behaviour. The mechanisms driving philanthropic behaviour are the principles that
explain why pushing one button results in more giving and volunteering, whereas another does not. We
have asked the contributors to this special issue to
devote explicit attention to the practical implications of their findings. We call on philanthropy professionals to also engage in the debate of unravelling
the mechanisms driving philanthropic behaviour.
The only way to find out whether the theoretical
mechanisms work in real life is to test them in
the field. Collaboration between academics and
philanthropy professionals on this matter will certainly increase our understanding of philanthropic
behaviour.
Next, we provide a short summary of the eight
mechanisms that drive philanthropic donation behaviour. This summary does not do justice to the
complexity of these eight mechanisms. We refer
the reader to the explanation of the mechanisms in
Bekkers and Wiepking (2011) for a complete discussion, including cautions when interpreting the
mechanisms and important moderators affecting
the mechanisms.
Awareness of need

Philanthropy addresses the needs of recipients. But,
if potential donors and volunteers are not aware of
existing needs, they will be less likely to engage in
philanthropic behaviour. Also, more often than
not, actors respond to a perceived need, rather than
an objective need.
Solicitation

In most cases, philanthropy occurs in response to a
solicitation from or on behalf of an organization.
Whether actors are solicited to engage in
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

R. Bekkers and P. Wiepking

philanthropic behaviour, and how often they receive solicitations, are important factors that increase the level of engagement in philanthropy.
Costs and benefits

Acts of philanthropy are costly for the actor as they
require a donation of his/her own resources. In
some circumstances, however, the costs are lowered (e.g. through a charitable deduction), and, in
many cases, acts of philanthropy also yield material
benefits for the actor (e.g. exclusive access to meetings or services of the organization). Philanthropy
will be enhanced when it can be done at lower
costs, and when it yields more benefits.
Altruism

Acts of philanthropy can be inspired by a ‘true’ or
‘pure’ concern for the well-being of recipients or
the creation of a public good or service. Knowing
that certain needs are addressed already, donors
who are motivated by altruism will reduce their giving to these needs.
Reputation

The desire to obtain or maintain a positive social
evaluation from others leads actors to engage in philanthropy (when such behaviour is expected to be
evaluated positively).
Psychological benefits

Acts of philanthropy typically generate a private internal benefit for the actor, even when the act of
philanthropy cannot be observed by others. The
psychological benefit is sometimes referred to as
‘warm glow’ or ‘joy of giving’.1
Values

Actors display philanthropic behaviour to create a
‘better world’ — in line with their own perception
Note, however, that ‘warm glow’ in the theoretical model of
‘impure altruism’ (Andreoni, 1989) refers to all types of private
benefits, including a positive reputation, a sense of duty or the
satisfaction obtained by acting according to a moral principle.

1

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

292

of a ‘better world’. Acts of philanthropy thus often
express a value held by the actor. These values include, among others, religious, political and more
general altruistic values.

Efficacy

Actors are more likely to engage in philanthropic behaviour when they perceive their contribution to be
more effective.
We will now describe the nine papers in this
special issue in the order of the eight mechanisms.
We start with a paper that examines multiple
mechanisms.

Multiple mechanisms
In their paper, ‘Who Volunteers? Constructing a
Hybrid Theory’, Einolf and Chambré examine three
distinct approaches in the literature on volunteering:
(1) social theories, emphasizing the influence of
roles, context and networks; (2) individual characteristic theories, emphasizing traits, values and motivations; and (3) resource theories, studying skills and
free time. Whereas Einolf and Chambré do not refer
to the mechanisms explicitly, the three approaches
clearly refer to different mechanisms as driving the
decision to engage in volunteering. Social theories refer to the mechanisms of solicitation (being asked to
volunteer through social networks) and reputation
(the display of role conform behaviour to others). Individual characteristic theories refer to the mechanisms of values (endorsing prosocial values such as
generative concern and moral obligation) and psychological benefits (having a volunteer role-identity).
Resource theories emphasize the costs and benefits
of volunteering as an important mechanism that influence the decision to engage in volunteering.
Einolf and Chambré use data from the first (1995)
wave of the MIDUS to predict engagement in volunteering from variables representing the three
approaches. Whereas they find that variables from
each approach are predictive of volunteering, the
variables representing roles, context and networks
have the strongest predictive power. The three
approaches offer complementary views on mechanisms that drive volunteering.
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

293

Values
In the paper ‘Print media portrayals of giving: exploring national “cultures of philanthropy”’, Australian
researchers McDonald and Scaife examine the value
mechanism from a unique and underexplored perspective in philanthropy research. They explore
the cultural values related to philanthropy in the
USA and Australia, two Anglo–Saxon countries with
a distinct different history and culture of philanthropy. The authors examine the way philanthropy
is depicted in the media, by studying the term ‘philanthropy’ in newspaper articles published in the
top four newspapers both in the USA and in Australia
between 1986 and 2010. Examining affective frames
of philanthropy in the USA and Australia, the results
show that, as the authors anticipate, the overall nature of philanthropy is portrayed in a positive way;
for example, as ‘a vehicle for good work’ in the
USA and as ‘a good thing’ in Australian media. A small
proportion of the papers do report critically on philanthropy, in both countries. Especially corporate
philanthropy or philanthropic behaviour with obvious self-interest motivation is reported on in negative terms.
When examining thematic frames of philanthropy
in the two countries under study, the authors find
that an important difference in media portrayals of
philanthropy in the USA and Australia relates to
the perceived role of the government in providing
public goods. Whereas in the USA papers report
philanthropy as a distinct and valued source of complementary funding for the nonprofit sector, the
Australian newspapers have a focus on philanthropy
as a substitute of — and to some extent, a threat
to — the welfare state. In Australia, ‘. . . the promotion
of democracy presupposes the central role of governments in provision of fundamental resources for
all’; whereas in the USA publications, ‘Philanthropy
is a better means of redistributing the nation’s
wealth than higher taxes on the rich’.
Another key difference between the USA and
Australia is that in the USA, philanthropic acts are
more celebrated and perceived as unique and exceptional, even though giving is more common for
Americans than Australians. In Australia, on the
other hand, gifts often go undervalued and are rarely
acknowledged. The authors relate these different
attitudes towards philanthropy to the individualistic
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Testing Mechanisms for Philanthropic Behaviour

and egalitarian culture of, respectively, the USA and
Australia. In the US newspapers, McDonald and
Scaife find support for the more individualistic
culture, especially in relation to philanthropic behaviour: ‘There was an acknowledgement that generosity
should be recognised and rewarded to encourage further generosity’ Whereas they conclude from the
Australian newspapers: ‘In egalitarianism, there is a
strong reluctance to stand out from the collective,
for fear of being perceived as “tooting one’s own
horn”, potentially restricting philanthropic leadership
in egalitarian cultures such as Australia.’.
In their paper ‘Generation green: understanding
the mechanisms and motivations influencing young
adults’ environmental volunteering’, McDougle,
Greenspan and Handy show how values and benefits
matter for giving time to a cause as a volunteer. Focusing specifically on volunteering for environmental
organizations, the authors investigate how environmental value orientations and perceptions of personal benefits are correlated with the likelihood and
the intensity of engagement. The authors distinguish
egoistic, altruistic and biospheric environmental
value orientations, but find no reliable differences
among volunteers and non-volunteers in these values.
Although correlated with other pro-environmental
behaviours, environmental volunteering is a distinct
form of behaviour that benefits the environment.
McDougle, Greenspan and Handy also find that
volunteering for environmental organizations is related to volunteering for other causes. Their data offer
no direct evidence on the mechanisms producing this
relationship. The mechanisms of solicitation and
values provide an explanation, perhaps even in an interactive way. Volunteers for one type of organization
(e.g. a student union) may be asked to volunteer for
another type of organization (e.g. a nature conservation group) because they are likely to say yes as a
result of their prosocial values. The paper shows
that environmental volunteering is not ‘altruistic’ or
‘egoistic’ but a complex mix of both. A variety of
mechanisms that have both ‘altruistic’ and ‘egoistic’
aspects is driving environmental volunteering.

Psychological benefits
In their paper ‘Gender differences in charitable
giving’, Mesch, Brown, Moore and Hayat examine
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

R. Bekkers and P. Wiepking

gender differences in values and psychological
benefits in relation to donation behaviour. Previous
research has shown significant differences between
men and women in receiving intangible psychological benefits from making donations as well as in the
different values that influence male and female
donors (see for example Einolf, in press; Bennett,
2003). The authors study empathic concern as an
example of the psychological benefit mechanism
and ‘the principle of care’, the moral principle to
care about others, as an example of the value
mechanism.
Using two large-scale survey studies, the General
Social Survey and the Knowledge Networks study,
the authors show that women have stronger feelings
of empathic concern and have a stronger moral
principle to care about others than that of men.
Moreover, the authors find that women are more
likely to give and give higher amounts, while holding constant for these psychological benefits and
value motivations, as well as other factors known
to influence philanthropic behaviour (such as income, age and educational achievement). In the
authors’ words: ‘Gender matters in philanthropy,
and our study underscores the importance of seeking to better understand philanthropy through a
gender lens.’
In their paper ‘Altruistic values, satisfaction and
loyalty among first time blood donors’, Boenigk,
Leipnitz and Scherhag make two important contributions to the field of philanthropic studies. Their
first contribution is that they give a survey of the literature on blood donation. The literature on blood
donation covers a large variety of predictors of donor behaviour and attitudes. Boenigk, Leipnitz and
Scherhag group these predictors according to the
mechanisms that are assumed to explain their
effects. Notably, they distinguish altruism — in this
case, concern for recipients of blood — from the
mechanism of values — in this case, altruistic values
may motivate people to donate blood as an expression of the value of helping others. Whereas many
studies have viewed blood donation as an act of altruism, the accumulated evidence shows that concern for recipients and the expression of altruistic
values are not the only drivers of blood donation.
Neither do altruistic values nor altruism seem to be
the strongest drivers of blood donor behaviour. Being
asked to give, material costs (inconvenience) and
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

294

benefits (e.g. medical checks), and the psychological
benefits (satisfaction with the experience) are also
important mechanisms.
In their second contribution to the literature —
an empirical test of the influence of altruistic values
and satisfaction on loyalty — Boenigk, Leipnitz and
Scherhag provide evidence supporting the conclusion that commitment to blood donation is not
merely an expression of altruistic values but also a
result of positive experiences during the blood donation procedure and a lower level of inconvenience (fear, travel distance). First time donors
who report less positive experiences (e.g. less
friendly and less competent treatment by staff), report a lower willingness to donate blood in the future. How satisfied people are with their treatment
by the blood donation staff contributes to a positive
attitude towards blood donation, constituting a
‘warm glow’. In terms of the mechanisms, the psychological benefits of donating are higher among
those with a positive attitude. The practical implication of these findings is clear: blood collection agencies can enhance donor loyalty by providing clean
facilities and friendly and competent treatment by
staff.
In “The effect of the word ‘loving’ on compliance to
a fundraising request: evidence from a French field
study”, Guéguen, Jacob and Charles-Sire show that activation of the concept of love leads people to engage
in philanthropic behaviour. The researchers solicited
1800 passers-by at a French university to donate
money to the Association against Muscular Dystrophy.
The experimental procedure relies on the technique
of priming: exposure to a word or concept that unconsciously activates a set of cognitions. The participants
were primed with the concept of ‘love’ through the
phrase ‘loving = helping’ printed on t-shirts worn by
solicitors. The results show that participants primed
with the concept of ‘love’ are more likely to donate
and give higher amounts than those approached by
solicitors who wore t-shirts with no print or with the
text ‘donating = helping’. The results for another experiment asking for the donation of blood were
similar.
Guéguen, Jacob and Charles-Sire argue that
exposure to the ‘loving = helping’ t-shirt makes participants more aware of the needs of others. Alternatively, as the authors state in their discussion, it can
also be argued that the priming procedure increases
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

295

the psychological benefits of giving: ‘. . .the word
“loving” could have the property of activating [such]
a positive mood, which in turn influences helping
behaviour.’ The experiments show that activation of
the concept of love is a technique that is easy to use
and can have a dramatically positive effect. It is a ‘giving nudge’ (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008).

Efficacy
In the paper ‘The impact of generalized and institutional trust on donating to activist, leisure, and interest organizations: individual and contextual effects’,
Evers and Gesthuizen examine the relationship between different types of trust and giving to different
types of charitable organizations in 19 European
countries and the USA. By examining the relationship between individual and country level
generalized trust (trust in unknown others), institutionalized trust (confidence in organizations) and
charitable giving, Evers and Gesthuizen contribute
to the understanding of the efficacy mechanism.
The authors argue in their paper: ‘the implicit mechanism underlying the relationship [between trust
and giving] is the expectation that people who generally have a positive view on (unknown) others,
donate more (often) because they more easily have
the feeling that their contribution will make a
difference.’
The authors formulate hypotheses explaining giving to activist (e.g. humanitarian and environmental
organizations), leisure (e.g. sports and outdoor
clubs) and interest organizations (e.g. trade unions,
profession and farmer organizations) derived from
social capital theory (Putnam, 2000; Uslaner &
Brown, 2005), a theory with roots in both sociology
and political research. They find that, at the individual level, both generalized trust as well as institutionalized trust positively relate to giving to all three
types of organizations. When examining the relationship between aggregated levels of generalized
and social trust on giving, they found that in
countries in which people on average have higher
levels of generalized trust, people are more likely
to give to activist and leisure organizations but not
to interest organizations. In addition, the authors
show that, in countries, in which people on average
have higher levels of institutionalized trust, people
are less inclined to make charitable donations to all
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Testing Mechanisms for Philanthropic Behaviour

three types of organizations. Thus, in countries
where people trust their government and institutions more, people are less inclined to make voluntary donations to charitable organizations.
In ‘Charitable giving inside and outside the workplace: the role of individual and firm characteristics’,
a study comparing giving inside and outside of the
workplace, Osili, Hirt and Raghavan examine the
efficacy mechanism through the study of confidence
in charitable organizations. Several studies have
shown confidence in (the efficacy of) charitable
organizations to positively influence incidence and
level of giving (see for example Bowman, 2004,
Sargeant and Lee, 2004, Bekkers and Bowman,
2009, Wiepking, 2010). The authors contribute to
this literature by examining the role of confidence
in charitable organizations in workplace giving, in
which potential donors are often asked to provide
unrestricted gifts to particular charitable organizations, such as United Way. With unrestricted gifts,
donors have greater uncertainty about how their
donations will be spent than with restricted gifts,
which are labelled to contribute to a specific project.
Therefore, the authors argue that confidence is more
important in workplace giving than in regular charitable giving. When people have more confidence in
charitable organizations, they trust that the organizations will spend their money more effectively, in line
with their expectations. Hence, as the authors argue,
there is a conceptual link between confidence in
charitable organizations and the efficacy mechanism.
As hypothesized, the authors find that a donor’s confidence in charitable organizations is positively related
to non-workplace (regular) charitable giving, but that
confidence in charitable organizations is even more
important in the case of workplace giving.
In addition, the authors provide very interesting
insights into the solicitation mechanism: ‘We find,
whereas demographic factors affect non-workplace
giving, they are much less important for workplace
giving. We attribute this finding to the importance
of the solicitation mechanism, in that workplace
campaigns allow us to hold constant the solicitation
mechanism and focus on other factors that influence giving. In contrast, we found that donor confidence in nonprofit organizations is particularly
important for workplace giving.’
The final paper in this special issue, by Wardell
and Ashley, is entitled ‘From solicitation to search:
Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

R. Bekkers and P. Wiepking

a study of monitoring costs as a driver of donor giving behavior in online portal websites’. The authors
adapt a general theoretical model of search behaviour to the context of philanthropic choice. How
do people decide which organizations to support
with monetary donations? In addition to identification with victims and the mission of charitable organizations, people are increasingly paying attention
to the impact of donations. Gathering information
about the impact of donations, however, is costly.
Donors have to make search and monitoring costs
in order to spend their money wisely.
Organizations soliciting donations, in turn, are increasingly paying attention to the desire for higher
transparency and accountability among donors.
Organizations provide project updates to inform
donors about the impact of their donations. This
type of information should strengthen the perceived
efficacy of donations and lower the search and monitoring costs. Wardell and Ashley examine the effect
of project updates on donation behaviour to organizations advertised in an online giving portal. Interestingly, their findings show no significant effects of
project updates on the amount donated to projects
or the likelihood to give again to a specific project.
Apparently, giving to projects advertised through
the online portal is not affected by search and monitoring costs for the majority of donors.
We are proud of the wide variation in the papers in
this special issue. The authors investigate a range of
philanthropic behaviours, coming from a variety of
disciplinary backgrounds, using both experimental,
archival and survey data, and testing a multitude of
hypotheses. Despite this large variety, all the papers
are inspired by view that research on philanthropy
benefits from a specific focus on the mechanisms that
drive acts of philanthropy. The papers also illustrate
the benefits of this approach for philanthropy professionals. We hope you will enjoy the papers as much as
we did.

References
Bekkers R, Bowman W. 2009. The relationship between
confidence in charitable organizations and volunteering revisited. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 38(5): 884–897.
Bekkers R, Wiepking P. 2007. Generosity and Philanthropy: A Literature Review. Report commissioned
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

296

by the John Templeton Foundation. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1015507.
Bekkers R, Wiepking P. 2011. A literature review of
empirical studies of philanthropy: eight mechanisms
that drive charitable giving. Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly 40(5): 924–973.
Bennett R. 2003. Factors underlying the inclination to
donate to particular types of charity. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing
8(1): 12–29.
Bowman W. 2004. Confidence in charitable institutions
and volunteering. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly 33(2): 247–270.
Einolf CJ. In Press. Gender differences in the correlates of
volunteering and charitable giving. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly (online 28 September 2010). DOI:
10.1177/0899764010385949 [7 October 2011].

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

297
Putnam RD. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York: Simon
and Schuster.
Sargeant A, Lee S. 2004. Trust and relationship commitment in the United Kingdom voluntary sector: determinants of donor behaviour. Psychology and Marketing
21(8): 613–635.
Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. 2008. Nudge. New Haven: Yale
University.
Uslaner EM, Brown M. 2005. Inequality, trust, and
civic engagement. American Politics Research 33(6):
868–894.
Wiepking P. 2010. Democrats support international relief
and the upper class donates to art? How opportunity,
incentives and confidence affect donations to different
types of charitable organizations. Social Science Research 39(6): 1073–1087.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., November 2011
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

1479103x, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.428 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Testing Mechanisms for Philanthropic Behaviour

