Marketing Letters
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-020-09524-w

The past, present, and future of brand research
Travis Tae Oh 1 & Kevin Lane Keller 2 & Scott A. Neslin 2 & David J. Reibstein 3 &
Donald R. Lehmann 4
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract
This article discusses the past, present, and future of brand research. We begin by
reviewing three historical eras of branding development in the past: the information, attribute, and brand equity eras. Each era is marked by an emphasis on a
particular concept of brands and a dominant research methodology during that
period. We characterize the present of brand research as the branding era, in
which brands have become part of the everyday vocabulary, and the concept of
“branding” has been embraced by all types of organizations and people. Finally,
we share our perspective on the future of brand research by discussing three major
shifts in the brand landscape, mostly influenced by technological advancements
such as IoT and their capacity to collect granular data at the individual level. We
anticipate that new, exciting opportunities in brand research will continue to open
up at the intersection of brands, technologies, and people.
Keywords Brands . Branding . Brand research history . Brands and technology

* Travis Tae Oh
to2280@columbia.edu
Kevin Lane Keller
kevin.keller@dartmouth.edu
Scott A. Neslin
scott.a.neslin@tuck.darmouth.edu
David J. Reibstein
reibstein@wharton.upenn.edu
Donald R. Lehmann
drl2@columbia.edu
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

Marketing Letters

1 Introduction
Brands are instrumental to marketers and consumers alike. For centuries, brands have
served as effective carriers of functional and symbolic information about goods,
services, and experiences, allowing customers to efficiently associate personal meaning
to a company’s products. It is now almost impossible to avoid exposure to brands, and
such ubiquity constantly shapes people’s thoughts and behaviors even without their
conscious awareness. Indeed, the success of a company in today’s marketplace is
largely attributable to the power of its brand—i.e., the level of awareness, strength of
associations, and overall brand attitudes it engenders. These far-reaching implications
have spurred much academic attention on brands since the early days of marketing
research (e.g., Gardner and Levy 1955), which continues to be of great interest for both
practitioners and academics.
This article provides a high-level discussion of the past, present, and future of brand
research. The primary purpose is to examine major trends and propose future research
directions, rather than review each subfield of brand research in detail1. First, we
identify three areas of focus that developed chronologically in the past: the
information era, the attribute era, and the brand equity era. We then discuss current
research, which we call the branding era. The emphasis is on creating and developing
brands. We identify five noteworthy brand research areas, and highlight a few key
findings. Lastly, we offer our take on future research topics on brands in light of
technological advancements and macro changes in the market.

2 Brand research in the past (1970s–early 2000s)
2.1 The information era
In the Indus Valley, circa 2000 B.C., a cow meandered off to a greener pasture to be
with other cows. How could the owner retrieve the cow and prove it was his cow?
Brand it. The farmer took a branding iron and burned his farm’s insignia onto the
cow. Now, the cow easily could be identified, no matter where it wondered off to.
The Old Norse word for “to burn” is “brandr.”2 Thus, the initial role of brands was
to associate the product with its producer. Over the years, pottery makers, brick
makers, paper makers, or anyone producing something that needed to be identified
jumped on the “brandwagon.”
The industrial revolution raised this to a higher level. Ford Motor Company, for
instance, could now produce for the entire United States and internationally as well. But
how could consumers in California know the car they were buying in fact was the real
thing—a Ford? The answer was to physically identify the brand; the Ford logo graced
the Model T, assuring consumers they were buying the right vehicle.
Hence, the initial role of brands was to alleviate consumer uncertainty and risk by
associating the brand with a given producer. Economists in the 80s formalized this
For a detailed review, see Keller and Lehmann (2006) or Avery and Keinan’s (2015) chapter on “Consuming
Brands”
2
See https://www.skyword.com/contentstandard/creativity/branding-brief-history
1

Marketing Letters

notion, launching the “information era” of brand research. Shapiro (1983) showed how
reputation, attributed to the product by knowing its brand, resolved uncertainty and
allowed the firm to charge higher prices. Erdem and Swait (1998) used survey data to
show that “When consumers are uncertain about product attributes, firms may use
brands . . . to ensure that their product claims are credible.” Wernerfelt (1988) showed
how the brand signal could be extended to assure the quality of new products. The
brand as an identifier of the producer became nuanced—a signal of brand quality.
2.2 The attribute era
Eventually, researchers and practitioners started to explore how to create high-quality
brands. This led to a focus on product attributes (e.g., convenience, reliability, taste,
nutrition), and gave rise to one of the most important concepts in marketing—the value
proposition: Crest toothpaste prevents cavities; Excedrin relieves headaches; Polaroid
produces a picture in one minute.
Marketers initially treated attributes as tangible—for example, the size of a monitor.
But soon marketers acknowledged that attributes could also be intangible. This entailed
images and associations, ranging from prestigious (e.g., an “Ivy League” institution) to
cultural (e.g., Pepsi is “for the Pepsi generation” or Chevrolet is about “baseball, hot
dogs, apple pie and Chevrolet”). Abstract branding messages proliferated during this
era. In its seminal 1984 Super Bowl ad, Apple established itself as revolutionary,
different, and innovative. Researchers began to incorporate “image” in brand research
(Dobni and Zinkhan 1990; Padgett and Allen 1997).
In the ’70s and ’80s, the emphasis was mostly on tangible attributes. Attribute-based
linear attitude models and conjoint analyses dominated brand research. Rooted in the
Fishbein model of attitude (Fishbein 1967), Bass and Talarzyk (1972) predicted brand
preference as a function of attribute ratings, while Lehmann and O’Shaughnessy (1974)
investigated the relative importance of various attributes in determining preference. A
vibrant debate centered on whether, in fact, all attributes were equally important
(Beckwith and Lehmann 1973). Conjoint analysis proved to be insightful in this regard,
showing how much of one attribute consumers were willing to trade off to get a certain
amount of another attribute (Green and Rao 1971; Green and Wind 1975).
As the field progressed, researchers related attributes not only to stated
preference but to actual brand choice, utilizing the multinomial logit model
(Guadagni and Little 1983). For example, Gensch (1984) applied the logit
model to predict supplier choice in a B2B context, using attributes such as
reliability, price, ease of installation, and warranty. Similarly, Kamakura and
Russell (1993) predicted choice based on both tangible and intangible (i.e.,
image) attributes. Erdem et al. (2005) showed consumers learn product quality
by tapping into multiple information sources along the path to purchase.
The focus on attributes was academically important and managerially relevant.
Yet, results from conjoint studies repeatedly suggested that brands were not only
about attributes, be they tangible or intangible. For example, Green and Wind
(1975) showed significant brand identification effects in conjoint models, even
after controlling for several important attributes. Though it is possible that the
conjoint models were not accounting for enough attributes, researchers concurred
that something was missing—brand equity.

Marketing Letters

2.3 The brand equity era
The first challenge was to define brand equity. Several researchers stepped in with
varying definitions (see Table 1). These diverse definitions share commonalities. First,
the brand name of a product conveys something extra compared to an unbranded
product or one with a different name. Second, brand equity has concrete implications
such as brand volume, margins, response to marketing, and other measurable outcomes.
The consensus across the definition is that brand equity translates brand identification
into added value for the brand.
The next task was to measure brand equity. Ailawadi et al. (2003) identify three
categories of brand equity measures:
&
&
&

Customer mindset: Measures such as awareness, attitude, attachment, or loyalty.
Mindset measures have been commercialized by approaches from companies such
as Young and Rubicam’s Brand Asset Valuator
Product-market outcomes: Measures based on outcomes such as market share
(Chaudhuri and Holbrook 2018), price premium (Agarwal and Rao 1996), profit
(Dubin 1998; Goldfarb et al. 2009), and revenue premium (Ailawadi et al. 2003)
Financial market outcomes: Measures that attempt to quantify the brand name as a
financial asset (Simon and Sullivan 1993; Mizik 2014)

Subsequent studies in branding quantified concrete causes and effects of brand equity.
For example, Ailawadi et al. (2003) measured brand equity as the added revenue a
branded product received relative to an unbranded product. They found that brands in
high-priced product categories with long inter-purchase times enjoyed higher brand
equity. One of their most important findings was that brand equity is “sticky.” The
equity a brand garners in the current year closely reflects its equity in the previous year.
Managerial actions such as advertising could improve or maintain equity but brand
equity is generally difficult to build, although not to destroy, in a short timeframe.

Table 1 Sample definitions of brand equity
Researcher

Definition

Farquhar (1989)

“We define brand equity as the ‘added value’ with which a given
brand endows a product”

Aaker (1991)

“A set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name and
symbol, that add to or subtract from the value provided by a
product or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers”

Keller (1993)

“The differential effect that brand knowledge has on consumer
response to the marketing of that brand”

Keller (2002)

“The set of associations and behaviors on the part of the brand’s
customers . . . that permits the brand to earn greater volume or
greater margins than it could without the brand name”

Ailawadi et al. (2003)

“Brand equity is defined as the marketing effects or outcomes that
accrue to a product with its brand name compared with those that
would accrue if the same product did not have a brand name”

Marketing Letters

In summary, initial research on brands took us through three eras: brands as
producer information, brands as attributes, and brands as equity. Importantly, the stage
was set for elaboration and extension of these ideas.

3 Brand research in the present: the branding era (2000s–2020)
Although brands have been around for centuries and marketers have recognized the
importance of brand equity for many years, the research environment and developments over the past two decades can be characterized as the branding era. Brands have
become part of the everyday vocabulary, and the concept of “branding” has been
embraced by all types of organizations and people. Coinciding with this trend is a
deeper and broader exploration of brands and branding by practitioners and academics
alike. In terms of the latter, the word “brand” now appears in the title of at least one
article in virtually every issue of a major marketing journal.
Academics have employed a variety of different methodologies, from survey or
experimental techniques (Aaker 1997; Thomson et al. 2005) to more qualitative
approaches (Fournier 1998; Muniz and O'Guinn 2001). This modern era of branding
is marked by a study of a myriad of different research topics. Though many topics have
been studied by academics during this time, we point out five broad branding areas for
their noteworthy insights and promise for the purposes of this article. For each area, we
identify three to four important topics and highlight some recent key findings on one of
those topics in greater detail.
3.1 Noteworthy areas of current study in branding
Brand fundamentals Three topics of continued interest in branding are (1) naming and
logo design criteria; (2) financial impact and value of brands; and (3) brand equity
dimensions. For example, analyses of the four brand equity dimensions as measured by
the aforementioned Brand Asset Valuator suggest that differentiation often performs
differently from relevance, esteem, or knowledge. Making a brand more distinctive than
other brands may also make the brand less familiar and well-regarded because of
greater uncertainty of its meaning:
&

&

“The authors uncover a fairly strong positive association of sales-based brand
equity (SBBE) with three dimensions of customer-based brand equity (CBBE)—
relevance, esteem, and knowledge—but a slight negative correspondence with the
fourth dimension, differentiation.” (Datta et al. 2017)
“Unlike the other three dimensions, differentiation is negatively associated with
customer acquisition and retention, although positively associated with profit
margin.” (Stahl et al. 2012)

Brand intangibles Four topics of continued interest in understanding brand intangibles are (1) brand authenticity; (2) brand feelings and emotions; (3) brand attachment and community; and (4) brand personality and anthropomorphism. Researchers are probing the different ways that consumers experience, engage, or

Marketing Letters

even advocate for brands and the effects that are created as a result. In terms of the
fourth topic, research continues to explore human-like characteristics of brands
through brand personality traits but also investigates specific brands that deliberately take on anthropomorphism. For example:
&
&
&

“Brand anthropomorphization increases the perceived unfairness of price increases
and the perceived fairness of price decreases.” (Kwak et al. 2015)
“Consumers’ inferences of an anthropomorphized brand's intentionality to interact
with them in a socially crowded context trigger greater social withdrawal, thereby
resulting in lower preferences for the brand.” (Puzakova and Kwak 2017)
“Materialists respond more favorably to a servant brand than to a partner brand
when the brand is anthropomorphized (vs. objectified), and they respond more
favorably to an anthropomorphized servant brand than do nonmaterialists.” (Kim
and Kramer 2015)

Marketing effects in a digital era Four topics of prime interest in understanding
marketing effects in a digital era are (1) social media and word-of-mouth; (2)
opinion leaders and influencers; (3) extracting brand meaning from online data;
and (4) integration with traditional media. Research in these areas has demonstrated how the consumer journey leading up to purchase and consumption has
shifted in profound ways in a digital era. Yet, in terms of the fourth topic,
research has also validated the continued effectiveness of more traditional
media, at least with today’s consumer, as follows:
&
&
&

“Thoroughly orchestrating traditional advertising and a firm’s social media activities may improve a firm’s performance with respect to building the brand and
encouraging customer acquisition” (de Vries et al. 2017).
“Overall, we find that earned and paid media play a central role in developing and
maintaining entertainment brands” (Lovett and Staelin 2016).
•The results indicate that companies benefit from using social media (e.g., Twitter)
for personalized customer responses, although there is still a role for traditional
brand communications, such as press releases and advertising (Hewett et al. 2016).

Brand architecture Three topics of continued interest in understanding brand architecture are (1) brand extensions and dilution; (2) corporate image; and (3) co-branding and
brand alliances. In terms of the third topic, research has shown that brand partnerships
can be helpful only under certain conditions:
&
&

“A partner brand’s social media power potential, power exertion, and their interaction can all lead to higher composite product sales.” (Kupfer et al. 2018)
“When product benefit information is presented simultaneously with co-branding
information (at a delay after co-branding information), the presence of a wellknown brand weakened (strengthened) the association of the less-known brand
with the outcome and thereby lowered (improved) evaluation of the less-known
brand.” (Cunha et al. 2015)

Marketing Letters

The role of brands Three topics of continued interest in understanding the role of
brands are (1) cultural differences; (2) legal consequences; and (3) brands as symbols.
Understanding how brands acquire different meaning and how that is manifested in
different domains is of fundamental importance. In terms of the third topic, research
shows that the meaning and power of brands can be transformative in multiple
circumstances:
&
&
&

“Brand use can enhance feelings of self-efficacy, which can lead to better task
performance.” (Park and John 2014)
“Consumption of a performance-branded product improves objective outcomes in a
variety of contexts, although consumers attribute gains to themselves.” (Garvey
et al. 2016)
“Close brand relationships can help insulate consumers against physical pain due to
brands’ ability to provide a semblance of social connectedness.” (Reimann et al. 2017)

3.2 Current status of branding research
Brands are a pervasive presence in consumers’ lives and central to marketplace
exchange and social interaction. While we have learned much about brands and
branding in recent years, research continues to reveal different facets of brands and
their direct and indirect effects. One clear take-away from the last two decades of
research, as illustrated above, is that brands are rich in meaning and complex in their
effects. One consequence of this is that research going forward must recognize and
appreciate the large number of concepts and factors that potentially come into play as
mediators and moderators of branding effects.

4 Brands in the future: what’s next? (~ 2030s)
We explore how the brand landscape may look in the not too distant future by
discussing how technological shifts and market changes may impact the role of brands
in the marketplace, and how we study them. Specifically, we identify three major
interconnected areas that we expect to be pertinent to the future of brands and brand
research: (1) technological advancement and its impact on the role and visibility of
brands, (2) an extended scope of brand research, beyond products and companies, and
(3) heightened capacities of automated data collection and analyses leading to changes
in branding strategies. We also present specific research questions for each of the areas.
4.1 Technology and the role of brands
Perhaps the biggest evolution affecting brands is the influence of technology on
brands and how customers interact with their brands. The Internet of things (IoT)
will change how products and brands relate to their customers. As products follow
our movements, calories burned and consumed, how and where we travel, and with
whom we interact—brands will have much more information about their customers.

Marketing Letters

This will enable companies to further customize and shape their offerings, communications, and connections with the customers, which may solidify the relationships
between customers and their brands. Yet, much is to be learned about the potential
barriers that IoT may create for new brands and acquiring new customers. Furthermore, it is unclear how technologies such as artificial intelligence, virtual reality,
and augmented reality will change the relationships customers have with their
brands, especially in regards to how these technologies will be further improved
from what we see now (see Lee et al. 2020 for more on this issue).
With rapidly improving features of virtual reality (“VR”) and augmented reality
(“AR”) that have been adopted by major online marketplace platforms (e.g., Amazon),
we expect that the experiential gap between online and offline vendors will be even
further reduced. Because online stores are less subject to space constraints, smaller
brands have become more readily available to customers. For instance, a search of
Bluetooth headphones on Amazon.com shows more than 40,000 results, whereas a
brick and mortar retailer could not physically carry 40,000 SKUs for Bluetooth
headphones. We predict that the concentration of sales among the dominant brands
may dissipate while that among online retailers may concentrate, but the question
remains as to which brands in which industries will be less or more influenced by this
shift that is being accelerated by developments in AR and VR.
Future research questions in this area include (1) How will advanced forms of IoT
and AR/VR influence customers’ relationships with brands? (2) Will enhanced behavioral information gathered from IoT increase barriers to entry for new brands? If so,
which industries will be more or less affected? (3) How will advanced AR/VR
technology influence customer-brand interactions in the online and offline marketplace? Will it lead to increased or decreased power of dominant brands? (4) Will online
retailers need to maintain a bricks-and-mortar presence to nurture its brand (cf. Amazon, Bonobos, Warby Parker)?
4.2 Extended scope of brands: beyond products and companies
Considerable research on brands has focused on branding of products and services.
However, geographic areas (nations, regions, and cities) as well as individuals will also
establish their brands. For example, New York City, London, or Paris are brands.
Individual experts, journalists, and politicians are also brands. Measuring the value of
geographic brands and their economic consequences has not been fully explored beyond
country of origin (e.g., Piron 2000; Lampert and Jaffe 1998). A country or geographical
region as a brand has also been explored, most notably by Anholt (1998). Yet, only
recently, have efforts emerged to examine the economic consequences of the brand of a
country3. The need for understanding the economic consequences of a nation’s brand or
how brand campaigns lead to a country’s brand image are still quite understudied.
Similarly, much more research can be conducted for brands of individual
persons. This is best understood through celebrity endorsements of brands, but
considerable work remains to be done on this front as well (see Keel and
Nataraajan 2012). More and more “non-celebrity” individuals are building their
own brands through independent media channels such as YouTube or Twitch,
3

https://www.usnews.com/news/best-countries/overall-rankings

Marketing Letters

while very little has been studied on the empirical and theoretical implications of
individuals as brands.
Another extension of brand research is its role within the organization (Aurand et al.
2005). The value of a brand has often been characterized using measures generated by
consumer demand (product-market outcomes as noted earlier). What has been largely
overlooked is the impact of the brand from the human resources side—one critical issue
being the ability to retain talent. Given the major financial implications of employee
turnover and efficiency, internal branding is of great value to the organization and has
not yet been sufficiently quantified.
Thus, future research questions include (1) What are the economic consequences of
geographical regions as brands? (2) What are the key antecedents to building a brand
for geographical regions, such as countries? (3) What are the implications and processes of building a brand for an individual? (4) What are the implications of internal
branding on human resource management?
4.3 Advancements in data collection and analysis
With the advent of Big Data and improved ability to understand specific needs of
individual customers through IoT, companies are not only producing products unique
to one individual’s preferences but also providing unique messages, promotions, and
prices catered to the individual. Highly advanced virtual audio assistants from Amazon,
Apple, and others are figuring out what you want based on your conversations before
you login to do a search. With precise geo-tracking information, companies now make
offers based on customers’ unique locations. The rapidly expanding means of
individual-level data collection and analyses, however, comes with major implications
for consumers, brands, and society. Customized marketing efforts raise concerns
regarding privacy and inequality, which have already incited much debate and even
led to “opt-in” regulations regarding personal information4. More research is needed to
determine the role of brands in this new environment, especially in regards to consumers’ experiences—the sensory, affective, intellectual, and behavioral interactions
(Brakus et al. 2009)—with brands that sell IoT products.
Another possible scenario of in the 2030s, as technologies on individual-level data
collection proliferate, is that brands as we know it today may disappear. Highly advanced
artificial intelligence and machine learning systems may simply scour the choices available
and make selections on behalf of customers, who no longer need to rely on brands as a
signal of quality or features. It is highly likely that this automation will dominate customerfirm interactions, as also discussed by Oblander et al. (2020) in this special issue. Future
research could empirically examine when and how brands influence the customer’s
journey, especially when customers are mostly represented by machine algorithms.
Future research questions thus include (1) What role does brand image play in
encouraging customers to share personal information? (2) Is it desirable (for the brand,
the customer, or society in general) to encourage sharing of personal information? (3)
How do brand experiences and relationships change in highly automated search and
selection processes?
4
For example, obtaining cookies data now requires permission (“opt-in”) from customers in the EU.
https://gdpr.eu/cookies/

Marketing Letters

5 Conclusion
More than seven decades of brand research have broadened our understanding of how
brands affect various aspects of a firm’s performance (e.g., margins, revenue) by
influencing consumers’ attitudes and behaviors. As a core marketing concept, brand
research has traversed multiple research paradigms over time, namely the information,
attributes, and brand equity eras. Brands initially served as a means of identification to
assure customers the source and quality of products. Soon, however, practitioners and
academics realized that brands convey intangible symbolic meaning along with tangible product attributes. Research on quantifying and measuring the effect of its attributes
(e.g., via conjoint analysis) eventually led to the conceptualization of brand equity. The
accumulating empirical evidence of brand equity’s significant impact on firm performance fueled greater research interest on how and when brands affect consumers’
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
This past research left the field with a heightened recognition of the psychology of
brands, triggering the branding era of the present. From brand anthropomorphization to
complexities in co-branding efforts, current research in branding spans across a wide
range of topics, including five notable research areas: brand fundamentals, brand
intangibles, marketing effects in a digital era, brand architecture, and the role of
brands. We expect that while branding research will continue to thrive as it relates to
the aforementioned topics and others, it may also face paradigmatic shifts arising from
macro changes in consumer demand, mainly due to technological developments.
In the dawning era of advanced technology, we anticipate that the role and influence
of brands will dramatically change. For one, the growing dominance of the online
marketplace, along with AR and VR developments, will fundamentally alter the way
products are distributed and purchased. Furthermore, we expect that the abundance of
individual-level data from online platforms and IoT will trigger major changes in how
brands build their relationships with their customers, and possibly lead to mass
customizations at all levels of industries. Lastly, we anticipate that mass data collection
and analyses at the individual level will engender major questions on the role of brands
in consumer privacy and fairness. Managers now face a more complex and automated
process of brand communications, and would benefit from more empirical research on
how brands influence the customer’s journey in such contexts.
For centuries, brands have served a quintessential role in marketing. Though certain
aspects of branding, such as attributes or brand images, were emphasized and
researched at different time periods, brands have and will continue to be an important
topic of study for marketing academics and practitioners. We anticipate that new,
exciting opportunities in brand research will continue to open up at the intersection
of brands, technologies, and people.

References
Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing brand equity. New York: The Free Press.
Aaker, J. L. (1997). Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of Marketing Research, 34(3), 347–357.
Agarwal, M. K., & Rao, V. R. (1996). An empirical comparison of consumer-based measures of brand equity.
Marketing Letters, 7(3), 237–247.

Marketing Letters
Ailawadi, K. L., Lehmann, D. R., & Neslin, S. A. (2003). Revenue premium as an outcome measure of brand
equity. Journal of Marketing, 67(10), 1–17.
Anholt, S. (1998). Nation-brands of the twenty-first century. Journal of Brand Management, 5, 395–406.
Aurand, T. W., Gorchels, L., & Bishop, T. R. (2005). Human resource management’s role in internal
branding: An opportunity for cross-functional brand message synergy. Journal of Product and Brand
Management, 14(3), 163–169.
Avery, J., & Keinan, A. (2015). Consuming brands. In M. I. Norton, D. D. Rucker, & C. Lamberton (Eds.),
The Cambridge handbook of consumer psychology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bass, F. M., & Talarzyk, W. W. (1972). An attitude model for the study of brand preference. Journal of
Marketing Research, 9(1), 93–96.
Beckwith, N. E., & Lehmann, D. R. (1973). The importance of differential weights in multiple attribute
models of consumer attitude. Journal of Marketing Research, 10(2), 141–145.
Brakus, J. J., Schmitt, B. H., & Zarantonello, L. (2009). Brand experience: What is it? How is it measured?
Does it affect loyalty? Journal of Marketing, 73(5), 52–68.
Chaudhuri, A., & Holbrook, M. B. (2018). The chain of effects from brand trust and brand affect to brand
performance: The role of brand loyalty. Journal of Marketing, 65(2), 81–93.
Cunha, M., Forehand, M. R., & Angle, J. W. (2015). Riding coattails: When co-branding helps versus hurts
less-known brands. Journal of Consumer Research, 41(2), 1284–1300.
Datta, H., Ailawadi, K. L., & van Heerde, H. J. (2017). How well does consumer-based brand equity align
with sales-based brand equity and marketing-mix response? Journal of Marketing, 81(5), 1–20.
de Vries, L., Gensler, S., & Leeflang, P. S. H. (2017). Effects of traditional advertising and social messages on
brand-building metrics and customer acquisition. Journal of Marketing, 81(9), 1–15.
Dobni, D., & Zinkhan, G. M. (1990). In search of brand image: A foundation analysis. Advances in Consumer
Research, 17, 110–119.
Dubin, J. A. (1998). The demand for branded and unbranded products: An econometric method for valuing
intangible assets. Chapter 4. In Studies in consumer demand: Econometric methods applied to market
data (pp. 77–127). Norwell: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Erdem, T., & Swait, J. (1998). Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
7(2), 131–157.
Erdem, T., Keane, M. P., Oncu, T. S., & Strebel, J. (2005). Learning about computers: An analysis of
information search and technology choice. Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 3(3), 207–246.
Farquhar, P. H. (1989). Managing brand equity. Marketing Research, 1(9), 24–33.
Fishbein, M. (1967). In M. Fishbein (Ed.), Readings in attitude theory and measurement. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Fournier, S. (1998). Consumers and their brands: Developing relationship theory in consumer research.
Journal of Consumer Research, 24(4), 343–373.
Gardner, B., & Levy, S. (1955). The product and the brand. Harvard Business Review, 33(3-4), 33–39.
Garvey, A. M., Germann, F., & Bolton, L. E. (2016). Performance brand placebos: How brands improve
performance and consumers take the credit. Journal of Consumer Research, 42(4), 931–951.
Gensch, D. H. (1984). Targeting the switchable industrial customer. Marketing Science, 3(1), 41–54.
Goldfarb, A., Lu, Q., & Moorthy, S. (2009). Measuring brand value in an equilibrium framework. Marketing
Science, 28(1), 69–86.
Green, P. E., & Rao, V. R. (1971). Conjoint measurement for quantifying judgmental data. Journal of
Marketing Research, 8(8), 355–363.
Green, P. E., & Wind, Y. (1975). New way to measure consumers’ judgments. In Harvard Business Review
(Vol. 7-8, pp. 107–117).
Guadagni, P. M., & Little, J. D. C. (1983). A logit model of brand choice calibrated on scanner data.
Marketing Science, 2(Summer), 203–238.
Hewett, K., Rand, W., Rust, R. T., & van Heerde, H. J. (2016). Brand buzz in the echoverse. Journal of
Marketing, 80(5), 1–24.
Kamakura, W. A., & Russell, G. J. (1993). Measuring brand value with scanner data. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 10, 9–22.
Keel, A., & Nataraajan, R. (2012). Celebrity endorsement and beyond: New avenues for celebrity branding.
Psychology and Marketing, 29(9), 690–703.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of
Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Keller, K. L. (2002). Branding and brand equity, MSI Relevant Knowledge Series. Cambridge: Marketing
Science Institute.

Marketing Letters
Keller, K. L., & Lehmann, D. R. (2006). Brands and branding: Research findings and future priorities.
Marketing Science, 25(6), 740–759.
Kim, H. C., & Kramer, T. (2015). Do materialists prefer the brand-as-servant? The interactive effect of
anthropomorphized brand roles and materialism on consumer responses. Journal of Consumer Research,
42(8), 284–299.
Kupfer, A. K., vor der Holte, N. P., Kübler, R. V., & Hennig-Thurau, T. (2018). The role of the partner
brand’s social media power in brand alliances. Journal of Marketing, 82(5), 25–44.
Kwak, H., Puzakova, M., & Rocereto, J. F. (2015). Better not smile at the price: The differential role of brand
anthropomorphization on perceived price fairness. Journal of Marketing, 79(7), 56–76.
Lampert, S. I., & Jaffe, E. D. (1998). A dynamic approach to country-of-origin effect. European Journal of
Marketing, 32(1/2), 61–78.
Lee, B. C., Moorman, C., Moreau, C. P., Stephen, A. T., & Lehmann, D. R. (2020). Research on innovation:
The past, present, and future. Marketing Letters.
Lehmann, D. R., & O’Shaughnessy, J. (1974). Difference in attribute importance for different industrial
products. Journal of Marketing, 38(2), 36–42.
Lovett, M. J., & Staelin, R. (2016). The role of paid, earned, and owned media in building entertainment
brands: Reminding, informing, and enhancing enjoyment. Marketing Science, 35(1-2), 142–157.
Mizik, N. (2014). Assessing the total financial performance impact of brand equity with limited time-series
data. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(6), 691–706.
Muniz, A. M., & O'Guinn, T. C. (2001). Brand community. Journal of Consumer Research, 27, 412–432.
Oblander, E. S., Gupta, S., Mela, C. F., Winer, R. S., & Lehmann, D. R. (2020). Research on innovation: The
past, present, and future. Marketing Letters.
Padgett, D., & Allen, D. (1997). Communicating experiences: A narrative approach to creating service brand
image. Journal of Advertising, 26(4), 49–52.
Park, J. K., & John, D. R. (2014). I think I can, I think I can: Brand use, self-efficacy, and performance.
Journal of Marketing Research, 51(4), 233–247.
Piron, F. (2000). Consumers’ perceptions of the country-of-origin effect on purchasing intentions of
(in)conspicuous products. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 17(4), 308–321.
Puzakova, M., & Kwak, H. (2017). Should anthropomorphized brands engage customers? The impact of
social crowding on brand preferences. Journal of Marketing, 81(11), 99–115.
Reimann, M., Nuñez, S., & Castaño, R. (2017). Brand-aid. Journal of Consumer Research, 44(10), 673–691.
Shapiro, C. (1983). Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 98(4), 659–680.
Simon, C. J., & Sullivan, M. W. (1993). The measurement and determinants of brand equity. A financial
approach. Marketing Science, 12(Winter), 28–52.
Stahl, F., Heitmann, M., Lehmann, D. R., & Neslin, S. A. (2012). The impact of brand equity on customer
acquisition, retention, and profit margin. Journal of Marketing, 76(7), 44–63.
Thomson, M., MacInnis, D. J., & Park, C. W. (2005). The ties that bind: Measuring the strength of consumers’
emotional attachments to brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(1), 77–91.
Wernerfelt, B. (1988). Umbrella branding as a signal of new product quality: An example of signaling by
posting a bond. The RAND Journal of Economics, 19, 458–466.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Affiliations
Travis Tae Oh 1 & Kevin Lane Keller 2 & Scott A. Neslin 2 & David J. Reibstein 3 &
Donald R. Lehmann 4
1

Columbia Business School, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA

2

Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA

3

Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

4

Columbia Business School, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA

