This article was downloaded by: [University of York]
On: 14 March 2013, At: 05:21
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

A Praxis Framework for Implementing
Market Orientation Into Charities
a

b

Paul Chad , Judy Motion & Elias Kyriazis

a

a

Centre for Research in Socially Responsible Marketing, School of
Management and Marketing, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
New South Wales, Australia
b

University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Version of record first published: 21 Feb 2013.

To cite this article: Paul Chad , Judy Motion & Elias Kyriazis (2013): A Praxis Framework for
Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities, Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 25:1,
28-55
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2013.759816

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 25:28–55, 2013
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1049-5142 print/1540-6997 online
DOI: 10.1080/10495142.2013.759816

A Praxis Framework for Implementing Market
Orientation Into Charities
PAUL CHAD
Centre for Research in Socially Responsible Marketing, School of Management and
Marketing, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

JUDY MOTION
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

ELIAS KYRIAZIS
Centre for Research in Socially Responsible Marketing, School of Management and
Marketing, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia

There is a scarcity of research regarding the process of introducing
market orientation into the not-for-profit sector. Understanding this
process would greatly assist the not-for-profit sector, which is under
increasing pressure to obtain funds to operate and offer appropriate services. In this article, we examine the successful introduction
of market orientation into three Australian charities and identify
the stages of implementation. The introduction of market orientation is analyzed from a discourse transformation perspective and
a praxis framework is developed. This is amongst the first studies examining the transition to a market orientation discourse
within charity organizations and the first study to develop a praxis
framework to guide managers. The study also pioneers a discourse
transformation perspective in market orientation research. The
article thus extends our knowledge of market orientation within the
not-for-profit sector and increases understanding of practitioner
engagement in marketing activities.
KEYWORDS market orientation, charities, non-profit, not-forprofit, case study, discourse

Address correspondence to Paul Chad, PhD, School of Management & Marketing,
University of Wollongong, Northfields Ave., Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia. E-mail:
pchad@uow.edu.au
28

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

29

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

INTRODUCTION
Charity organizations play a significant role in improving the welfare of societies and their economies. Traditionally, charities have appealed to the social
conscience of communities to fund services. However, increased competition
amongst numerous charities has created pressure to improve fundraising and
service delivery performance. The challenge for charity organizations is to
change their practice without compromising their ethos. Adoption of effective business practices is essential but may clash with the philosophy and
culture of charity organizations and potentially alienate significant stakeholders. The aim of this article is to develop a managerial praxis framework for
the successful introduction of a market orientation (MO) into charity organizations. A discourse analytic approach is used to examine how three charity
case study organizations move to a more market oriented mode of operation. The discourse analytic approach is based on Michael Foucault’s (1991)
work on discourse transformation and concentrates on how shifts in meaning modify the way organizational stakeholders perceive systemic change.
Two key research questions are addressed: first, what are the processes for
effectively introducing market oriented discourses in a charity organization?
Second, what is an appropriate praxis framework for successfully introducing
MO into charity organizations?
MO has received widespread attention in the marketing literature over
the past two decades and the adoption of MO has been shown to be associated with improved performance within organizations (Jaworski & Kohli,
1993). The research has typically been conducted in a for-profit setting. The
actual process of implementing MO has received little attention in either the
for-profit or the not-for-profit sector. Harris (2000) examined the barriers to
developing a MO and concluded that “comparatively few studies have examined the processes and dynamics of developing market orientation” (p. 619).
Similarly, Beverland and Lindgreen (2007) contended that “only one study
has examined the implementation of a market orientation” (p. 430) and that
examining the change process would substantially increase our knowledge
by determining practical implications. This issue was subsequently addressed
by Beverland and Lindgreen (2007) within the context of two agricultural
organizations. However, to date, no such research has been conducted in
the not-for-profit sector.
This article addresses the aforementioned gap in the existing literature
and examines the manner in which managers conduct the process of change
within charities, a specific subsector of the not-for-profit sector, and hence
responds to calls from Harris (2000), Kennedy, Goolsby, and Arnould (2003)
and Beverland and Lindgreen (2007) to progress research into the manner in
which MO is actually introduced into organizations. This article also assists
in addressing the comment by Tadajewski and Hewer (2011) “that there
needs to be a concerted effort in understanding how practitioners engage in

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

30

P. Chad et al.

marketing activities” (p. 451). This issue is significant because charities play
a key role in society and increased competition has resulted in numerous
charities struggling to survive. Improving the performance of charities will
assist them to better satisfy the needs of society.
The research contributes in a number of ways. Amongst the first research
to examine how MO can be successfully introduced into charities, the resultant praxis framework is a significant contribution to the literature and will
guide and direct managers within the charity sector to improve performance.
In doing so, it has “the potential to enrich marketing practices” (Tadajewski
& Hewer, 2011, p. 449) and “transform the intellectual and practical landscape” (p. 452). Likewise, the research contains elements of “novelty and
continuity” (p. 450) by continuing the examination of the MO concept from
a discourse transformation perspective.
Within the article, we review relevant aspects of MO and justify the relevance of MO for the not-for-profit sector. The research approach is outlined
and the findings of the three case studies are presented enabling our subsequent development of a praxis framework for implementation of market
orientation within charities. Finally, we provide a discussion and identify our
key contributions, followed by a conclusion.

THE MARKETING CONCEPT AND MARKET ORIENTATION
The marketing concept is defined by Kotler and Armstrong (2012) as the
management “philosophy that holds that achieving organizational goals
depends upon knowing the needs and wants of target markets and delivering
the desired satisfactions better than competitors” (p. 34). Formulation of the
marketing concept originated “in the 1950s in the context of business firms”
(Mukkerji 2004, p. 9). The marketing concept has long been viewed as the
main way for organizations to create satisfied customers and considered the
primary objective of organizations (Drucker, 1954; Levitt, 1960). Kohli and
Jaworski (1990) regarded the marketing concept as a business philosophy
and “a market-oriented organization is one whose actions are consistent with
the marketing concept” (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990, p. 1). Significant research
evidence suggests that a high level of MO is associated with a high level of
business performance in commercial for-profit organizations. Emphasising
this, a meta-analysis conducted by Shoham, Rose, and Kropp (2005) covering 15 years of published research concluded that MO has a significant
impact (directly, indirectly, and totally) on performance.
Early MO research was led by Narver and Slater (1990) and also Kohli
and Jaworski (1990). Narver and Slater (1990) developed the independent effects model of relationships between MO, business-specific factors,
market-level factors and business performance and suggested that MO “is
a one dimension construct consisting of three behavioural components

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

31

and two decision criteria—customer orientation, competitor orientation,
interfunctional coordination, a long-term focus, and a profit objective”
(Narver & Slater, 1990, pp. 21–22). In parallel to the Narver and Slater
(1990) research, Kohli and Jaworski (1990) considered MO to revolve around
market intelligence (intelligence generation, intelligence dissemination, and
responsiveness) and shortly afterwards proposed a model suggesting the
nature of top management, interdepartmental dynamics and organizational
systems influenced MO, and that MO consequently influenced employees
and business performance (Jaworski & Kohli, 1993).
Lafferty and Hult (2001) later conducted a meta-analysis of published
MO research. In comparing the decision-making perspective (Shapiro, 1988),
market intelligence perspective (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990), culturally based
behavioral perspective (Narver & Slater, 1990), strategic approach (Ruekert,
1992) and customer orientation perspective (Deshpande, Farley, & Webster
Jr, 1993), they suggested four key “synthesis dimensions” of MO, namely:
emphasis on customer, importance of information, interfunctional coordination and taking action. These principles were developed in the context of
for-profit organizations, with no consideration given to their relevance within
not-for-profit organizations.

MARKET ORIENTATION AND NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
MO “in the for-profit sector is one of the most researched fields in the marketing discipline. However, not-for-profit marketing as a whole and MO of
not-for-profit organizations in particular are largely under-researched areas”
(Modi & Mishra, 2010, p. 565). Despite being a neglected research area in
regards to MO, marketing is relevant to not-for-profit organizations (Drucker,
1990; Kotler & Andreasen, 1996) and given the key role that such organizations play in society (Pope, Isely, & Asamoa-Tutu, 2009), should be the focus
of further research. This would assist managers of not-for-profit organizations
who lack an appreciation of “the meaning, importance, and relevance of the
marketing concept to NPOs” (Modi & Mishra, 2010, p. 549). Not-for-profit
organizations play a key role not just within society, but also within the
overall economy and contribute 10% of GDP in the United States (Daystar
Council, 2011), over 4% in Australia (Productivity Commission, 2010) and
around 4% in the U.K. (Charity Commission, 2011).
The key differences between for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
are the economic rationale based on profit and loss considerations of forprofit organizations, whereas a not-for-profit organization is socially oriented
and based on helping people who have a generally less than optimal life
situation. Sargeant, Liao, and Foreman (Liao et al., 2001; Sargeant et al.,
2002) modified the original MO models developed for large for-profit organizations (Narver & Slater, 1990; Kohli & Jaworski, 1990) and proposed

32

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

a societal orientation model for the not-for-profit sector. They renamed
“customer” as “stakeholder” and an additional component named “collaboration” was included to accommodate situations whereby some competitors
in the not-for-profit sector sometimes work together to provide synergy
in service delivery. Gonzalez, Vijande and Casielles (2002) also modified
the MO model of Kohli and Jaworski (1990) and divided customers into
donors and beneficiaries. More recently, Duque-Zuluaga and Schneider
(2008) divided the customer in the MO model of Narver and Slater (1990) into
beneficiary/recipient, donor, volunteer/employee, and added a new component referred to as “collaborative orientation.” Duque-Zuluaga and Schneider
(2008) also added learning and entrepreneurship to their model, but this is
often regarded as a moderator/antecedent to MO by other researchers.

IMPLEMENTING MARKET ORIENTATION
Various models have been developed regarding the linkages between aspects
of organizations and MO but these do not actually explain how to implement
MO. Indeed, Beverland and Lindgreen (2007) contend that the literature “is
silent on the process involved in moving firms to a market orientation”
(p. 430). Taghian (2010) regarded implementation of MO as underresearched and considered that what research does exist typically examines
the antecedents to achieving MO rather than the actual implementation.
In 2007, Beverland and Lindgreen stated that Kennedy et al. (2003) had conducted the only empirical examination of implementing a MO—this involved
comparison of attempts by two schools to introduce MO and identified leadership support and interfunctional coordination as key issues. Beverland and
Lindgreen (2007) subsequently examined the introduction of MO into two
agricultural firms in New Zealand.
Using an ethnographic study of seven firms, Gebhardt, Carpenter, and
Sherry (2006) suggested a four-stage model for the process of introducing
MO: namely, initiation, reconstitution, institutionalization, and maintenance.
Whilst research into the actual implementation of MO is underresearched,
there has been various research regarding “barriers” to use of MO (e.g.
Harris, 1998). Wong, Saunders, and Doyle (1989) considered a key barrier
to introduction of a MO is the difficulty in attempting to change traditional
thinking, the self-interest of staff and lack of cooperation between functional
units. Harris and Ogbonna (2001) have identified leadership style as a key
to successful introduction of MO. Other reasons offered for nonachievement
of MO include flawed measures of customer satisfaction, inappropriate customer complaint mechanisms, rejection of competitor threats, and strategic
inertia (Mason & Harris, 2005). Barriers are both system focused (Harris &
Piercy, 1999) as well as people-focused/cultural (Gainer & Padanyi, 2005).
In terms of antecedents of MO, based on a review of MO literature, van Raaij

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

33

and Stoelhorst (2008) suggested seven “enablers” of MO: structure, process
design, information systems, reward systems, leadership, behavioral norms
and values, and competence management. All of the research outlined in
this article regarding barriers and antecedents to the introduction of MO has
been conducted within a for-profit context except the research of Gainer and
Padanyi (2005).
In summary, various researchers have developed models of MO for
both the for-profit and not-for-profit sectors. However, the process of how
MO is actually introduced into organizations is underresearched; most of the
research identified barriers to the introduction of MO rather than determining
the actual process of how it can be successfully introduced. Therefore we
focus on two research questions: first, what are the processes for effectively
introducing market oriented discourses in a charity organization? Second,
what is an appropriate praxis framework for successfully introducing MO
into charity organizations?

RESEARCH APPROACH
This research concentrates on charities because of the wide range within the
not-for-profit sub-sectors, for example charities, cultural groups, hospitals,
libraries, universities, and political parties which may operate in different
ways and thus not be appropriate to examine in one research project. The
model and definition of MO used for the research is based upon Lafferty
and Hult’s (2001) meta-analysis because it provides a synthesis of the views
of various key researchers, particularly the research of Kohli and Jaworski
(1990) and also Narver and Slater (1990) upon which the not-for-profit models are based. The research in this article examines how charities change as
management introduces MO. To assess this change, a discourse analytical
approach is adopted as the epistemic foundation. Ellis, Jack, and Higgins,
(2005) stated that “a discursive approach is gaining increased interest in marketing” (p. 124). Discourse may be understood as a system of thought or
a “grand narrative” (Ellis et al., 2011, p. 59) that constructs the world in
meaning; it influences everyday thought, talk and practice (Foucault, 1991).
Institutional domains, such as health, law, education, and commerce, are the
most prevalent sources of discourse. Foucault (1991) offered an analytical
tool for identifying and examining discourse transformation. First, discourse
transformation may be tracked by an analysis of changes in the substance
or meanings of a discourse, its “objects, operations, concepts, theoretical
options” (Foucault, 1991, p. 56). Second, changes may also be detected at the
level of discursive function/process—the “displacement of discourse boundaries,” “the new position and role” of the speaking subject, the “new mode of
functioning of language,” and “circulation” of the discourse (Foucault, 1991,
pp. 56–57). Lastly, changes in the discourse priorities may also be analyzed

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

34

P. Chad et al.

by identifying shifts at the level of multiple discourses—the hierarchy, directing principle and functional displacements of a discourse. A change from
a traditional charity discourse to a more market oriented discourse will
have occurred if employees “come not only to act differently but also to
understand or ‘know’ the world differently” (Motion & Leitch, 1996, p. 299).
To assess the change within charities, Foucault’s (1991, pp. 56–57) criteria
for identifying discourse transformations are applied in this research.
Case study methodology (Creswell, 2003) was used as it is considered
appropriate for in-depth and holistic analysis (Feagin, Orum, & Sjoberg,
1991) and for use during the formative period of research and theory
(Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 1994), such as the current situation regarding examination of how MO can be successfully introduced into charities. Three cases
were conducted as “multiple cases . . . have the advantage of allowing the
researcher to triangulate data from multiple sources, thus allowing results to
be generalised beyond a single case” (Aaker, Kumar, Day, & Lawley, 2005,
p. 161) and richer theory can be developed from multiple case studies relative to a single case (Eisenhardt, 1989). A criteria-based selection process
(LeCompte & Preissle 1993) was utilized to select the cases. The criteria
utilized were: not-for-profit charities, operating in the “health advice and
assistance” sector, geographically based in southeastern Australia, and having recently experienced an attempt to introduce a market orientation. The
level of success in introducing a market orientation was not a consideration
and indeed was not known at time of case selection. The focus on a single “industry” also reduced the likelihood of external influence (McDonald
2007). For confidentiality, the case organizations will be referred to by the
pseudonyms Arana, Bukari, and Camira.
Semistructured in-depth interviews utilizing open-ended questions were
used to explore the “lived experience” (Covaleski, Dirsmith, Heian, & Sajay,
1998) of those being interviewed. An interview protocol (Yin, 1994) was utilized to ensure consistency. Topics for discussion were particularly informed
by Lafferty and Hult’s (2001) four synthesis dimensions of MO and Foucault’s
(1991) framework “for detecting the changes which affect the discursive formations” (p. 56). Guidelines for conducting interviews suggested by Patton
(2002, see pp. 343–380) were followed. Interviews were augmented with
direct observation, archival material, and various artifacts considered appropriate (Gillham, 2000), including annual reports, organizational induction
manuals, strategic plans, organization brochures, newsletters, examples of
client surveys, and organizational Internet sites. The “triangulation made possible by these multiple data collection methods provided substantiation of
constructs and hypotheses” (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 538) and use of multiple
sources increased the validity of the research (Haigh, n.d.; Parkhe, 1993).
Within each case, theoretical sampling of interviewees was conducted
to build and refine emergent theory (Eisenhardt, 1989; Glaser & Strauss,
1967; Yin, 1984). In-depth interviews were initially conducted with the

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

35

chief executive officer (or equivalent). Employees (possessing a variety of
backgrounds, experience, and training) from all levels of the organizations
(vertical) and across all functional areas (horizontal) were interviewed to
gain a comprehensive perspective (Steinman, Deshpande, & Farley, 2000;
Webb, Webster, & Krepapa, 2000). Theoretical sampling stopped upon “saturation” when “a sufficient number of arguments of sufficient quality and
sufficient data for those arguments to be well grounded” (Wood & Kroger,
2000, p. 81) were obtained. Fifteen participants were interviewed at Arana,
10 at Bukari, and 15 at Camira. A single interviewer conducted all interviews
to minimize bias (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Strauss & Corbin, 1998). The interviews were digitally recorded and subsequently professionally transcribed.
Copies of interview transcripts were checked by the researchers and provided to respondents to verify accuracy and, where appropriate, follow-up
interviews were used to clarify and elaborate on any issues. Manual thematic
analysis of the transcripts was conducted to enable greater ‘immersion’ of
the researchers in the data (Wood & Kroger, 2000). Analysis was informed
by guidelines developed by Patton (2002, see pp. 465–468) and Creswell
(2003, see pp. 191–195) to identify emergent themes. Analysis was conducted
within-cases prior to cross-case (Miles & Huberman, 1994).
To ensure research quality, internationally recognized quality practices for case study (e.g., Eisenhardt, 1989; Gummesson, 2007; Stake, 1995,
pp. 107–116; Yin, 1993, pp. 39–40, 1994, pp. 32–38) and qualitative research
(e.g., Creswell, 2003, pp. 195–197; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Miles & Huberman,
1994, pp. 277–280; Patton, 2002, pp. 552–584) were utilized.

Background to the Three Cases
ARANA
Established in 1974, Arana operates within southeastern Australia and provides a range of services and support for people with a specific medical
condition and for their families. Arana is primarily funded by both State and
Federal Government. Guided by a somewhat visionary long-term CEO, Arana
has progressively introduced MO in a relatively low-key manner since the
mid 2000’s and has since grown markedly. The period 2007/08 was characterized by significant growth, bedding down new structures and adjusting to
life as a much more complex organization and simultaneously dealing with
significant staffing issues (Arana, 2008). Arana currently has 1,700 service
recipient clients, 160 permanent staff, and 200 casual staff. A newly formed
for-profit division not only provides employment for service recipient clients
with the specific medical condition, but also competes in the open market
to provide various services such as lawn mowing and property maintenance
for external, paying clients. Revenue from this fee-for-service division provides additional funds for use within the organization. The increased revenue

36

P. Chad et al.

has coincided with significant changes towards a more professional and
businesslike perspective involving numerous aspects of a market oriented
discourse being introduced within the organization. These changes have
included a strong social entrepreneurial focus (including the creation of the
for-profit division) as well as increased use of key performance indicators
and reporting processes plus recognition of the need to develop relationshipmarketing activities with key government fund providers to cement funding
sources for the future.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

BUKARI
Originating in 1952 as a charity run by parents and interested persons, Bukari
began employing professionals in 1968 and is now a national Australian charity employing over 100 staff and forty volunteers (Bukari, n.d.a). Bukari’s
aim is to provide education and support services throughout Australia to
children and adults with a specific medical condition, raise awareness within
the community of the medical condition as well as advocacy/lobbying to
government. The national office in Sydney plus regional offices enables
Australia-wide coverage.
Services include individual service programs (aimed at individuals and
their families), community and professional programs (for schools, police,
nurses, and other community groups), as well as information and referral services (Bukari, n.d.b). Bukari mainly relies upon self-generated funds
(donations, lotteries, and bequests). An outbound call centre is operated to
contact potential donor clients and lottery ticket purchasers. Operating at a
loss, in 2005 the CEO resigned and several members of the senior management team also left. Since then, under the direction of a new CEO, significant
changes towards a business oriented perspective involving numerous aspects
of a market oriented discourse have occurred within Bukari. These changes
were deemed as urgently needed due to the poor financial situation of
Bukari. The financial situation was a key influencer in the manner in which
the new CEO introduced the discourse transformation.
The new CEO, with the assistance of a new senior management team
made changes towards development of a corporate structure to provide a
base for service growth (Bukari, 2006) and initiated a strategic planning process including a new vision, new framework and business plan. A 3-year
aim was established to identify client needs, develop quality products, meet
or exceed the changing expectations of service recipient clients, build organization capability, introduce new policies and procedures, diversify income
streams and raise awareness (Bukari, 2006). Development of a strong direct
marketing capability (Bukari, 2007) enabled subsequent growth in revenue,
particularly from lottery sales (Bukari, 2009). The current strategy incorporates design of innovative services and delivery tools and commitment
to quality services (Bukari, 2008). The success of Bukari’s new marketing

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

37

strategy has enabled a 40% increase in revenue over the period 2005–2010.
The new market orientation of Bukari is emphasized in its new mission
statement based upon delivery of innovative, high quality education and
support services as well as listening, responding, continually improving, and
innovating (Bukari, n.d.c).

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

CAMIRA
Operating as the community care division of the Sydney (Australia) operations of a Christian-based church, Camira was formed 150 years ago and
currently provides care of the aged and disadvantaged, and the love of Christ
expressed in practical ways within the community (Camira, 2007). Regional
offices are located throughout the greater-Sydney area, with 1,400 paid staff
and 2,000 volunteers providing the range of services. Battling financially and
operationally, a major re-structure occurred within Camira in 2006. The then
CEO (with a theological background) retired and all six general managers
also left the organization. A new CEO with business experience was recruited
with the express mandate to reinvigorate the organization. This was the first
time that Camira has ever had a CEO from a nontheological background.
A strategic plan was developed which assumes a dynamic and changeable future. The plan was based on an extensive environmental analysis
that included engagement via interviews of a broad range of stakeholders
(Camira, 2007). Thus, introduction of a new CEO possessing a strong business background signaled the commencement of a new era for Camira, with
a more market oriented discourse being introduced. Government funding
accounts for 57% of Camira’s total income and steps have recently commenced to reduce reliance on government funding via development of
corporate donation income streams. Despite the introduction of a more businesslike perspective, Camira still maintains a strong religious base and aims
for all senior management and other key positions to be filled by Christians
from Bible-based churches.

FINDINGS
Traditional Charities
A traditional charity discourse was characterized by notions of people needing help, being objects of pity, tragic, low achievers, dependent on others,
and victims of circumstance (Fulcher, 1989). Respondents perceived traditional charity organizations as typically entailing small-scale activity, a
reliance on volunteers, and operating in an inefficient and unsophisticated
manner. Traditional charities were regarded as being reactive and having a
welfare-based orientation, fund-raising was low-scale and unsophisticated.
Corporations were not targeted for funds and traditional charities were

38

P. Chad et al.

perceived as having little or no professional fund-raising employees. The
three charities examined in this article were traditional charities that have
recently had MO introduced.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation: A Three Stage Process
We have identified that MO was implemented within the charities in three
transitional phases: a new managerialism phase, a professionalism phase and
a subsequent embedding phase. Within Arana, the progressive CEO with
managerial skills anticipated the need for change, whereas the catalyst for
change within both Bukari and Camira was poor financial performance. The
long held assumptions that the organizations would survive in the newly
competitive environment whilst still operating as traditional charities were
challenged. Senior management with appropriate business skills were introduced into Bukari and Camira. Thus, new managerialism was the first phase
needed within these charities to become more market oriented.
New managerialism has a “concern for efficiency, cost-effectiveness and
competition” (Gewirtz & Ball, 2000, p. 256). Emergence of new managerialism is associated with “new icons such as outcomes and missions, and new
rituals to enshrine them including corporate planning, performance evaluation and new fiscal accountability arrangements” (Sinclair, 1996, p. 234).
Incorporation of management techniques from for-profit businesses (Meyer,
2002; Vickers & Kouzmin, 2001) resulted in the transformation of charities
into businesses.
The second phase towards MO for charities that we identified was
the introduction of professionalism. This was a major discursive shift from
the traditional charity discourse characterised by volunteers. To provide
the charities with the human capital necessary to deliver MO, volunteers
were replaced by paid professionals, paid nonprofessionals were trained
to become more professional, and even professionals with nonbusiness
backgrounds were required to gain professional business skills. This was
most evident within Arana (who utilized consultants to provide training)
and Camira (who offered University based courses to existing employees).
Bukari, due to very tight financial constraints used in-house training offered
by the CEO. Charities must “be good at learning” and able to improve
employee capabilities (Bennett, 1998a, p. 12). Employees were required to
be more accountable and skilled at service delivery. Following the foundations built via new managerialism and professionalism, the charities were
then in a position to utilize the new resources to subsequently consolidate
and embed new practices consistent with market oriented behavior.
Application of Foucault’s (1991) criteria for detecting discourse transformation identified that each charity had successfully moved from a traditional
charity mode of operation to a more market oriented discourse and practice.
The challenge was to map how the inclusion of a market oriented discourse

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

39

was implemented and impacted on the charities. The fundamental systems
of meaning that shape charities were examined. The discourse boundaries
(Foucault, 1991) that control what is included in how we think about charities
were expanded to include economic practices, the charities had all introduced dimensions of social entrepreneurialism practices and Bukari had also
introduced state-of-the-art direct marketing activities. Although the discourse
boundaries relating to operating functions had changed, an underlying charity ethos of client-first was maintained. Employees gained a “new position
and role” (Foucault, 1991, p. 56) within the change to a market oriented
discourse and were required to possess a higher level of skills and operate
in a more professional manner. Fournier (1999) suggests that professionalism can be used to embed what management considers appropriate work
identities, conduct, and practice. This was a significant change, affecting
employees across all three cases, and supporting Evetts (2003) who observed
that “the discourse of professionalism is increasingly used” (p. 23) in organizations and can be used by management “as a mechanism of occupational
change and control” (p. 32). The move from the traditional charity discourse that was characterized by volunteers to a more businesslike discourse
required increased professionalism. One service provider commented that
the “differences would have to be professionalism . . . our accountability on record keeping, documentation. Just the whole thing.” The changes
did cause some issues but were accepted overall as indicated by a service
provider:
[Some people] had a real culture shock, there were a few resignations
[but also] the ones that are still here are just so impressed with what has
happened and the changes that have happened . . . those people who
are still here are really appreciative of the fact that we can see the [service
recipient] clients are benefiting from what’s happened.

There was what Foucault (1991, p. 57) referred to as a “new mode
of functioning of language” within each charity as MO was introduced. The
language of business was introduced by the new managers with phrases such
as service delivery, strategic planning and best practice being introduced.
A service provider commented:
It was a very challenging time, I am the last remaining manager from
the original group. At the point when we got a new CEO, they came
from a services marketing perspective, I come from an acute care nursing
perspective, I had never been exposed to that before, so it is a completely
new concept and the language, it was like a foreign language.

Managers utilized various methods to introduce and embed the new
modes of discourse and operation. Arana, utilized subcommittees, Bukari

40

P. Chad et al.

used direct management/employee meetings (due to the relatively small size
and centralized location of employees), whilst Camira gained employee buyin by inviting all employees to an initial strategic planning day then using
various ongoing employee committees. The new CEO of Bukari commented:
The biggest thing facing me has actually been trying to bring some cultural change about in the organization. Because I could see the need to
do things but I couldn’t get the, you know, it has been a struggle to get
the troops to see where we needed to go.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Similarly, communication was regarded as a key to introducing the
change with a senior manager commenting:
I think the key is communicating the changes to staff before they are
implemented, and if you communicate to people the change and you
explain to them why you are doing [it] and what the benefit to the
organization is going to be [they will accept the need for change].

Utilising Lafferty and Hult’s (2001) four synthesis dimensions of MO,
Appendix 1 indicates the change in levels of MO within the charities based
on the managerial interventions. “Emphasis on customer” is a trait of traditional charities and this was maintained in the new discourse. The other
three dimensions of MO increased in the new discourse indicating that
management had been successful in introducing MO. Appendix 1 contains
quotations in italics obtained from employees that justify the identification of new levels of MO. Traditional charities operate in a relatively
unsophisticated manner with few records of donors or service recipients.
The more market oriented mode of operation resulted in the organizations introducing information-gathering procedures and recognizing the
benefits of data regarding donors, hence greater appreciation of the “importance of information.” The increased professionalism and skills assisted
improved “interfunctional coordination.” Introduction of service delivery
processes based around standard procedures assisted improved “taking
action.”

A Praxis Framework for Implementing Market Orientation Within
Charities
Insights gleaned from the interviews have identified that all three charities
have successfully introduced MO, and the phases by which the transformation occurred. This data was drawn upon to develop a conceptual praxis
framework for implementing MO into charities that is provided in Table 1.
To develop the framework, we firstly identified the relevant characteristics
that a charity needs to consider (left-hand column of Table 1). This list of

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

41

TABLE 1 Praxis Framework For Development of a Market Oriented Charity

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Characteristics

Market oriented charity

Organization mission (values and beliefs) and strategy
Client focus
Service-recipient clients
Maintain and reinforce emphasis of high service recipient
client focus characteristic of traditional charity.
Switch from portrayal of service recipient client as subject
of pity to portrayal of service recipient client as valued
member of society.
Donor clients
Utilize customer relationship management to identify key
target donors. Implement relationship marketing to
develop bonds with key donors (individual and
corporate) and government fund providers.
Competitive focus
Increase collaboration with other charities for synergistic
service delivery to minimize resource wastage and to
provide service recipient client with most appropriate
service provision. Not withstanding, recognize high
competition with other charities for individual and
corporate donations and government funds.
Organizational size
Grow to achieve economies of scale to improve
performance. Grow via increase in market share within
existing markets and/or expansion of geographic
regions served and/or via increased range of services
offered.
Reduce growth once no further economies of scale can
been achieved.
Stakeholder relationships
Identify key stakeholders.
Develop strategic and well-planned relationships with
key stakeholders.
Interface with external
stakeholders
Funding bodies
Develop and maintain capability to increase success in
gaining access to government funds.
Publics
Increase interface to gain new donor clients.
Service recipient clients
Introduce holistic/customized service approach with
pro-active involvement of service recipient client in
service provision.
Donor clients
Increase pro-active frequency of contact.
Leadership
Board of directors
Increase proportion of business professionals via
pro-active targeted invitations to potential candidates.
Managerial interventions
Ongoing professional monitoring of operations.
Interventions as appropriate to ensure continuance of
smooth operations.
Emphasis
Ensure long-term strategy development.
Risk aversion
Introduce calculated risk to enable achievement of
organization goals.
(Continued)

42

P. Chad et al.

TABLE 1 (Continued)
Characteristics
Top management (CEO)

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Managerial interventions

Emphasis

Risk aversion
Middle management
Managerial interventions
Emphasis

Risk aversion
Employees
Service providers
Organizational commitment
Identity
Esprit de corps
Perception of marketing

Market oriented charity
Employ experienced business professional generally from
for-profit sector.
Utilize high involvement during establishment phase in
leading change:
• change management skills
• skills/capability audit
• leverage existing capabilities
• develop formalized strategy
• gain buy-in from all organization
• introduce new language
• increase staff training
• increase internal marketing
• change organizational image/identity
• new managerial job titles
Reduce involvement following embedding change in
discourse.
Subsequent ongoing overview of operations.
Ensure organizational efficiency and long-term strategic
perspective.
Introduce diverse range of highly specific and
appropriate services.
Diversify revenue sources including increased
government funding and increased social
entrepreneurship including establishment of for-profit
activities.
Ensure ongoing staff training as appropriate to ensure
appropriate employee skill levels.
Utilize calculated level of risk.
Increase level of entrepreneurialism to assist achievement
of organization goals.
Utilize high achieving, experienced internal service
employees and new business professionals typically
from for-profit sector.
Enable opportunity for significant ongoing consultation
and input into organizational strategic goals and tactics.
Continue organizational efficiency.
Increase involvement in medium and long-term strategy.
Increase use of promotion- personal selling, advertising,
publicity, public relations.
Increase opportunity for risk-taking to achieve
organizational objectives.

Employ staff with high commitment to new discourse.
Employ professionals willing to accept high
accountability.
Employee staff that embrace the new discourse.
Educate staff regarding the value of selected use of “7P’s”
to achieve organizational goals.
(Continued)

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

43

TABLE 1 (Continued)
Characteristics
Fundraisers
Organizational commitment
Identity
Esprit de corps
Perception of marketing
Organizational structure
Organizational systems
Formalization

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Centralization
Departmentalization
Rewards
Intrinsic/“raison d’être”
Financial
Respect
Accountability
Personal
Organizational

Interdepartmental dynamics
Conflict
Connectedness

Market oriented charity
Employ staff with high commitment to new discourse.
Employ professionals willing to accept high
accountability.
Employ staff that embrace the new discourse.
Educate staff regarding use of 7P’s to achieve
organizational revenue generation goals.

Develop high level of formalization to ensure service
quality and ease of reporting for government audits.
Introduce high use of KPI’s.
Decentralize to cater to localized service recipient client
needs and wants but overseen by centralized top
management to ensure coordinated organization.
Create formalized specialist departments and enable
strong inter-department communications.
Reinforce employee satisfaction from high quality service
recipient client service delivery.
Offer competitive salaries to attract appropriate staff.
Provide high respect due to predominantly professional
employees.
Emphasize employees’ need for high personal
accountability based on personal KPI’s.
Ensure ongoing processes enable compliance with audits
by government fund providers.
Minimize administrative expenses to appease various
stakeholders including general public and donor
clients.
Develop low conflict climate.
Utilize ongoing communications and publicize role of
each department to enable high level of connectedness.
Use regular integrated internal communications.
Establish leadership forums/cross-functional
teams/professional practice teams.

characteristics was drawn from various market/societal orientation models
(Duque-Zuluaga & Schneider, 2008; Gonzalez et al., 2002; Kohli & Jaworski,
1990; Kohli, Jaworski, & Kumar, 1993; Lafferty & Hult, 2001; Liao et al.,
2001; Narver & Slater, 1990; Sargeant et al., 2002). Following compilation of
these characteristics, the data obtained from the three case studies enabled
development of management praxis guidelines (right-hand column of Table
1) to assist successful implementation of MO into charities. The content of
the Table is now discussed.

44

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Organization Mission (Values and Beliefs) and Strategy
Client focus is a key aspect of MO. Charities typically have an inherent strong
focus on service recipient clients so should maintain this focus after the
discourse transformation and, in fact, can utilize the existing service recipient
client focus as a bridge and legacy from the previous discourse to gain
“buy-in” from employees. Thus, maintenance of high client focus should be
regarded as the foundation of the new market oriented discourse. As well as
continuance of this high focus, the focus on service recipient clients should
also switch to perceiving these people as valued members of society rather
than objects of pity as is the case in traditional charity discourse.
In a traditional charity discourse, donor clients, although necessary to
enable charities to gain funds to exist, often have less focus relative to service
recipient clients. Charities should therefore increase focus on donor clients
and recognize the need to have a balanced focus on both service recipient clients as well as donor clients. This increased focus on donor clients
can be assisted via implementation of customer relationship management to
identify key target donors, and utilization of subsequent relationship marketing to develop bonds with key donors (individual and corporate) as well as
government fund providers.
Management of charities need to recognize the existence of other charities, and determine the appropriate relationship to have with these charities.
There will be a competitive focus relative to other charities due to competition for donations and government funds. However, there should also be
co-operation for the common good in regards to collaboration on service
provision to increase efficiency in an industry regularly battling for funds—
this will result in the best use of funds to achieve maximum societal benefits.
Charities typically recognize the need to grow to create economies of
scale needed to survive. Management should thus identify an appropriate
target size for the charity, and implement a growth strategy to enable this
size to be reached in a timely manner. This growth may be via merging
with, or acquisition of other charities. Another option is to expand the range
of services offered within the current geographic region, or expand into
other regions—these options should however be considered in relation to
the effect/consequences on other charities.
Associated with the client focus, charities need to identify important
new key stakeholders and develop relationships with them. Charities need
to not only determine a focus, but also then develop an appropriate interface with these stakeholders. For example, government-funding bodies are
a key potential source of revenue so it is essential to develop and maintain capability to interface with the key government personnel. Likewise, an
appropriate interface is needed with the general public to gain new donors.
The interface with service recipient clients should be via a holistic service
delivery process including pro-active involvement of clients rather than the

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

45

traditional reactive singular contacts. Charities should also be pro-active in
increasing frequency of contact with donor clients.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Leadership
The nature and history of traditional charities is such that the leadership
(board of directors, top and middle management), although well intentioned,
often do not have the skills and knowledge regarding how to operate a
charity in the current environment, nor do they often recognize the need to
change. As much as possible, leadership of a modern charity should be structured and operated similarly to a for-profit business—for reasons of efficiency
and long-term viability. Whilst the board of directors of the charity will still be
composed of unpaid volunteers, the number of directors with business skills
should be increased via proactive targeting of appropriate people within
the local business community. By developing a more professional board of
directors, managerial interventions will be typical of a for-profit board—with
a focus on long-term strategy development with calculated business risk.
Similarly, top management (including CEO) should ideally consist of
experienced business professionals, preferably with not-for-profit experience, but possibly sourced from the for-profit sector, but who have an
appropriate affiliation and understanding of the overall aims and underlying
ethos of charities. With experience of management, their managerial interventions will be associated with change management, leveraging existing
capabilities, improving service delivery, ensuring appropriate employee skills
(via either retraining/upskilling existing employees if needed, or employing
new people), and developing a formalized long-term strategy. Based on
direction from the CEO, the middle management, consisting of existing high
achieving employees and new business professionals, should assist the CEO
to transform the traditional charity discourse.
Managers should also look to gain the services of external consultants
for short-term access to specialist skills. For example, tax consultants can
assist charities to capitalize on the taxation benefits afforded to not-for-profit
organizations and restructure payment packages to employees to assist in
making salaries more competitive with similar jobs in the for-profit sector.
To assist in the circulation of the new discourse, managers should focus
on the employees and educate employees that the previous discourse was
not best practice. Employment within charities can be very insular, with longterm employees having little, if any, exposure to other modes of operation.
Employees tend to replicate past actions, and need to be informed of the
need to change their mode of operation.

Employees
A vital requirement for success of the new discourse is employees who
are committed to the new direction of the charity and who are willing

46

P. Chad et al.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

to accept the higher level of personal accountability and new modes of
day-to-day operation. Gaining legitimization and acceptance from the existing employees and involving them in all stages of the discursive shift will
minimize resistance. Managers need to recognize and appreciate how the
discourse change impacts on both the organizational and individuals’ identities and their work practices. Thus, during the change management process,
management need to gain buy-in from the existing employees and ensure
they possess the appropriate skills, and/or employ new professional staff
with the relevant skills. This is required in both the service provision as well
as the fundraising sections of the charity. Professionalism and the associated
high accountability are essential.

Organizational Structure
The new discourse should contain a high level of formalization to
ensure quality services, with ongoing accountability via reference to KPI’s.
Whilst top management oversees the operations of the organization, there
should be decentralization of empowerment to the employees at any
branches and regional centers to enable effective responses to local
market needs. Formalized specialized departments with strong interdepartment communications will ensure an efficient and effective organizational
structure.
Optimum performance is achieved by high-performing employees. The
employees are likely to perform well if they perceive appropriate rewards.
The underlying raison d’être for charities is to provide services to people
who are not always able to help themselves. By providing a high level of
client service delivery and seeing their clients’ benefit, employees will gain
high intrinsic job satisfaction. Coupled with this, there is a need to also
offer competitive financial rewards. The introduction of more professional
job requirements will require an increase in salaries as the intrinsic reward
of seeing service recipient clients helped will not by itself guarantee high
performance from employees.
A new market oriented discourse is characterized by high levels
of accountability, both individually and organizationally. The individual
accountability should be based on personal KPIs, whilst organizational
accountability is measured via KPIs and external audits.
A traditional charity is often associated with a low level of operational
efficiency and less than optimum interdepartmental dynamics due to poor
management skills as well as a reliance on volunteers working irregular
hours. The modern discourse should utilize ongoing communications to
develop a low conflict climate. This can be assisted by regular internal communication via newsletters, and establishment of cross-functional teams, as
well as professional practice teams which bring together employees in similar
job roles from different geographic locations.

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

47

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

DISCUSSION AND CONTRIBUTIONS
This article addressed two research aims. First, we examined the process
for effectively introducing market oriented discourses in a charity organization. Based on examination of three cases and use of a Foucauldian
(1991) approach we have identified how charities actively change the
discourse boundaries, develop new positions and roles for employees,
introduce new language and circulate the new discourse. This discourse
transformation involved a phased approach involving new managerialism,
then professionalism prior to embedding the MO. Second, based on these
findings, we developed a conceptual praxis framework to guide charities to
implement MO.
Whilst the four synthesis dimensions of MO are all relevant to charities,
adoption is not an easy process and requires development of capabilities
and changes to the mind-sets of a number of existing employees. The introduction of MO into the three charity case studies assisted in improved
performance. This improved performance is exemplified by the increased
revenue generation since the discourse transformations occurred. This reinforces the findings of Bennett (1998b) who determined that small/medium
charities with high MO increased revenue more so than charities with lower
levels of MO. Improved service delivery and a more targeted range of
services also exemplify the improved operating performance of the charities. However, the discourse transformations were not smooth, with various
employees within the three charities either leaving during the course of the
transformation, or taking time to accept the transformation. Following the
introduction of MO into the charities, the resultant discourse in each charity
was characterized by a more businesslike and professional approach with
numerous standard practices and procedures to formalize and embed the
new discourse.
The research has indicated that charities can successfully introduce a
more market oriented discourse for the benefit of all stakeholders, but caution needs to be taken to ensure it is introduced in an appropriate manner
and new managerialism and professionalism need to be introduced before
market orientation can be embedded. A key finding of the research is that
an extremely strong client-first ethos exists amongst existing employees in
the charity sector, particularly amongst service providers. Although a discourse transformation reflecting a more market oriented approach supplants
the previous legacy charity discourse, a significant remnant for employees
was the emphasis on customers, a foundation for the transformation. The
emphasis of customers was maintained, albeit via new and more professional
service delivery processes. Continuing a client-first ethos may potentially
cause ongoing challenges as management wrestle with limited resources,
maintaining ongoing efficiency and ensuring sustainability but a client-first
ethos is the raison d’être for these organizations. However, the conceptual

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

48

P. Chad et al.

praxis framework provided in Table 1 recommends appropriate actions to
successfully transform a traditional charity into a modern, market oriented
organization.
Research regarding the actual implementation of MO is sparse
(Beverland & Lindgreen, 2007) both within the for-profit as well as the
not-for-profit sectors. Also, relative to the for-profit sector, research regarding MO in general within not-for-profit organizations including charities is
an under-researched area (Bennett, 2005; Sargeant et al., 2002; Warnaby &
Finney, 2005). This research thus not only expands our general knowledge
regarding how an organization can successfully introduce MO, but it also
specifically advances our knowledge within the not-for-profit sector. We consider the research questions addressed in this article to be of interest and of
importance to both academics and practitioners as they specifically examine
the manner in which charities actually operate and utilize marketing theory.
This research pioneers the actual examination of the process of implementing MO into charities and as such responds to the comment by Tadajewski
and Hewer (2011) “that there needs to be a concerted effort in understanding how practitioners engage in marketing activities” (p. 451). This article
explicitly addresses the lack of practitioner perspectives (Cornelissen & Lock,
2005). Based on actual examination of how managers within three charities
introduced and engaged in market orientation, our development of a resultant praxis framework is thus a significant contribution to the literature and
is aimed to assist charity managers to improve performance. This improved
performance will potentially have a major impact in assisting society at large.
In response to the “so what” (Tynan, 2006, p. 573) question often asked
regarding the contributions of research, we contend that the not-for-profit
sector plays a key role in society, that MO is relevant for the not-for-profit
sector, that there has been minimal previous examination of how successful implementation of MO can be achieved within the sector, and thus the
development of a framework to introduce MO into the charity sub-sector of
the not-for-profit sector offers a significant contribution. It addresses a gap
by providing knowledge regarding how practitioners can successfully introduce MO into charities. Thus, we consider the research will “transform the
intellectual and practical landscape” (Tadajewski & Hewer, 2011, p. 452).
Using Bourner’s (1996) checklist, the research fills gaps in the current
literature; assists in clarifying the specific areas in which existing MO ideas
apply; offers synthesis of existing ideas and looks at existing situations from
a novel theoretical perspective (discourse theory). The research presents an
examination of the process of change within an organization as management introduces some form of MO. We now know that, given the historical
traditional nature of charities, introduction of MO into a charity (based on
the analysis of three case organizations) firstly requires a transition through
new managerialism and professionalism phases. This provides an interesting
comparison with the research conducted by Gebhardt, Carpenter, and Sherry

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

49

(2006) who suggested a four-stage model for the process of introducing MO
in for-profit organizations namely, initiation, reconstitution, institutionalization, and maintenance. It also provides a useful addition to the research
conducted by Beverland and Lindgreen (2007) who examined introduction
of market orientation in two agricultural organizations using Lewin’s (1951)
broad three-stage change process model, namely unfreezing, movement,
refreezing.
Given the claims that marketing, and hence MO is relevant not just in
the for-profit arena but is also relevant in the not-for-profit arena (e.g., Kotler
& Levy, 1969), the research has re-affirmed and clarified that MO, in some
form, is appropriate for at least the charity sub-sector of the not-for-profit
arena but needs to be introduced in a very specific manner to address the
strong historical charity ethos within the organizations. The inherent nature
of traditional charities is such that the specific drivers and consequences of
introducing market orientation into charities is different than in the for-profit
sector and thus is different than simple replication.
The research is highly original as it sets down “a major piece of new
information in writing for the first time” (Phillips & Pugh, 2000, p. 63) based
on first hand data collected from charity employees. Likewise, the research
contains elements of “novelty and continuity” (Tadajewski & Hewer, 2011,
p. 450) by continuing the examination of the MO concept but from a
novel perspective—a discourse transformation perspective. The Foucauldian
(1991) framework was found to be useful in providing a worthwhile and
convenient guide to detecting the changes that affect discursive formations.
The research has demonstrated that complex discourse theory can be utilized
in an applied manner to analyze an organization to offer insights into marketing praxis related to organizational change. Change is vitally connected to
what things mean to people, how they communicate, and what actions they
take. The discourse approach provided useful theoretical insights to assist in
framing an examination of organizational change and established discourse
as relevant to marketing.
The current research also offers ideas for future research. The current
research was based on multiple case studies of domestic charities based
in southeastern Australia. Charities operate in numerous countries around
the world and they may operate under differing and specific environmental
factors and dynamics. In terms of future research, additional cases covering
a wider range of charities both within Australia as well as in other countries
could assist in fine-tuning the developed praxis framework.

CONCLUSION
We have examined the manner in which three Australian charities have
successfully introduced a market orientation. The research has shown that

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

50

P. Chad et al.

poorly operating charities can gain improved organizational performance via
the introduction of MO. The inherent differences between the for-profit and
the charity sector, particularly the motivations and beliefs of employees, do
however present unique managerial challenges and therefore require a specific manner of introduction of market orientation within the charity sector.
The praxis framework subsequently developed and provided in Table 1 can
guide charity managers towards successful introduction of market orientation. We strongly suggest that managers keep in mind the key aspects of
discourse transformation—displacement of discourse boundaries, the position and role of the speaking subject, language, and circulation of the new
discourse (Foucault, 1991). By being aware of these issues, managers can
be better placed to utilize appropriate processes to maximize the smooth
introduction of their proposed new market oriented discourse. Our world is
ever-changing, and considering the key role of charities in assisting society,
we hope this research has increased our knowledge of how charities can
become more market oriented to their improve performance for the benefit
of their clients.

REFERENCES
Aaker, D., Kumar, V., Day, G., & Lawley, M. (2005). Marketing research—the Pacific
rim edition. Sydney, Australia: Wiley.
Arana. (2008). Annual report 2007–2008. Sydney, Australia: Arana.
Bennett, R. (1998a). Charities, organisational learning and market orientation: A suggested measure of the propensity to behave as a learning organisation. Journal
of Marketing Practice: Applied Marketing Science, 4(1), 5–25.
Bennett, R. (1998b). Market orientation among small to medium sized UK charitable
organisations: Implications for fund-raising performance. Journal of Nonprofit &
Public Sector Marketing, 6(1), 31–45.
Bennett, R. (2005). Competitive environment, market orientation, and the use of
relational approaches to the marketing of charity beneficiary services. Journal
of Services Marketing, 19, 453–469.
Beverland, M., & Lindgreen, A. (2007). Implementing market orientation in industrial
firms: A multiple case study. Industrial Marketing Management, 36, 430–442.
Bourner, T. (1996). The research process: Four steps to success. In T. Greenfield
(Ed.), Research methods—guidance for postgraduates (pp. 7–11). London,
England: Arnold.
Bukari. (n.d.a). Our history. Retrieved June 12, 2010, from http://www.bukari.org.
au/our_history.asp
Bukari. (n.d.b). About us. Retrieved June 12, 2010, from http://www.bukari.org.au/
about_us.asp
Bukari. (n.d.c). Our purpose. Retrieved June 12, 2010, from http://www.bukari.org.
au/our_purpose.asp
Bukari. (2006). Annual report 2005/6. Sydney, Australia: Bukari.
Bukari. (2007). Annual report 2006/7. Sydney, Australia: Bukari.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

51

Bukari. (2008). Annual report 2007/8. Sydney, Australia: Bukari.
Bukari. (2009). Annual report 2008/9. Sydney, Australia: Bukari.
Camira. (2007). Strategic plan 2007–2009. Sydney, Australia: Camira.
Charity Commission. (2011). The Charity Commission’s role and regulatory
approach. Retrieved April 25, 2011, from http://http://www.charity-commission.
gov.uk/about_us/contacting_us/role_and_regulatory_approach.aspx
Cornelissen, J., & Lock, A. (2005). The uses of marketing theory: Constructs, research
propositions, and meaningful implications. Marketing Theory, 5, 165–184.
Covaleski, M., Dirsmith, M., Heian, J., & Sajay, S. (1998). The calculated and avowed:
Techniques of discipline and struggles over identity in the big six public
accounting firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 43, 293–327.
Creswell, J. (2003). Research design; qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Daystar Council. (2011). Is it viable to set up a non profit organization? Retrieved
April 25, 2011, from http://http://www.startnonprofitorganization.com/u-sstatewise-nonprofit-incorporation-process
Deshpande, R., Farley, J., & Webster, F., Jr. (1993). Corporate culture, customer orientation and innovativeness in Japanese firms: A quadrad analysis. Journal of
Marketing, 57(1), 23–37.
Drucker, P. (1954). The practice of management. New York, NY: Perennial Library.
Drucker, P. (1990). Managing the non-profit organization. Oxford, England:
Butterworth Heinemann.
Duque-Zuluaga, L., & Schneider, U. (2008). Market orientation and organisational
performance in the nonprofit context: Exploring both concepts and the relationship between them. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 19(2),
25–47.
Eisenhardt, K. (1989). Building theories from case study research. The Academy of
Management Review, 14, 532–550.
Ellis, N., Fitchett, J., Higgins, M., Jack, G., Lim, M., Saren, M., & Tadajewski, M.
(2011). Marketing: A critical textbook. London: Sage.
Ellis, N., Jack, G., & Higgins, M. (2005). (De)constructing the market for animal feeds:
A discursive study. Journal of Marketing Management, 21, 117–146.
Evetts, J. (2003). The construction of professionalism in new and existing occupational contexts; Promoting and facilitating occupational change. International
Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, 23(4), 22–35.
Feagin, J., Orum, A., & Sjoberg, G. (1991). A case for case study. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina.
Foucault, M. (1991). Politics and the study of discourse. In G. Burchell, C. Gordon, P.
Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect—studies in governmentality, with two lectures
by and an interview with Michael Foucault (pp. 53–72). Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago.
Fournier, V. (1999). The appeal to ‘professionalism’ as a disciplinary mechanism.
Social Review, 47, 280–307.
Fulcher, G. (1989). Disabling policies? A comparative approach to education policy
and disability. London, England: Falmer Press.
Gainer, B., & Padanyi, P. (2005). The relationship between market-oriented activities and market-oriented culture: Implications for the development of market
orientation in nonprofit service organisations. Journal of Business Research, 58,
854–862.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

52

P. Chad et al.

Gebhardt, G., Carpenter, G., & Sherry, J., Jr. (2006). Creating a market orientation: A
longitudinal, multifirm, grounded analysis of cultural transformation. Journal of
Marketing, 70(4), 37–55.
Gewirtz, S., & Ball, S. (2000). From ‘welfarism’ to ‘new managerialism’: Shifting
discourses of school headship in the education marketplace. Discourse, 21,
253–268.
Gillham, B. (2000). Case study research methods. London, England: Continuum.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Gonzalez, L., Vijande, M., & Casielles, R. (2002). The market orientation concept in
the private nonprofit organisational domain. International Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7, 55–67.
Gummesson, E. (2007). Case study research. In B. Gustavsson (Ed.), The principles
of knowledge creation methods: research methods in the social sciences (pp.
87–110). Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar.
Haigh, M. (n.d.). The many faces of case study research. Retrieved August 30, 2006,
from http://www.ace.ac.nz/learning/science/articles/a5.asp
Harris, L. (1998). Barriers to market orientation: The view from the shopfloor.
Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 16, 221–228.
Harris, L. (2000). The organisational barriers to developing market orientation.
European Journal of Marketing, 34, 598–624.
Harris, L., & Ogbonna, E. (2001). Leadership style and market orientation: An
empirical study. European Journal of Marketing, 35, 744–764.
Harris, L., & Piercy, N. (1999). Management behaviour and barriers to market
orientation in retailing companies. The Journal of Services Marketing, 13,
113–131.
Jaworski, B., & Kohli, A. (1993). Market orientation: Antecedents and consequences.
Journal of Marketing, 57(3), 53–70.
Kennedy, K., Goolsby, J., & Arnould, E. (2003). Implementing a customer orientation:
Extension of theory and application. Journal of Marketing, 67(4), 67–81.
Kohli, A., & Jaworski, B. (1990). Market orientation: The construct, research
propositions, and managerial constructs. Journal of Marketing, 54(2), 1–18.
Kohli, A., Jaworski, B., & Kumar, A. (1993). MARKOR: A measure of market
orientation. Journal of Marketing Research, 30, 467–477.
Kotler, P., & Andreasen, A. (1996). Strategic marketing for nonprofit organizations
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kotler, P., & Armstrong, G. (2012). Principles of marketing (14th ed.). Boston, MA:
Pearson.
Kotler, P., & Levy, S. (1969). Broadening the concept of marketing. Journal of
Marketing, 33(1), 10–15.
Lafferty, B., & Hult, G. (2001). A synthesis of contemporary market orientation
perspectives. European Journal of Marketing, 35, 92–109.
LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative design in
educational research. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Levitt, T. (1960). Marketing myopia. Harvard Business Review, 38(4), 45–56.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Liao, M.-N., Foreman, S., & Sargeant, A. (2001). Market versus societal orientation in
the nonprofit context. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 6, 254–268.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities

53

Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic enquiry. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Mason, K., & Harris, L. (2005). Pitfalls in evaluating market orientation: An
exploration of executives’ interpretations. Long Range Planning, 38, 373–391.
McDonald, R. (2007). An investigation of innovation in nonprofit organisations: The
role of organisational mission. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 36,
256–281.
Meyer, H.-D. (2002,). The new managerialism in education management:
Corporatization or organizational learning. Journal of Educational
Administration, 40, 534–551.
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. (1994). An expanded sourcebook: Qualitative data
analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Modi, P., & Mishra, D. (2010). Conceptualising market orientation in non-profit
organisations: Definition, performance, and preliminary construction of a scale.
Journal of Marketing Management, 5, 548–569.
Motion, J., & Leitch, S. (1996). A discursive perspective from New Zealand: Another
world view. Public Relations Review, 22, 297–309.
Mukkerji, G. (2004). Introduction to social marketing. New Delhi, India: India
Research Press.
Narver, J., & Slater, S. (1990). The effect of a market orientation on business
profitability. Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 20–35.
Parkhe, A. (1993). “Messy” research, methodological predispositions and theory
development in international joint ventures. The Academy of Management
Review, 18, 227–268.
Patton, M. (2002). Qualitative research & evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Phillips, E., & Pugh, D. (2000). How to get a PhD—a handbook for students and their
supervisors. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Pope, J., Isely, E., & Asamoa-Tutu, F. (2009). Developing a marketing strategy for
nonprofit organizations: An exploratory study. Journal of Nonprofit & Public
Sector Marketing, 21, 184–201.
Productivity Commission. (2010, January). Contribution of the not-for-profit sector.
Melbourne, Australia: Productivity Commission.
Ruekert, R. (1992). Developing a market orientation: An organisational strategy
perspective. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 9, 225–245.
Sargeant, A., Foreman, S., & Liao, M.-N. (2002). Operationalizing the marketing concept in the nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing,
10(2), 41–65.
Shapiro, B. (1988). What the hell is ‘market oriented’? Harvard Business Review,
66(6), 119–125.
Shoham, A., Rose, G., & Kropp, F. (2005). Market orientation and performance: A
meta analysis. Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 23, 435–454.
Sinclair, A. (1996). Leadership in administration: Rediscovering a lost discourse. In P.
Weller & G. Davies (Eds.), New ideas, better government. St Leonards, Australia:
Allen & Unwin.
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Steinman, C., Deshpande, R., & Farley, J. (2000). Beyond market orientation: When
customers and suppliers disagree. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
28, 109–119.

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

54

P. Chad et al.

Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and
procedures for developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tadajewski, M., & Hewer, P. (2011). Intellectual contributions and ‘gap-spotting.’
Journal of Marketing Management, 27, 449–457.
Taghian, M. (2010). Marketing planning: Operationalising the market orientation
strategy. Journal of Marketing Management, 26, 825–841.
Tynan, C. (2006). Editorial: Academy of marketing new blood special issue. Journal
of Marketing Management, 22, 573–577.
van Raaij, E., & Stoelhorst, J. (2008). The implementation of a market orientation:
A review and integration of the contributions to date. European Journal of
Marketing, 4, 1265–1293.
Vickers, M., & Kouzmin, A. (2001). New managerialism and Australian police
organizations. The International Journal of Public Sector Management, 14,
7–26.
Warnaby, G., & Finney, J. (2005). Creating customer value in the not-for-profit sector: A case study of the British library. International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, 10, 183–195.
Webb, D., Webster, C., & Krepapa, A. (2000). An exploration of the meaning and outcomes of a customer-defined market orientation. Journal of Business Research,
48, 101–112.
Wong, V., Saunders, J., & Doyle, P. (1989, July). The barriers to achieving stronger
market orientation in British companies: An exploratory study. 22nd Annual
Conference Proceedings, Marketing Education Group, Glasgow Business
School, Glasgow, Scotland.
Wood, L., & Kroger, R. (2000). Doing discourse analysis: Methods for studying action
in talk and text. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Yin, R. (1984). Case study research. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Yin, R. (1993). Applications of case study research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Yin, R. (1994). Case Study Research - Design and Methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.

55

Implementing Market Orientation Into Charities
APPENDIX 1 Perceived Level of Market Orientation
Component of market orientation (Lafferty & Hult 2001)
Emphasis on
customer
Arana
Pre discourse High (e.g., “focus
transformation
. . . on needs of
clients”)

Downloaded by [University of York] at 05:21 14 March 2013

Post discourse High (e.g., “very
transformation
client focused”)
Bukari
Pre discourse Medium (e.g.,
transformation
“opened offices
. . . without any
real service
plan”)
Post discourse High (e.g., “that is
transformation
why we are
here”)

Importance of
information

Interfunctional
coordination

Taking Action

Low (e.g.,
“Probably not
well”)

Medium (e.g.,
Medium (e.g.,
some
progress
management
towards
communicaformation of
tion)
committees)
Medium (e.g., “will High (e.g., “there High (e.g.,
take a more
is more comformation of
structured
munication”)
committees)
approach”)
Low (e.g., “wasn’t
geared up to
even capture
data”)

Low (e.g., “it has Medium (e.g., no
the typical
standard
silos”)
practices and
procedures)

Medium (e.g., “that High (e.g., “there High (e.g., “we’ve
is something
is a lot of
got service
that wasn’t here
communication
models designed
before”)
now. There
and developed
wasn’t before”)
now”)

Camira
Pre discourse High (e.g., “we are Low (e.g., “we are Low (e.g., “silo
transformation
here for the
not very good at
mentality”)
clients”)
that”)
Post discourse High (e.g., “what
Medium (e.g., “we Medium (e.g.,
transformation
we’re here for”)
are trying to get
increased
better”)
investment in
training)

Medium (e.g., “it is
improving”)
High (e.g., “more
businesslike
processes”)

NOTE. In relation to “emphasis on customer,” most comments from respondents related to service
recipient clients.

