This article was downloaded by: [University of Tennessee, Knoxville]
On: 30 December 2014, At: 19:27
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

Market Orientation and Organizational Performance in
the Nonprofit Context: Exploring Both Concepts and
the Relationship Between Them
a

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga PhD & Ulrike Schneider PhD

b

a

Research Center for Welfare Economics, Scientific Park of Barcelona, University of
Barcelona , Baldiri Reixac 4-6, 08028, Barcelona, Spain E-mail:
b

Institute for Social Policy, Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration ,
Nordbergstrasse 15, A-1090, Vienna, Austria E-mail:
Published online: 08 Sep 2008.

To cite this article: Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga PhD & Ulrike Schneider PhD (2008) Market Orientation and Organizational
Performance in the Nonprofit Context: Exploring Both Concepts and the Relationship Between Them, Journal of Nonprofit &
Public Sector Marketing, 19:2, 25-47, DOI: 10.1300/J054v19n02_02
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J054v19n02_02

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Market Orientation
and Organizational Performance
in the Nonprofit Context:
Exploring Both Concepts
and the Relationship Between Them
Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga
Ulrike Schneider

ABSTRACT. The purpose of this paper is to explore the relationship
between the concepts market orientation and organizational performance for nonprofit organizations. To understand the nature of this link
in the nonprofit context, the authors will discuss and elaborate on the
applicability of both concepts to nonprofits. They will develop multidimensional notions of “societal orientation” and “nonprofit organizational performance,” which fit the specific operating environment of
nonprofit organizations engaged in the provision of health and social
services. The authors also propose a conceptual framework that relates
both notions and present the main underlying propositions. They conclude by suggesting items to empirically measure both constructs and
venues for future research. doi:10.1300/J054v19n02_02 [Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Service: 1-800-HAWORTH.

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga, PhD, is Member, Research Center for Welfare Economics,
Scientific Park of Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Baldiri Reixac 4-6, 08028 Barcelona, Spain (E-mail: lduque@pcb.ub.es).
Ulrike Schneider, PhD, is Chair, Institute for Social Policy, Vienna University of
Economics and Business Administration, Nordbergstrasse 15, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
(E-mail: ulrike.schneider@wu.wien.ac.at).
This research has been supported by a Marie Curie Fellowship of the European
Community programme IHP under contract number HPMT-CT-2001-00352.
Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 19(2) 2008
Available online at http://jnpsm.haworthpress.com
Ó 2008 by The Haworth Press. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1300/J054v19n02_02

25

26

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING
E-mail address: <docdelivery@haworthpress.com> Website: <http://www.
HaworthPress.com> Ó 2008 by The Haworth Press. All rights reserved.]

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

KEYWORDS. Market orientation, societal orientation, performance
measurement, nonprofit organizations, organizational effectiveness

INTRODUCTION
Recent studies highlight the importance of bringing the market orientation philosophy to the nonprofit context as an organizational response
to current pressures and environmental changes. In the last decade the
nonprofit sector has been experiencing pressures such as increasing
control by the public sector and donors, competition for resources, and
cutbacks in subsidies.
The market orientation philosophy constitutes a self-assessment tool
to know whether the organization is doing well, and if so, in which specific aspects. This analysis takes relevance when linked to performance
indicators. Understanding the relationship between market orientation
and organizational performance will help organizations in focusing and
advancing efforts to improve their effectiveness and efficiency. In the
for-profit sector various studies have found a positive relationship between market orientation and organizational performance indicators
(e.g., Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Slater and Narver, 1994). As we can
expect from studies focused on for-profit organizations, their primary
concern is to unravel the relationship between market orientation and a
variety of profit performance measures such as return on investment
and assets, sales growth or market share. The thesis behind these kinds
of studies is that the more market oriented a firm, the more profitable it
is. However, neither the concept of market orientation nor profit performance may be completely applicable to the nonprofit environment. As
many authors suggest, both concepts should be modified in order to
account for the particular characteristics of nonprofit organizations and
their specific context.
The market orientation philosophy centers on understanding the
environmental forces affecting an organization, so that its strategy and
activities can be adapted to achieve its organizational mission. The missions of nonprofits are assorted; they can be roughly summarized as relieving or benefiting society (Alvarez, Santos and Vasquez, 2002; Balabanis,
Stables and Phillips, 1997). In achieving its mission(s), a nonprofit or-

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

27

ganization has to monitor the various forces acting directly on it and on
its key constituent groups. Major environmental forces include, among
others, (changes in) legislation, (changes in) behaviors of potential, and
current collaborators or suppliers. Key constituent groups encompass
users or beneficiaries and donors providing funding for the organization’s activities. In the case of organizations relying heavily on unpaid
labor, current and potential volunteers form another key constituency.
The market orientation approach should include, at least, these components when adapted to the nonprofit sector.
The performance measurement in nonprofit organizations is more
difficult than in the for-profit world. This can be due to the presence of
various stakeholders with differing expectations (Fishel, 2004; Kendall
and Knapp, 2000), the lack of alignment between mission and programs
(Kaplan, 2001), the difficulty in defining organizational outputs and
outcomes, or due to the fact that success and failure cannot be strictly
measured in financial terms (Evans and Berman, 1993). Obtaining resources and profits could be considered as means to higher ends,
which ultimately serve the organizational mission (Anheier, 2000).
The major goals of nonprofits relate to quantity and quality of the
goods and services delivered (Hansmann, 1987), i.e., some organizations can seek maximizing outputs (e.g., servicing the greatest possible number of needy people in a community) while others can focus on
maximizing certain types of inputs rather than outputs (e.g. sheltered
employment), and others may maximize revenues. Still others focus on
lobbying societal issues, aiming at a maximum political impact. This
variety of goals calls for a multidimensional way for measuring nonprofit organizational performance (Fishel, 2004; Herman and Renz,
1999b; Sowa, Selden and Sandfort, 2004).
Given that the meaning and the relevance of both concepts differ between nonprofit and for-profit organizations, the functional link between them could differ as well. Accordingly, the main purpose of this
paper is to explore the relationship between market orientation and organizational performance for nonprofit organizations. To understand
the nature of this link in the nonprofit context, we discuss the adaptation
of the two concepts: “market orientation” and “organizational performance” to nonprofit organizations and propose a conceptual framework
that relate them. In doing so, we focus on nonprofits providing health
and social services, as defined in the International Classification of
Non-Profit Organizations (UN, 2003; Annex A1). Yet variations of the
framework can be used for other types of nonprofit organizations.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

28

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

The article is structured as follows: the first section presents the market orientation and organizational performance concepts, while in the
second section, previous research in the nonprofit sector of their relationship is reviewed. In the third section, we first present the conceptual framework that comprises the proposed constructs and the propositions
relating them. We also discuss the societal orientation construct and its
components as well as the nonprofit organizational performance dimensions. In this section we also suggest items for testing the framework. Finally, we present the discussion and suggest future lines of
research.
MARKET ORIENTATION AND PERFORMANCE CONCEPTS
Market Orientation (MO)
There are two dominant research streams of market orientation (MO)
in the literature. On one hand, Kohli and Jaworsky use a process approach (Sinkula, 1994). They define MO as “the organization-wide
generation of market intelligence pertaining to current and future needs
of customers, dissemination of intelligence horizontally and vertically
within the organization, and organization-wide action or responsiveness to market intelligence” (Kohli, Jaworski and Kumar, 1993, p. 467).
The authors initially treated MO as the application of the marketing
concept, but later they pointed out that MO is a philosophy in which the
entire organization must be involved. They developed the MARKOR
scale, which consists of three main components titled: intelligence generation, intelligence dissemination and responsiveness. The customer is
the philosophy’s main focus. Methodologically, the authors suggest
maintaining the three correlated MO components and one general MO
factor. This approach permits studying each component by using three
subscales separately.
On the other hand, Narver and Slater have continued their MO research that stresses organizational culture. They define MO as “the
organizational culture that most effectively and efficiently creates
the necessary behaviors for the creation of superior value for buyers
and, thus, continuous superior performance for the business” (1990,
p. 21). In their view, MO is comprised of three behavioral components
(customer orientation, competitor orientation and inter-functional coordination), a long-term focus, and a profitability focus. For nonprofit organizations, they suggest survival as the main focus, i.e., obtaining

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

29

revenues sufficient to cover long-run expenses or to satisfy all key constituencies in the long-run. The authors found that the three components
are strongly correlated and use one single MO measure as the simple average of them.
Although both the definition and development of scales have many
similarities, the Narver and Slater proposal is more related to strategy
and the creation of competitive advantage. In this vein Lado, MaydeuOlivares and Rivera (1998) proposed a scale of nine MO components
that take into account market participants (customer, distributors, competitors and environment), stages of the MO process (analysis and strategic actions), and inter-functional coordination. They found one overall
MO factor and another factor representing context particularities. After
these studies, many authors have tried to improve the MO concept or the
scale to measure it, but to little effect (Farrell, 2002).
Organizational Performance (OP)
For understanding organizational performance (OP) proposals and
studies, it is useful to be aware of two different vantage points for a discussion. To begin with, there are theories or models of organizational
effectiveness that guide the development of performance indicators.
There are also two main units of analysis; namely the organization on
one hand and programs on the other. Looking at the organization we
find performance systems and frameworks that involve the entire organization and suggest how to analyze various organizational dimensions.
Considering programs, the analysis is done by studying different aspects of a specific program that an organization carries on.
There are various organizational effectiveness theories; a wide classification was presented by Cameron (1986) that summarizes eight
commonly used models. For specific nonprofit organizations (NPOs)
performance analysis, some authors pointed out the multiple constituencies model as the most useful (Herman and Renz, 1998; Kanter and
Summers, 1987). Herman and Renz distinguish this model as a modification of the goal model, recognizing that multiple stakeholders of a
NPO are likely to use different criteria (rational goals) to evaluate its
effectiveness. These authors note that the multiple constituencies
model should be combined with a social constructionism perspective,
i.e., stakeholders’ judgments, agreements and negotiations about effectiveness criteria that may change over time.
At the organizational level, performance measurement systems create a way for observing, reporting and using performance measures in

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

30

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

decision making (Poister, 2003). Wholey (1998) singled out the following characteristics of a performance measurement system as the
most important: quality of information, utility for decision making,
and cost effectiveness. Among the various frameworks for OP measurement the Balanced Scorecard stands out. This framework shows a
balanced presentation of the organizational financial perspective and
the operational perspective (customer satisfaction, internal processes,
innovation and learning activities). Kaplan (2001) adapted the Balanced
Scorecard to NPOs, suggesting that its highest level should be the NPO
mission; then to develop processes in order to satisfy donors and recipients or beneficiaries; and finally, a complete involvement of the entire
organization is needed.
Using theories, models, or frameworks as guidelines, academics and
practitioners have developed a range of measures for organizational and program-performance. The logical way for doing so
is to (i) set the unit of analysis, (ii) identify the aspects or dimensions to be assessed in accordance with the organizational mission
or strategy, and then (iii) develop measures that capture those dimensions. Some dimensions studied in nonprofits are objective
fulfillment, job satisfaction, resource acquisition, management capacity, adaptability, and service quality, among others (Griggs, 2002;
Poister, 2003; Pounder, 1999; Sowa, Selden and Sandfort, 2004). The criteria to assess performance dimensions could be objective (e.g., financial
figures, number of beneficiaries, etc.) or subjective (e.g., judgments
based on interviewed perceptions). Objective and subjective measures
offer complementary information, which is useful to understand and
evaluate performance (Selden and Sowa, 2004).
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Although various studies suggest adapting market orientation and organizational performance to NPOs, only few attempts have been made
to actually develop concepts and measures that fit the nonprofit context. As Alvarez, Santos and Vasquez (2002) note, the number of pertinent studies is significantly lower than in the for-profit context.
Table 1 summarizes six studies that explicitly adapt both concepts to
the nonprofit context and that offer an empirical application to NPOs.
The first study is concerned with charity organizations (Balabanis, Stables and Phillips, 1997), the second one focuses on children and youth
centers (Chan and Chau, 1998), studies three and four look at artistic or-

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

31

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

TABLE 1. Review of the Empirical Literature on MO and Organizational Performance in NPOs

ganizations (Gainer and Padanyi, 2002; Voss and Voss, 2000), and the
last two studies refer to various NPO activities (Kara, Spillan and
DeShields, 2004; Padanyi and Gainer, 2004).
From Table 1 we can observe that terminology, methods, and findings vary across previous studies. In terms of concepts and methods the
degree of adaptation of the MO concept is mixed. Some studies use a
one-dimensional construct, others use up to four dimensions to represent market/strategic orientation, and others develop specific orientations to donors or clients. The performance indicators differ as well. The
studies mainly use subjective or judgmental indicators. The performance indicator used the most has been fundraising or resource acquisi-

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

32

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

tion. When relating MO to performance measures, only the studies of Voss
and Voss (2000) and Padanyi and Gainer (2004) assessed the effects of
multiple dimensions/orientations on various performance indicators.
In terms of the findings, the study of Balabanis et al. (1997) pointed
to a lagged relationship between market orientation and performance. In
addition, there is some indication that the link between market orientation and performance varies by sub-sector. In short, the studies signal
that both concepts offer an interesting background for organizational
analysis and assessment. However nonprofits have unique characteristics that should be considered more systematically in order to develop a
more accurate organizational analysis.
SOCIETAL ORIENTATION (SO) AND NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONAL PERFORMANCE (NPOP):
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND CONSTRUCTS
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed conceptual framework that relates a
concept of market orientation and a concept of organizational perforFIGURE 1. Conceptual Framework Linking the SO and NPOP Constructs

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

33

mance, both adapted to the nonprofit context. We suggest calling these
constructs societal orientation (SO) and nonprofit organizational performance (NPOP), respectively. It is important to note that the relationship between SO and NPOP can vary depending on environmental
circumstances and organizational characteristics. Some potential moderating variables have already been suggested in the literature, among
them environmental turbulence, competition for resources, number of
institutions delivering the same service, ideology of the NPO (social or
economic), NPO size, professionalism or formalization, funding structure (public, contracts, donations, etc.), scope of activities (national or
international), and belongingness to networks.
Sargeant (2005) suggests that societal oriented organizations will
achieve significantly higher performance in terms of mission achievement and efficiency than those without such an orientation. In practice,
some nonprofits may be focused on just some components of societal
orientation and perform better in some specific dimensions. For instance, NPOs could focus just on resource acquisition, which could lead
to a growth in resources. Yet this would not necessarily ensure that the
NPO is offering better services to its clients, or that it is doing extraordinarily well in motivating and retaining employees and volunteers.
Consequently, we state that societal oriented nonprofits are those
taking care of beneficiaries, donors, volunteers and employees, searching for convenient partnerships, learning from experience, and working
in a coordinated way all at the same time. These NPOs are expected to
be more effective and efficient in various organizational aspects, giving
such response to their various stakeholders’ expectations.
We begin by discussing the societal orientation construct and its six
components. Then, we examine nonprofit organizational performance
and its seven dimensions as well as the main research propositions underlying our conceptual framework.
The Societal Orientation Construct
We stick to the terminology proposed by Liao, Foreman and Sargeant
(2001), who point out that the adaptation of the MO philosophy to
nonprofits should be called Societal Orientation (SO). The authors suggest this term based on Kotler and Levy’s (1969) definition of marketing in the nonprofit sector (sensitively serving and satisfying human
need), and note that it avoids confusion with for-profit business concepts and enhances betterment of society.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

34

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

We define societal orientation as the organizational belief and culture
that create and align behaviors for offering/delivering services that are
worthy for society, thus fulfilling the nonprofit organizational mission
(focus). As Figure 1 shows in its left hand side, this construct is composed of six behavioral components. In what follows, we explore these
components and suggest their formal definitions.
Beneficiary or Recipient Orientation. Customer orientation as it is
defined in the for-profit sector may not work for a number of nonprofits.
Looking at nonprofit social service provision more specifically, NPO
usually serve population subgroups that are disadvantaged or marginalized
in economic, social or political terms. Not all beneficiaries are able to
(fully) pay for services and some consumers might be forced to use a
specific service (e.g., probation assistance). In addition, it is often difficult for potential beneficiaries to judge service quality and effectiveness, in which case they must either rely on the integrity of service
providers or include substitute decision-makers in their service choices
(Darby and Karni, 1973). Although these circumstances do not seem to
depict an equitable exchange, relationships between social NPO and
their beneficiaries are still covered by the marketing exchange concept
(Bagozzi, 1975). The latter involves the transfer of tangible or intangible goods between social actors for symbolic and/or utilitarian reasons.
This component needs to be broadly defined in the case of NPOs in the
health and social services field, covering transient beneficiaries (e.g.,
disaster victims), permanent users (e.g., recipients of long-term care),
beneficiaries serviced for free (e.g., homeless people), and paying clients. Thus, we suggest calling this component of SO beneficiary or recipient orientation. It refers to the identification of potential service
beneficiaries, to the understanding of their situation and needs, and to
the development of programs and activities that are valuable them (usually disadvantaged and marginalized groups).
Donor or Resource Acquisition Orientation. As it was pointed out
before, this kind of orientation is necessary for mission achievement of
NPOs. Nonprofits need to look dynamically at various entities for obtaining new resources and retaining current donors. To search for new
resources or donors, a NPO must monitor legislative changes and
funding sources, paying attention to new calls for applications. To retain current donors, a nonprofit needs to take care of donors’ desires.
The latter were summarized by Evans and Berman (1993) as accountability on the part of the organization, recognition of donor contributions, efficient operations and high success rates. According to the
marketing concept of generalized exchange (Bagozzi, 1975) donors

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

35

and governments transfer money or donations to nonprofits, which in
turn offer services to their beneficiaries creating exchange of values
(e.g., altruistic, agonistic, behavioural change, community improvement). Donors or resource acquisition orientation points to the dynamic monitoring of current and potential sources of NPO financial
support, namely private and government donators, and implementing
activities to retain or attract financial resources.
Volunteer and Employee Orientation. Some studies have suggested
taking into account employee orientation in the MO framework (Jaworski
and Kohli, 1993). As Salamon and Anheier (1997) point out, one of the
main features characterizing nonprofit organizations is the voluntary input in their activities and/or management. In social services and health
care nonprofits’ production is particularly labor-intensive (Salamon
and Dewees, 2002). As a consequence, service quality depends heavily
on workers’ preparation and motivation. This is why we suggest considering this orientation as a relevant component of the SO construct. Volunteer and employee orientation refers to the strategic process of
obtaining and maintaining motivated human resources, taking into account their perceptions and suggestions for NPO planning and implementation.
Collaborative Orientation. We agree with Liao, Foreman and Sargeant
(2001) in that collaborative orientation should be a crucial component
of the SO construct. Cooperation can be considered one of the fundamental characteristics in the nonprofit sector. Partnership can ensure
continuity of operation, increase the capability of solving problems,
and contribute to improving the efficiency of service delivery. Snavely
and Martin (2000) illustrate such need for charitable NPOs in rural environments. Guo and Acar (2005) look at collaboration of charitable
nonprofits in the urban context. They found that collaborations are
formalized depending on various factors such as age and size of the
NPO. They also found that informal collaborations are more widespread among smaller organizations. Austin (2000) suggests that strategic alliances in the nonprofit context are more successful when the
parties find an important goal to work for. Collaborative orientation
hence implies the process of looking for convenient partnerships to cooperate in either provision of services, lobbying or resource acquisition.
Learning and Social Entrepreneurship. Two interesting concepts
could be included in the SO construct. The first is social entrepreneurship, which Mort, Weerawardena, and Carnegie (2003) consider as a
behavioral characteristic expressed within a social organization, reflected in four aspects: (1) the organization is driven by a social mission

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

36

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

of creating better social value, (2) social entrepreneurs demonstrate the
ability to form balanced judgments and a coherent unity of purpose and
action in the face of complexity, (3) recognition of opportunities to create better social value, and (4) social entrepreneurs’ decision-making is
innovative, proactive and open to risk taking. Lee (2002) explains that
social entrepreneurship could apply to NPOs if it is taken in moderation,
i.e., giving the right weight to profits and business management. This is
why we propose to account for organizational learning capacity as well.
As Slater and Narver (1995) and Mort et al. (2003) point out, entrepreneurship is possible in an organizational setting within a learning orientation. For nonprofits, the interaction between these two concepts would
constitute a dynamic way of management improvement. Implicitly, it
could guide the right NPO role in society and would involve an assessment of dimensions such as equity and innovation (Kendall and Knapp
2000). Learning and social entrepreneurship refers to the organizational capacity of consciously assessing NPO overall performance and
environmental opportunities in an innovative and proactive way, and to
the continuous comparison to other benchmarks in order to learn from
own and other’s experiences.
Inter-Functional Coordination. This component has been found to be
related to other MO components in for-profit and nonprofit organizations. In the NPO sector inter-functional coordination takes relevance
because of the many constituencies related to NPOs. Nonprofits need
coordination in strategy and activities not only between employees inside the organization, but also between paid staff and volunteers or between the own organization and collaborating partners. In social services,
major charitable NPOs serve a variety of beneficiaries with a broad array of services, which generate an additional need for coordination between different divisions of the NPO. Inter-functional coordination
relates to the extent to which every activity is synergistically contributing to the organizational mission. It implies coherent planning, information sharing across all members of the NPO, and alignment of strategy
and programs.
The Nonprofit Organizational Performance Construct
and Framework Propositions
We define Nonprofit Organizational Performance (NPOP) as a social construction that takes into account stakeholders’ expectations, organizational values and mission to define the base or criteria that will
guide organizational assessment. The right hand side of Figure 1 shows

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

37

the seven dimensions we suggest NPOs should assess. Six of them refer
to organizational and program effectiveness, while the last one refers to
organizational efficiency.
As some authors have pointed out (e.g., Cameron, 1986; Herman and
Renz, 1999b; Kanter and Summers, 1987), the criteria for each dimension must be adapted to the specific NPO context and to the stakeholders’ agreement on desirable results. We will briefly discuss each
dimension and also present the main propositions that relate these dimensions to the societal orientation construct.
Beneficiary or Recipient Response. Customer satisfaction has become a very important measure of service delivery in the for-profit sector. It explains not only OP but also customers’ repurchase intentions
and loyalty (Oliver, 1997). In the nonprofit sector many authors suggest evaluating customer satisfaction as a key dimension of NPOP. As
we discussed before, sometimes clients of NPOs offering social and
health services are not able to judge service quality and at times they
only realize service benefits much later. This does not mean, however,
that social services can not be assessed from the users’ point of view,
but that this evaluation should be made carefully, and might involve
substitute decision makers. We prefer calling this performance dimension beneficiary or recipient response, which could be assessed with
different measures such as satisfaction, attendance, participation, improvement reported by a user’s supervisor, among others.
P1: Beneficiary or recipient response will be strongly affected by
the NPO beneficiary or recipient orientation.
P2: The remaining five societal orientation components will be
positive related to beneficiary or recipient response.
Financial Flexibility and Resource Acquisition. The financial performance dimension has received much attention in NPO studies. In fact,
some studies focus only on its measurement, explaining that this is the
most important goal pursued by NPOs, or because it is easy to be captured. According to Cameron (1986), performance indicators must be
appropriate to their particular context. Thus, depending on the NPO activity or financial structure, nonprofits might want to monitor resource
acquisition (e.g., fundraising or the monetary value of volunteering),
financial health, or stability. Tuckman and Chang (1991) proposed
studying financial vulnerability, or conversely, financial flexibility to
respond to financial shocks. According to these authors, a financially

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

38

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

flexible NPO is one with access to equity balance (assets higher than
liabilities), diverse revenue sources, administrative costs that could be
cut without affecting program administration, and positive operating
margins. Hager (2001) found that although those measures do not apply
to all NPOs, they are good predictors of their survival or closure. Trying
to encompass various measures, we call this dimension financial flexibility and resource acquisition.
P3: The greater the donors or resource acquisition orientation, the
higher the NPO financial flexibility and resource acquisition.
P4: The other five societal orientation components will be positive
related to financial flexibility and resource acquisition.
Job Satisfaction of Volunteers and Employees. This dimension is crucial for various NPOs, and even more so when they deal with health and
social services. The effectiveness of these services depends critically on
the interaction between service professionals and the client, as well as
on the motivation of volunteers and employees. Volunteers are highly
driven by intrinsic values, personal recognition and realization, social
interaction, sense of debt or obligation, and altruism (Besley and
Ghatak, 2003; Mitchell and Yates, 1996; Varner, 1983). However, although employees can be motivated for the NPO mission, they also
value monetary compensation to remain working for the organization
(Brown and Yoshioka, 2003). In a cross-country study, Benz (2005)
compared employees’ satisfaction in the for-profit and nonprofit sector. The author found evidence that nonprofit workers obtain a particular satisfaction from their jobs, not given by monetary compensation or
individual heterogeneity. This satisfaction seems to be derived from
contributing to societal goals, and from specific NPO working conditions. Job satisfaction in the nonprofit sector could be assessed as the
employees’ identification with the organization and its mission, full
participation in activities, low absenteeism and fluctuation; in the case
of volunteers, the willingness to collaborate in the future may be another key measure.
P5: Volunteers and employee satisfaction will be directly affected
by the NPO orientation towards volunteers and employees.
P6: The remaining five societal orientation components will be
positive related to volunteers and employees satisfaction.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

39

Responsiveness Assessment. According to Herman and Renz (1999a,
1999b) it is very appropriate to use a measure of responsiveness as
an indicator of organizational effectiveness. The authors based
this suggestion on a panel study where three different stakeholders
(board, donors and funders) were asked about their perceptions of organizational effectiveness. The ratings displayed significant differences
between the three groups. However, when it came to assessing organizational responsiveness, the ratings were very similar. The instrument
used, developed by Tsui (1984), asked respondents about how well the
NPO had been doing on whatever was important for them. Jaworski and
Kohli (1993) treated responsiveness as a component of MO, namely as
action taken to respond to market needs. In the nonprofit sector it would
take a similar meaning, but Herman and Renz (1999a) refer to it as the
stakeholders’ satisfaction with organizational responsiveness. In order
to avoid confusion we call this performance dimension responsiveness
assessment. It could encompass the general perception of how the NPO
adapts to environmental changes and stakeholders’ needs and expectations.
P7: The higher the societal orientation, the higher the responsiveness assessment. In other words, the six societal orientation components will be positive related to responsiveness assessment.
Long-Term Outcomes. It is clear from the literature that there are different types of objectives achievement. In line with Kanter and Summers (1987), we propose two different dimensions of achievement,
one related to goal achievement and the second linked to program
effectiveness. The long-term outcomes are supposed to contribute to
the NPO mission, whereas outputs or short-term outcomes are more
relevant to program assessment (see Program Outputs and Intermediate Outcomes). Both dimensions are, of course, linked, since programs need to be aligned with the organizational mission. In order to
measure if the NPO mission is being achieved, and if strategies and activities are contributing to it, we suggest considering long-term outcomes as NPO survival, percentage of main goals achieved last year,
results in terms of social benefit or improvement, etc.
P8: Societal orientation will affect the NPO long-term outcomes.
Said differently, all societal orientation components will be positively related to this performance dimension (long-term outcomes).

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

40

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Program Outputs and Intermediate Outcomes. This dimension, which
is linked to the previous one, refers to the assessment of a specific program. It could measure different kinds of outputs and intermediate outcomes related to the program. In measuring program outputs and
intermediate outcomes, the number and variety of programs developed
for a NPO need to be taken into account. This dimension should consider different facets of programs. The program logic model (Poister,
2003) and the field-by-field list of output-measures in the United Nation’s Handbook on Nonprofit Institutions (UN, 2003; p. 79) constitute
a helpful tool for developing these measures. Measures of program performance need to be aligned with long-term outcomes in order to assess
if a NPO is doing well where it is supposed to do so. Some NPOs might
be doing well in terms of program performance, but less well in
long-term performance, which constitutes a strategic gap.
P9: The higher the societal orientation, the better the program outputs and intermediate outcomes are achieved. In other words, the
six societal orientation components will relate positively to this
dimension (program outputs and intermediate outcomes).
Organizational Efficiency. Torres and Pina (2003) point out that for
obtaining complete performance information of NPOs it is necessary to
develop measures that relate effort (inputs or financial and non-financial resources) to accomplishments (outputs and outcomes). Again, the
dimension organizational efficiency should cover different organizational aspects. It can contain a complete combination of ratios that facilitate obtaining a proxy of internal operations quality and good
management of resources. Ritchie and Kolodinsky (2003) identified
three NPO financial categories of measures that can be used in efficiency measurement: fundraising efficiency (total public support/fundraising expenses; total revenue/fundraising expenses), public support
(total contributions/total revenue; direct public support/total assets),
and fiscal performance (total revenue/total expenses; total contributions/total expenses). Non-financial measures could include: administration/costs ratio, variation rates in some categories like volunteers,
time spent in achieving a unit of output, etc.
P10: Societal orientation components will be positive related to
NPO efficiency.

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

41

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Suggestions to Operationalize the SO and NPOP Constructs
Table 2 provides some suggestions of measures for the societal orientation and nonprofit organizational performance constructs. Various
items have already been tested as indicated in our synopsis. The remaining items in Table 2 have been introduced in the course of outlining our
concepts.
TABLE 2. Possible Items to Measure SO and NPOP Constructs

42

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

TABLE 2 (continued)

DISCUSSION
In this paper we followed suggestions of various authors to develop
appropriate adaptations of both the market orientation (MO) and the organizational performance (OP) concept for the nonprofit context. We
first reviewed those concepts as well as six empirical studies that ap-

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

43

plied them to nonprofit organizations. In the following, we proposed a
conceptual framework comprising the construct of societal orientation
(SO), a performance construct for nonprofit organizations (NPOP) and
the relationship between both constructs. Finally, we also suggested
items supporting the empirical study of SO and NPOP.
The MO philosophy adapted to the nonprofit context is called Societal Orientation. This name was suggested by Liao, Foreman and
Sargeant (2001). Our contribution in this matter was to advance the literature by accounting for particularities of the NPO context (with particular consideration of NPOs in the social services and health care
field) and proposing the formal definition for SO and its six behavioral
components. Regarding nonprofit organizational performance, we made
an attempt to integrate research efforts and proposed seven NPOP dimensions that offer a rounded picture for assessing competent results.
Criteria for measuring each one can be developed considering the multiple constituencies’ interests and the particular NPO context.
The last purpose of this paper was to propose a conceptual framework that relates SO and NPOP. The section The Nonprofit Organizational Performance Construct and Framework Propositions presents
the postulated relationships. The general proposition is that societally
oriented nonprofits are those taking care of beneficiaries, donors, volunteers and employees, searching for convenient partnerships, learning
from experience, and working in a coordinated way. These nonprofits
are expected to be more effective and efficient in various organizational
aspects, giving response to their distinct stakeholders’ expectations.
Although the proposed framework needs to be tested, practitioners
can benefit from our conceptual work. The most important suggestion is
to be aware of the multiple aspects that contribute to better performance
(SO components), and the multiple facets that manifest integrative organizational performance (NPOP dimensions). Table 2 suggests items
useful for assessing how well a NPO is doing in these particular aspects.
As with any proposal of a conceptual framework, there is a need to
validate its applicability to the NPO context. To test whether the framework is appropriate and useful, some aspects must be addressed, among
them the design/adaptation of measures to specific environments, definition of specific relationships between variables, and the identification of moderating and mediating variables for specific sub-sectors. In
line with other research, all components and dimensions must be studied individually. This responds to NPOs’ multiple constituencies and
their variety of interests. We did not suggest any hierarchy among the
various SO components or NPOP dimensions since such a hierarchy

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

44

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

can hardly be deducted from theory. Yet, we assume that the components and dimensions suggested interact with each other so that organizations should pay attention to all of them.
Empirical research on the SO components measurement is in a
more advanced state than empirical work on NPO performance. We
encourage researchers to work on the development and refinement
of measures for each of the proposed NPOP dimensions; in particular, the two dimensions we suggested are composed of various facets (organizational efficiency, and program outputs/intermediate
outcomes). In testing the framework researchers could focus on
specific activities or sub-sectors, allowing for the improvement of
the framework and suggesting suitable control variables for each
one. Another interesting line of research is to study causal relationships between the various SO components and NPOP dimensions.
Interrelationships are very likely to occur among performance dimensions.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, Luis I., Maria L. Santos and Rodolfo Vazquez C. (2002), “The Market Orientation Concept in the Private Nonprofit Organization Domain,” Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7 (1), 55-67. doi: 10.1002/nvsm.167
Anheier, Helmut K. (2000), “Managing non-profit organisations: Towards a new approach,” Civil Society Working Paper 1 (accessed March 20, 2006), available at
http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/CCS/pdf/cswp1.pdf
Austin, James E. (2000), The Collaboration Challenge: How Nonprofits and Business
Succeed through Strategic Alliances, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (1975), “Marketing as Exchange,” Journal of Marketing, 39 (October), 32-39.
Balabanis, George, Ruth E. Stables and Hugh C. Phillips (1997), “Market Orientation
in the Top 200 British Charity Organizations and its Impact on Their Performance,”
European Journal of Marketing, 31 (8), 583-603.
Besley, Timothy and Maitreesh Ghatak (2003), “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents,” American Economic Review, 95 (3), 616-636. doi: 10.1257/0002
828054201413
Benz, Matthias (2005), “Not for the Profit, but for the Satisfaction? Evidence on
Worker Well-Being in Non-Profit Firms,” Kyklos 58 (2), 155-176. doi: 10.1111/
j.0023-5962.2005.00283.x
Brown, William A. and Carlton F. Yoshioka (2003), “Mission Attachment and Satisfaction as Factors in Employee Retention,” Nonprofit Management & Leadership,
14 (1), 5-18. doi: 10.1002/nml.18
Cameron, Kim S. (1986), “Effectiveness as Paradox: Consensus and Conflict in Conception of Organizational Effectiveness,” Management Science, 32 (5), 539-553.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

45

Chan, Ricky Y. and Alice Chau (1998), “Do Marketing-Oriented Children and Youth
Centers (CYCs) Perform Better: An Exploratory Study in Hong Kong,” Journal of
Professional Services Marketing 17 (1), 15-28.
Darby, Michael and Edi Karni (1973), “Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of
Fraud,” Journal of Law and Economics, 16 (April), 67-86.
Evans, Joel R. and Berman, Barry (1993), Marketing, Fifth Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, New York.
Farrell, Mark (2002), “A Critique of the Development of Alternative Measures of Market Orientation,” Marketing Bulletin, 13, 1-13.
Fishel, David (2004), Performance and Accountability in the Non-Profit Sector, Proceedings of the One-Day Symposium on Accountability, Governance and Performance in Transition, Griffith Business School, Brisbane, February.
Gainer, Brenda and Paulette Padanyi (2002), “Applying the Marketing Concept to Cultural Organisations: An Empirical Study of the Relationship Between Market Orientation and Performance.” Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
7 (2), 182-193. doi: 10.1002/nvsm.178
Gatignon, Hubert and Jean-Marc Xuereb (1997), “Strategic Orientation of the Firm and
New Product Performance,” Journal of Marketing Research, 34 (February), 77-90.
Griggs, Harvey E. (2002), “Strategic Planning System Characteristics and Organizational Effectiveness in Australian Small-Scale Firms,” The Irish Journal of Management, 23 (1), 23-51.
Guo, Chao and Muhittin Acar (2005), “Understanding Collaboration Among Nonprofit Organizations: Combining Resource Dependency, Institutional, and Network
Perspectives,” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 34 (3), 340-361 doi:
10.1177/ 0899764005275411
Hager, Mark A. (2001), “Financial Vulnerability Among Arts Organizations: A Test of
the Tuckman-Chang Measures.” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 30 (2),
376-392. doi: 10.1177/0899764001302010
Hansmann, Henry (1987), “Economic Theories of Nonprofit Organization,” in The
Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook, Powell, W. W., ed. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 27-42.
Herman, Robert D. and David O. Renz (1998), “Nonprofit Organizational Effectiveness: Contrast Between Especially Effective and Less Effective Organizations.”
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 9 (1), 23-38. doi: 10.1002/nml.9102
Herman, Robert D. and David O. Renz (1999a), “Theses on Nonprofit Organizational
Effectiveness,” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 28 (2), 107-126.
Herman, Robert D. and David O. Renz (1999b), Nonprofit Organizational Effectiveness: Practical Implications of Research on an Elusive Concept: An Occasional Paper Issued by the Midwest Center for Nonprofit Leadership, 1-13.
Jaworski, Bernard J. and Ajay K. Kohli (1993), “Market Orientation: Antecedents and
Consequences,” Journal of Marketing, 57 (July), 53-70.
Kanter, R. Moss and David V. Summers (1987), “Doing Good While Doing Well: Dilemmas of Performance Measurement in Non-Profit Organisations and the Need for
a Multiple Constituency Approach,” in The Non-Profit Sector: A Research Handbook, W. W. Powell, ed. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 55-64.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

46

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Kaplan, Robert S. (2001), “Strategic Performance Measurement and Management in
Nonprofit Organizations,” Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 11 (3), 353-370.
doi: 10.1002/nml.11308
Kara, Ali, John E. Spillan, and Oscar W. DeShields Jr. (2004), “An Empirical Investigation of the Link Between Market Orientation and Business Performance in NonProfit Service Providers,” Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 12 (2), 59-72.
Kendall, Jeremy and Martin Knapp (2000), “Measuring the Performance of Voluntary
Organizations”, Public Management, 2 (1), 105-132.
Kohli, Ajay K., Bernard J. Jaworski and Ajith Kumar (1993), “MARKOR: A Measure
of Market Orientation,” Journal of Marketing Research, 30 (November), 467-77.
Kotler, Philip (1997), “From Sales Obsession to Marketing Effectiveness.” Harvard
Business Review, November-December, 67-75.
Kotler, Philip and Sidney J. Levy (1969), “Broadening the Concept of Marketing.”
Journal of Marketing, 33 (January), 10-15.
Lado, Nora, Albert Maydeu-Olivares and Jaime Rivera (1998), “Measuring Market
Orientation in Several Populations: A Structural Equations Model,” European
Journal of Marketing 32 (1/2), 23-39.
Lee, Morcadei (2002), “Non-Profits and Social Entrepreneurship: Taking the Good,
Avoiding the Bad.” PA Times (August), p. 4.
Liao, Mei-Na, Susan Foreman and Adrian Sargeant (2001), “Market versus Societal
Orientation in the Nonprofit Context,” Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 6 (3), 254-268. doi: 10.1002/nvsm.151
Mitchell, Mark and Donald Yates (1996), “How to Attract the Best Volunteers,” Nonprofit World, 14 (4), 47-48.
Mort, Gillian S., Jay Weerawardena and Kashonia Carnegie (2003), “Social Entrepreneurship: Towards a Conceptualization,” International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, 9 (1), 76-88.
Narver, John C. and Stanley F. Slater (1990), “The Effect of Market Orientation on
Business Profitability,” Journal of Marketing, 54 (October), 20-35.
Oliver, Richard L. (1997), Satisfaction: A Behavioural Perspective on the Consumer.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Padanyi, Paulette and Brenda Gainer (2004), “Market Orientation in the Nonprofit
Sector: Taking Multiple Constituencies into Consideration,” Journal of Marketing
Theory and Practice, 12 (2), 43-58.
Poister, Theodore H. (2003), Measuring Performance in Public and Nonprofit Organizations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pounder, James (1999), “Organizational Effectiveness in Higher Education: Managerial Implications of a Hong Kong Study.” Educational Management & Administration, 27 (4), 389-400. doi: 10.1177/0263211X990274006
Ritchie, William J. and Robert W. Kolodinsky (2003), “Nonprofit Organization Financial Performance Measurement: An Evaluation of new and Existing Financial Performance Measures”, Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 13 (4), 367-381.
Salamon, Lester M. and Helmut K. Anheier (1997), Defining the Non-Profit Sector: A
Cross-National Analysis, Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press.
Salamon, Lester M. and Sarah Dewees (2002), “In Search of the Nonprofit Sector: Improving the State of the Art,” American Behavioral Scientist, 45 (11), 1716-1740.

Downloaded by [University of Tennessee, Knoxville] at 19:27 30 December 2014

Lola C. Duque-Zuluaga and Ulrike Schneider

47

Sargeant, Adrian (2005), Marketing Management for Nonprofit Organizations. Second Edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sargeant, Adrian, Susan Foreman and Mei-Na Liao (2002), “Operationalizing the
Marketing Concept in the Nonprofit Sector,” Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 10 (2), 41-65.
Selden, Sally C., and Jessica E. Sowa (2004), “Testing a Multi-Dimensional Model of
Organizational Performance: Prospects and Problems.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 14 (3), 395-416.
Sinkula, James M. (1994), “Market Information Processing and Organizational Learning,” Journal of Marketing, 58 (January), 35-45.
Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (1994), “Does Competitive Environment Moderate the Market Orientation Performance Relationship?” Journal of Marketing, 58
(January), 46-55.
Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (1995), “Market Orientation and the Learning
Organization,” Journal of Marketing, 59 (July), 63-74.
Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (2000), “The Positive Effect of a Market Orientation on Business Profitability: A Balanced Replication,” Journal of Business Research, 48, 69-73. doi: 10.1016/S0148-2963(98)00077-0
Snavely, Keith and Martin B. Tracy (2000), “Collaboration Among Rural Nonprofit
Organizations,” Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 11 (2), 145-165. doi: 10.1177/
0899764005275411
Sowa, Jessica E., Sally C. Selden and Jodi R. Sandfort (2004), “No Longer Immeasurable?: A Multidimensional Integrated Model of Nonprofit Organizational Effectiveness,” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector, 33 (4), 711-728. doi: 10.1177/08997
64004269146
Torres, Lourdes and Vicente Pina (2003), “Accounting for Accountability and Management in NPOs: A Comparative Study of Four Countries: Canada, the UK, the
USA, and Spain,” Financial Accountability & Management, 19 (3), 265-285. doi:
10.1111/1468-0408.00174
Tsui, Anne S. (1984), “A Role Set Analysis of Managerial Reputation.” Organizational Behaviour and Human Performance, 34 (1), 64-96.
Tuckman, Howard P. and Cyril F. Chang (1991), “A Method for Measuring the Financial Vulnerability of Charitable Nonprofit Organizations,” Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly, 20 (4), 445-60.
UN (2003), Handbook on Non-Profit Institutions in the Systems of National Accounts.
United Nations Statistics Division, Editor. New York: United Nations.
Varner, Albert F. (1983), “What Motivates the Volunteer?” Nonprofit World Report,
July-August, 12-15.
Voss, Glenn B. and Zannie G. Voss (2000), “Strategic Orientation and Firm Performance in an Artistic Environment,” Journal of Marketing, 64 (January), 67-83 doi:
10.1509/jmkg.64.1.67.17993
Wholey, Joseph S. (1998), “Performance Measurement and Performance-Based Management: An Interview with Joseph S. Wholey,” (accessed March 20, 2006), available at http://www.orau.gov/pbm/links/wholey.pdf

doi:10.1300/J054v19n02_02

