C. Whan Park, Deborah J. MacInnis, Joseph Priester, Andreas B. Eisingerich, &
Dawn Iacobucci

Brand Attachment and Brand
Attitude Strength: Conceptual and
Empirical Differentiation of Two
Critical Brand Equity Drivers

Research has not verified the theoretical or practical value of the brand attachment construct in relation to
alternative constructs, particularly brand attitude strength. The authors make conceptual, measurement, and
managerial contributions to this research issue. Conceptually, they define brand attachment, articulate its defining
properties, and differentiate it from brand attitude strength. From a measurement perspective, they develop and
validate a parsimonious measure of brand attachment, test the assumptions that underlie it, and demonstrate that
it indicates the concept of attachment. They also demonstrate the convergent and discriminant validity of this
measure in relation to brand attitude strength. Managerially, they demonstrate that brand attachment offers value
over brand attitude strength in predicting (1) consumers’ intentions to perform difficult behaviors (those they regard
as using consumer resources), (2) actual purchase behaviors, (3) brand purchase share (the share of a brand
among directly competing brands), and (4) need share (the extent to which consumers rely on a brand to address
relevant needs, including those brands in substitutable product categories).

Keywords: brand management, consumer behavior, marketing strategy, brand attachment, attitude strength

Academic researchers and practitioners in marketing

have shown significant interest of late in studying
consumers’ attachment to brands (Chaplin and John
2005; Fedorikhin, Park, and Thomson 2008; Park and
MacInnis 2006; Park et al. 2009; Schouten and McAlexan-
der 1995; Thomson 2006). As a construct that describes the
strength of the bond connecting the consumer with the
brand, attachment is critical because it should affect behav-
iors that foster brand profitability and customer lifetime
value (Thomson, MacInnis, and Park 2005). At the same
time, marketers have long invoked the constructs of attitude
valence and strength as key antecedents to consumer behav-
ior. We define attitude valence as the degree of positivity or
negativity with which an attitude object (in the current con-
text, a brand) is evaluated. We conceptualize brand attitude
strength as the positivity or negativity (valence) of an atti-
tude weighted by the confidence or certainty with which it

C. Whan Park is Joseph A. DeBell Professor of Marketing (e-mail:
Choong@marshall.usc.edu), Deborah J. MacInnis is Charles L. and
Ramona I. Hilliard Professor of Business Administration (e-mail: macinnis@
usc.edu), and Joseph Priester is Associate Professor of Marketing (e-mail:
Priester@marshall.usc.edu), Marshall School of Business, University of
Southern California. Andreas B. Eisingerich is Assistant Professor of
Marketing, Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London
(e-mail: a.eisingerich@imperial.ac.uk). Dawn Iacobucci
is E. Bronson
Ingram Professor in Marketing, Owen Graduate School of Management,
Vanderbilt University (e-mail: Dawn.iacobucci@owen.vanderbilt.edu).

is held (i.e., the extent to which it is considered valid; see
Petty, Briñol, and DeMarree 2007). Strong attitudes result
from effortful thought about the attitude object (Petty and
Cacioppo 1986), most often because of its personal rele-
vance. This effortful thought and the confidence with which
the attitude object is held guide behavior. Prior research has
shown that brand attitude strength predicts behaviors of
interest to firms, including brand consideration, intention to
purchase, purchase behavior, and brand choice (Fazio and
Petty 2007; Petty, Haugtvedt, and Smith 1995; Priester et al.
2004).

The rich history of research on brand attitude strength
raises questions about the need for a construct such as brand
attachment. Does attachment provide value beyond mea-
sures of brand attitude strength? The answer to this question
is elusive because research to date has not verified how
brand attachment and brand attitude strength differ concep-
tually or empirically. Nor has research differentiated what
unique consumer behaviors, if any, each predicts.

The current research makes three key contributions per-
tinent to these issues. First, we differentiate the brand
attachment construct from brand attitude strength conceptu-
ally, arguing that the two constructs have distinct concep-
tual properties and entail different formation processes.
Second, we validate this distinction empirically, developing
a novel scale that maps the conceptual properties of brand
attachment and assessing its relationship to attitude strength.
Third, and most significantly, we empirically demonstrate

© 2010, American Marketing Association
ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic)

1

Journal of Marketing
Vol. 74 (November 2010), 1–17

that attachment and attitude strength have distinct behav-
ioral implications. Brand attachment more accurately pre-
dicts intentions to perform behaviors that use significant
consumer resources (time, money, reputation). It is also a
stronger predictor of actual consumer behaviors than brand
attitude strength. We observe these effects in terms of con-
sumer purchase behavior, brand purchase share (i.e., choice
among directly competing brands), and need share (i.e.,
choice among brands targeting similar needs), even after
controlling for consumer inertia (i.e., past behaviors) and
other potential factors. Beyond their theoretical signifi-
cance, the results have significant managerial implications,
suggesting that brand attachment serves as the ultimate des-
tination for customer–brand relationships. As far as we are
aware, this is the first article to examine this diverse set of
behavioral outcomes from brand attachment, and it is the
first to demonstrate these effects in relation to attitude
strength.

Conceptual Distinction Between
Brand Attachment and Brand
Attitude Strength

Attachment

Although research has examined attachment in interpersonal
contexts, research in marketing suggests that consumers can
also develop attachments to marketplace entities, including
product brands (Fournier 1998; Keller 2003; Schouten and
McAlexander 1995), celebrities (Thomson 2006), and spe-
cial possessions (Ball and Tasaki 1992; Kleine and Baker
2004). Notably, despite the growing popularity of the
attachment construct, the conceptual properties of this con-
struct remain elusive (Park, MacInnis, and Priester 2006,
2009).

Conceptual properties. We define brand attachment as
the strength of the bond connecting the brand with the self.
Consistent with attachment theory (Mikulincer and Shaver
2007), this bond is exemplified by a rich and accessible
memory network (or mental representation) that involves
thoughts and feelings about the brand and the brand’s rela-
tionship to the self. Two critical factors reflect the concep-
tual properties of brand attachment: brand–self connection
and brand prominence.

Brand–self connection. The idea that attachment
involves a bond (with the brand included as part of the self)
suggests that a critical aspect of attachment involves the
cognitive and emotional connection between the brand and
the self, defined here and elsewhere as brand–self connec-
tion (Chaplin and John 2005; Escalas 2004; Escalas and
Bettman 2003). By categorizing the brand as part of the
self, a consumer develops a sense of oneness with the
brand, establishing cognitive links that connect the brand
with the self. Though cognitive in its representation, this
brand–self linkage is inherently emotional (Mikulincer and
Shaver 2007; Thomson, MacInnis, and Park 2005), involv-
ing myriad and potentially complex feelings about the
brand, including sadness and anxiety from brand–self sepa-
ration, happiness and comfort from brand–self proximity,

2 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

and pride from brand–self display. Consumers can be con-
nected to a brand because it represents who they are (e.g.,
an identity basis) or because it is meaningful in light of
goals, personal concerns, or life projects (an instrumentality
basis; Mittal 2006).

Brand prominence. In addition to brand–self connec-
tion, previous research suggests that the extent to which
positive feelings and memories about the attachment object
are perceived as top of mind also serves as an indicator of
attachment. According to Mikulincer (1998) and Collins
(1996), positive memories about the attachment object
(another person) are more prominent for people who are
highly attached to an attachment object than for people who
show weak attachment. The notion that brand–self connec-
tions develop over time and through experience suggests
that brand-related thoughts and feelings become part of a
person’s memory and vary in the perceived fluency or the
ease with which they are brought to mind. We call this com-
ponent “brand prominence”: Prominence reflects the
salience of the cognitive and affective bond that connects
the brand to the self. This salience is reflected by the per-
ceived (1) ease and (2) frequency with which brand-related
thoughts and feelings are brought to mind. Thus, con-
sumers’ attachment in relation to two brands with the same
degree of brand–self connection is greater for the brand that
they perceive as more prominent.

Importance of both indicators. Brand–self connection is
a core component of attachment because it centrally reflects
the definition of attachment as the bond connecting a person
with the brand. However, we suggest that the inclusion of
brand prominence adds precision in measuring the
“strength” of the bond connecting the brand with the con-
sumer. This is so for two reasons.

First, when thoughts and feelings about the brand are
highly accessible, prominence may exert a disproportion-
ately strong influence on decision making (Alba and Mar-
morstein 1987) and, ultimately, on consumer purchase
behavior (Akçura, Gönül, and Petrova 2004). Specifically,
consumers for whom brand–self connection is high and for
whom associations are also prominent may be more likely
to engage in relationship-sustaining behaviors than those
for whom the brand–self connection is high but prominence
is low. This is true because the brand’s prominence makes
relationship-sustaining activities salient as well. Thus, there
may be greater behavioral commitment in the form of brand
loyalty and other behaviors (e.g., positive word of mouth;
more time, money, and energy spent on relationship-
sustaining behaviors) when both brand–self connection and
prominence are high. This logic is also consistent with prior
work (Akçura, Gönül, and Petrova 2004; Alba and Chat-
topadhyay 1986; Alba and Marmorstein 1987), which sug-
gests that the prominence of feelings and thoughts can
affect behavior by inhibiting recall of other thoughts and
feelings (Alba and Chattopadhyay 1986). As relationship-
sustaining activities become more prominent, relationship-
inhibiting behaviors may be reduced.

Second, we noted previously that consumers can
develop a strong brand–self connection because (1) the
brand is part of a person’s self-conception and/or (2) it has

instrumental value. The former emphasizes brand–self con-
nections in terms of who a person is and a person’s identity.
It might be expected that when brands are identity based
(e.g., a person’s iMac is viewed as part of who he or she is
and what he or she stands for), prominence is high because
self-activation and brand activation co-occur. If so, adding
prominence may add little to the assessment of attachment
because prominence and brand–self connection covary.
However, prominence may serve as an important indicator
of attachment when consumers are connected to a brand
because of its instrumental value (i.e., a person’s iMac is
important in fulfilling entertainment- and work-related
goals). That is, when a brand has instrumental value, attach-
ment should be stronger when brand-related thoughts and
feelings are more versus less prominent. As prominence
increases, brand-related thoughts and feelings are part of
everyday life tasks, making brand attachment stronger.

Brand attachment and emotions. Emotions are often
evoked when attachment is strong because emotions are
inherent to brand–self connection and prominence factors.
Indeed, the emotional nature of attachment has led to a
measure of attachment based purely on emotions. Thomson,
MacInnis, and Park’s (2005) three-factor model character-
izes brand attachment in terms of three emotional compo-
nents: (1) affection (characterized by the emotion items
“affectionate,” “loved,” “friendly,” and “peaceful”), (2) pas-
sion (characterized by the items “passionate,” “delighted,”
and “captivated”), and (3) connection (characterized by the
items “connected,” “bonded,” and “attached”).

First, although we agree that attachments are emotional,
in contrast to Thomson, MacInnis, and Park (2005), the set
of specific emotions underlying attachment is not central to
our conceptualization (or measure) of attachment. Indeed,
we are agnostic to the specific set of positive feelings linked
to the brand. Feelings linked to brand–self connection and
brand prominence could be numerous in type, and different
feelings may be idiosyncratically linked to specific person–
brand autobiographical meanings and their prominence.
Such feelings could include those that Thomson, MacInnis,
and Park note. However, they could also include joy, excite-
ment, pride, contentment, relief, nostalgia, or any other
feelings retrieved from brand–self memories.

Second, although passion may indeed characterize
strong brand attachment as Thomson, MacInnis, and Park
(2005) suggest, the degree of passion linked to strong
attachment may depend on the relationship’s evolutionary
status. Research indicates that passion may wane as rela-
tionships progress (Ahuvia, Batra, and Bagozzi 2009). At
the same time, relationship progression brings with it more
brand–self experiences that should deepen the brand–self
bond and enhance its salience. Thus, time may be associ-
ated with waning passion, but it may also be associated with
enhanced attachment. Representing attachment based on
passion may not fully capture all relationships characterized
by strong attachment.

Third, attachment is more than emotions; it is reflected
by mental representations (rich cognitive schemata) that
include brand–self cognitions, thoughts, and autobiographi-
cal brand memories (Berman and Sperling 1994; Mikulin-

cer and Shaver 2007) that measures of emotions may not
capture. As such, we do not include emotions as factors that
indicate brand attachment. Instead, we reason that our two-
factor model of attachment (brand–self connection and
brand prominence) captures the emotions that accompany
attachment.1

Brand attachment and brand relationship quality. The
brand attachment concept also shares some conceptual
resemblance to Fournier’s (1998) seminal concept of brand
relationship quality (BRQ). Both concepts propose similar
outcomes (e.g., accommodations, devaluation of alterna-
tives). Furthermore, Fournier’s concept includes brand–self
connection as one of the six indicators of BRQ, assessing
the “quality, depth, and strength” of a consumer’s relation-
ship with a brand (Fournier 1998, p. 363). However, our
measure is designed to reflect only the strength dimension
as it pertains to brand–self connection. Moreover, BRQ is
designed to accommodate a host of relationship types (e.g.,
best friends, kinships, dependencies, enslavements) and thus
accommodates relationship types that can be positive, neu-
tral, or negative. However, brand attachment neither specifies
relationship type nor accommodates negative relationships.

Differentiating Brand Attachment from Brand
Attitude Strength

Brand attachment and brand attitude strength share several
similarities. Both are psychological constructs that reference
a brand. Both involve assessments of “strength” (i.e., of the
bond or the attitude). Both assume that high levels of their
respective constructs are based on substantial processing
regarding the brand. Both have implications for marketing-
relevant consumption behaviors, such as brand purchase,
repeat purchase, and willingness to recommend a brand.
Moreover, we surmise that when consumers are strongly
attached to a brand, they can also have a positive and strong
attitude toward it. However, we regard brand attachment
and brand attitude strength as distinct constructs because
they differ in several fundamental respects.

First, the constructs differ in the nature of affect they
implicate. Whereas attachment implicates “hot” affect from
the brand’s linkage to the self (Mikulincer and Shaver
2007), strong brand attitudes reflect evaluations and “cold”
affect (Cohen and Areni 1991) involving a judgment about
the brand. This difference in affect has important implica-
tions for brand behaviors, as we discuss subsequently. In
this sense, the constructs differ in their motivational power
because attachment, unlike attitude strength, has emotional
and self-implications that serve as more powerful drivers of
behavior.

Second, although both constructs involve assessments
of strength, the entity to which “strength” applies differs.
With attachment, what is strong is the bond that connects
the brand with the self. Bonds are stronger (1) as connec-
tions between the brand and the self become closer and (2)

1Studies 2 and 3 compare our brand attachment measure with
Thomson, MacInnis, and Park’s (2005) measure. Both studies
strongly support the added value of the former over the latter. We
do not report these results given space constraints.

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 3

as brand-related thoughts and memories become more
prominent. With strong attitudes, what is strong is a per-
son’s judgment of the goodness or badness of the brand.
Thus, with attachment, strength references the brand–self
relationship. Such strength is indicated by the connection
between the self and the brand and a subjective sense of
brand prominence. With strong attitudes, strength refer-
ences the attitude object and the confidence with which it is
held. Such strength is often indicated by objective indica-
tors of attitude accessibility. Moreover, the factors that lead
to variation in strength differ. With strong brand attitudes,
strength varies not as a function of brand–self connections
or the prominence of brand thoughts but rather as a function
of the confidence with which the judgment is rendered
(Petty, Briñol, and DeMarree 2007).

Third, the constructs differ in their range of valence.
Strong attitudes can range from positive to negative, such
that attitude strength is conceptualized on a bipolar valence
dimension. Thus, attitudes range from strong–positive to
weak–positive to weak–negative to strong–negative. Positive
and negative ends anchor the attitude strength continuum,
and behavior is linked with either end of that continuum. In
other words, just as strong positive attitudes predict behav-
ior (e.g., purchase), strong negative attitudes also predict
behavior (e.g., purchase avoidance). In contrast, attach-
ments vary in strength from weak to strong. The opposite of
strong attachment is weak attachment. What varies is not
the valence of the attachment but rather the strength of the
bond connecting the brand with the self and its prominence.
Finally, whereas attachment is largely time dependent,
brand attitude strength need not be. Specifically, attachment
includes relationship-based working models (mental repre-
sentations) that reflect prominent autobiographical and
episodic memories pertaining to the self and the attachment
object. Such models also include procedural knowledge about
how the brand can regulate a person’s emotions (Collins
and Read 1994; Mikulincer and Shaver 2007). Such
self–brand links develop over time (Mikulincer and Shaver
2003). In contrast, strong brand attitudes need not be time
dependent. They are based on thoughtful processing (elabo-
ration) and can be formed in a limited time. Because attach-
ments develop over time while strong brand attitudes need
not, attachment may reflect a more advanced stage of rela-
tionship development.

Predicting the Differential Impact of Brand
Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength

Having conceptually distinguished brand attachment from
brand attitude strength, we now turn to understanding
whether they predict different outcomes. This is a novel
issue because prior research has not yet distinguished the
differential effects each predicts. Thomson, MacInnis, and
Park (2005) demonstrate that their measures of emotional
attachment and attitude valence have distinct effects, with
attachment better predicting brand loyalty and willingness
to pay a price premium. However, their research does not
study attitude strength. Because attitude strength is more
closely tied to actual purchase behavior than attitude
valence (Fazio 1995; Petty, Haugtvedt, and Smith 1995;
Priester et al. 2004), a more convincing case for the power

4 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

of attachment would be made if its impact were different
from that of attitude strength.

Increasing research shows that attitude strength predicts
purchase behavior, with the direction of the behavior (being
inclined or disinclined toward purchase) varying as a func-
tion of whether attitude valence is strongly positive or
strongly negative (Fazio 1995; Petty, Haugtvedt, and Smith
1995). Most often studied are relatively simple behaviors,
such as purchase intentions or product choice (Fazio, Pow-
ell, and Williams 1989; Petty, Haugtvedt, and Smith 1995).
We add to the literature by suggesting that within a given
consumption context, behaviors can be conceptualized
along a behavioral hierarchy that reflects their enactment
difficulty. We conceptualize difficulty as the extent to which
the behaviors expend economic, social, psychological, tem-
poral, or physical resources. We use an extended version of
self-expansion theory to develop these ideas. As we
describe subsequently, our theorizing predicts novel behav-
ioral outcomes that have not been linked with brand attach-
ment or strong brand attitudes—specifically, intentions and
actual behaviors, including actual purchase, brand purchase
share, and need share. Self-expansion theory provides a
basis for these predictions.

Self-Expansion Theory and Behaviors

Self-expansion theory (Aron et al. 2005) posits that people
possess an inherent motivation for self-expansion, or a
desire to incorporate others (here brands) into their concep-
tion of “self.” The more an entity (brand) is included in the
self, the closer is the bond that connects them. Attachment
develops over time as relationships between the self and the
entity evolve. Over time, a cognitive reorganization takes
place such that the self expands to include the entity. People
develop a positive feeling of “oneness” with the entity
(Aron, Aron, and Smollan 1992) and tend to view the
entity’s resources as their own (Mittal 2006).

We add to self-expansion theory by proposing that con-
sumers who are attached to brands are not just recipients of
the brand’s resources (i.e., consumers come to regard the
brand’s resources as their own); they also actively invest
their own resources in the brand to maintain their brand
relationship. Thus, consumers who are highly attached to a
brand are more motivated to expend resources of their own
in the process of self-expansion. Such resources include the
allocation of (1) social resources, such as defending the
brand to others and derogating alternatives (Johnson and
Rusbult 1989); (2) financial resources, as evidenced by a
willingness to pay a higher price for the brand (Thomson,
MacInnis, and Park 2005) or the willingness to devote a
greater share of expenditures to the brand (rather than to
other brands in the same or related product categories); and
(3) time resources, as illustrated by involvement in brand
communities and brand promotion through social media
(Muñiz and O’Guinn 2001; Schouten and McAlexander
1995). The more attached a person is to the brand, the more
likely he or she is to move from an egocentric to a more rec-
iprocal brand relationship that involves sharing resources
with the brand. As such, consumers who are highly attached
to a brand should treat the brand preferentially and engage
in restorative behaviors that ensure brand relationship con-

tinuation (Aron, Aron, and Smollan 1992; Aron et al. 2005;
Mikulincer 1998).

Impact on Intentions to Perform Difficult
Behaviors

We expect that consumers’ intent to enact difficult behaviors
along the behavioral hierarchy (those that use more of their
own resources) is greater when attachment is strong (versus
weak). This is so because a feeling of oneness is accompa-
nied by hot affect, which is highly motivational (Mikulincer
and Shaver 2007). Because attached consumers view brands
as part of themselves and have salient thoughts and feelings
about the brand, they should be more willing to use greater
resources of their own, resources that require the enactment
of difficult behaviors to maintain that relationship. The
greater the attachment, the more difficult the behavior the
consumer is willing to enact to maintain the brand relation-
ship. Attitude strength should be less able to predict these
relationship-maintaining, -sustaining, and -restoring behav-
iors because the brand is not connected to the self and thus
is less strongly linked to resource allocation for the pur-
poses of sustaining a brand relationship. This novel exten-
sion of self-expansion theory leads us to predict the follow-
ing:

H1: Brand attachment is a better indicator of a consumer’s
intentions to perform difficult behaviors than brand atti-
tude strength.

Impact on Actual Purchase Behavior
Whereas H1 examines intentions, a long history of research
shows that intentions and actions do not always correspond.
This is because situational (e.g., brand unavailability), nor-
mative (e.g., social constraints), behavioral (e.g., habits),
and financial (price increase) constraints may preclude
people from actualizing intentions into behaviors (Fishbein
and Ajzen 1975; Shepphard, Hartwick, and Warshaw 1988).
When the behavior itself involves significant resources,
enactment difficulty will be even higher. We posit that brand
attachment acts as a stronger predictor of actual difficult-to-
enact behaviors than strong brand attitudes. Strongly
attached consumers incorporate a brand as part of their self
and hold salient thoughts and feelings about it. On the basis
of perceived oneness with a brand, consumers should be
more motivated to enact relationship-sustaining behaviors
that are difficult to perform than consumers with strong
brand attitudes. Therefore, we predict the following:

H2: Brand attachment is a better indicator of a consumer’s
actual purchase behavior than brand attitude strength.

Brand Purchase Share

We also expect that brand attachment better predicts a
brand’s purchase share, defined as the share of a brand
among directly competing brands (i.e., if the number of
competing brands a consumer purchases in a given product
category is 0, the focal brand’s purchase share is 100%).
When consumers are strongly attached to a brand, compet-
ing brands will be less prominent and linked less strongly to
the self. As a result, competing brands will be less likely to

be regarded as substitutes. Work in attachment theory and
psychology indicates that people perceive attached objects
as irreplaceable; other objects will not serve as substitutes
(Bowlby 1980). Thus, a consumer who is strongly attached
to a brand of running shoes (e.g., Nike) is less likely to use
competing brands. In contrast, brand attitude strength does
not necessarily have the same implications for brand pur-
chase share. A person can have a strong positive attitude
toward one brand while having a similar strong positive atti-
tude toward another brand. Thus, we anticipate the following:

H3: Brand attachment is a better indicator of brand purchase
share (the share of a brand among directly competing
brands) than brand attitude strength.

Need Share

We also expect that brand attachment better predicts the
brand’s share of use among substitutable alternatives,
specifically, need share. For example, a consumer who is
strongly attached to a brand of soft drinks is not only less
likely to buy competing soft drinks but also less likely to
buy other beverages (e.g., tea, coffee, water, juice). Like-
wise, a consumer who is attached to his or her iPhone may
not only be more likely to allocate more monetary resources
to it (than competing cell phone alternatives) but also be
more likely to use the iPhone as a source of information and
entertainment than use products from competing-needs
categories (e.g., newspapers, television, magazines). The
brands to which consumers are highly attached capture con-
sumers’ minds and hearts. Therefore, attached consumers
are less likely to rely on alternatives, even in other categories
that fill the same need. Thus, we predict the following:

H4: Brand attachment is a better indicator of brand need share
(the relative use of a brand compared with substitutable
alternatives) than brand attitude strength.

Study 1: Measuring Brand
Attachment
We developed a scale designed to map the conceptual prop-
erties of the brand attachment construct. We generated a set
of items designed to tap brand–self connections and the
prominence of brand thoughts and feelings. We generated
ten indicators of attachment, five each for the brand–self
connection and prominence components. Participants evalu-
ated all items on 11-point scales anchored by “not at all” (0)
and “completely” (10).

We analyzed consumers’ responses to the ten-item scale
using three different brands (Quaker Oats Oatmeal, Apple
iPod, and a local university). Through exploratory factor
analyses using oblique factor rotation, we reduced the ten-
item scale to eight items. The full list of items constituting this
scale and results pertinent to this pretest appears in Table 1.

Although the resultant eight-item scale (five items
reflecting brand–self connection and three items represent-
ing brand prominence) is not unusually long for academic
use, we wanted to develop a more parsimonious scale that
would lend itself to marketing practice. Therefore, we
selected items that best map the conceptual definition of the

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 5

TABLE 1
Study 1: Factor Loadings for the Two-Factor Model of Brand Attachment

Quaker Oats Oatmeal

Apple iPod

University

Three Different Stimuli

Items

To what extent is (brand name)
part of you and who you are?

To what extent do you feel

personally connected to (brand
name)?

To what extent do you feel

emotionally bonded to (brand
name)?

To what extent is (brand name)

part of you?

To what extent does (brand name)
say something to other people
about who you are?

To what extent are your thoughts
and feelings toward (brand
name) often automatic, coming
to mind seemingly on their own?

To what extent do your thoughts
and feelings toward (brand
name) come to your mind
naturally and instantly?

To what extent do your thoughts
and feelings toward (brand
name) come to mind so naturally
and instantly that you don’t
have much control over them?

To what extent does the word
(brand name) automatically
evoke many good thoughts about
the past, present, and future?
To what extent to you have many
thoughts about (brand name)?

Brand–Self
Connection Prominence Connection Prominence Connection Prominence

Brand–Self

Brand–Self

.90

.94

.92

.91

.75

.41

.46

.42

.77

.69

.37

.39

.45

.41

.40

.89

.91

.90

.52

.61

.89

.91

.90

.92

.75

.57

.53

.52

.70

.74

.48

.51

.57

.54

.52

.88

.93

.91

.74

.60

.92

.88

.91

.91

.84

.56

.52

.49

.72

.69

.52

.53

.54

.48

.54

.85

.93

.92

.70

.63

Notes: Italicized items represent brand–self connection and prominence in the final attachment scale.

two attachment components based on statistical grounds
(strong factor loadings and reliability tests). For brand–self
connection, these items are as follows: (1) “To what extent
is [Brand Name] part of you and who you are?” and (2) “To
what extent do you feel that you are personally connected to
[Brand Name]?” These items represent the identity and
instrumentality bases of brand–self connection, respec-
tively, that we described previously.

For brand prominence, the items are (1) “To what extent
are your thoughts and feelings toward [Brand Name] often
automatic, coming to mind seemingly on their own?” and
(2) “To what extent do your thoughts and feelings toward
[Brand Name] come to you naturally and instantly?” These
two items, which reflect myriad brand-relevant thoughts and
feelings and the lack of control over their activation, capture
the retrieval ease and frequency characteristic of brand
prominence. Note that one of the two prominence measure
items explicitly captures the frequency (“often”) of brand-
related thoughts and feelings. We also phrased these two
items to describe multiple (versus a single) thoughts and
feelings, thus capturing the frequency aspect of brand promi-
nence. The brand prominence measure does not distinguish

the valence of thoughts and feelings about a brand, because
the distribution of positive versus negative feelings linked to
the brand are reflected in the degree of brand–self connection.
Note that reducing the number of indicators (from eight
to four) provides a more parsimonious scale without signifi-
cant loss of reliability. Reduction also provides a more con-
servative test of our hypotheses.2

2To determine whether and to what extent the reduced set of
items affected the reliability of each attachment component, we
examined the change in alpha coefficient for the eight-item versus
the more parsimonious four-item attachment scale. For brand–self
connection, the alpha coefficients for the five-item scale were α =
.95oats, α = .94iPod, and α = .95university, and the two-item scale
coefficients were α = .92oats, α = .90iPod, and α = .86university. The
alpha coefficients for the three-item brand prominence scale were
α = .94oats, α = .94iPod, and α = .94university, and the two-item scale
coefficients were α = .91oats, α = .90iPod, and α = .89university. We
seven-item
also compared Escalas and Bettman’s
brand–self connection measure (α = .96) with our two-item scale
(α = .95) using a different sample of 221 respondents. Combined,
these results reveal that reducing the number of indicators provides
a parsimonious attachment scale that does not sacrifice reliability.

(2003)

6 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

Study 2: Attachment and Attitude
Strength as Distinct Constructs
We designed Study 2 to accomplish two things. First, we
wanted to test the assumption that both brand–self connec-
tion and brand prominence are indicators of brand attach-
ment. Second, we wanted to demonstrate that attachment
and attitude strengths are empirically discriminable.

Method

Participants and design. One hundred eight undergradu-
ate marketing students completed a booklet in exchange for
partial course credit. The booklet asked respondents to
report their thoughts and feelings toward Apple iPod. We
administered the survey in a group setting (30–40 per
group).

Measures. Participants provided all responses on 11-
point scales anchored by “not at all” (0) and “completely”
(10). We used the four-item brand attachment scale (for
indicators of brand–self connection, r = .91; for indicators
of brand prominence, r = .71). Two items measured separa-
tion distress: “To what extent would you be distressed if the
iPod were discontinued?” and “To what extent is it difficult
to imagine life without the iPod?” (r = .82).

We assessed brand attitude strength by attitude valence
and a set of items regarded as corresponding with strength.
Respondents indicated the extent to which they viewed the
Apple iPod as “good” (+5) versus “bad” (–5) and “positive”
(+5) versus “negative” (–5) and the extent to which they
“liked it” (+5) versus “disliked it” (–5) (α = .73). These
items indicate attitude valence.3 Respondents used five
additional items to rate the extent to which the Apple iPod
is (1) important to them and (2) self-relevant, as well as the
extent to which they (3) have thought about the brand, (4)
are confident with their brand evaluation, and (5) are certain
regarding their brand evaluation (α = .73). These items are
commonly used with attitude valence to indicate attitude
strength (Krosnick et al. 1993).

We assessed brand attitude strength as a single-order
factor reflecting the multiplicative product of attitude
valence weighted by the confidence/certainty with which
this attitude is held.4 The results are unchanged when all
five aforementioned items are included. All subsequent
analyses use only attitude certainty and confidence as indi-
cators because the joint product of attitude valence
weighted by confidence and certainty is most consistent with
the conceptual definition of brand attitude strength (Briñol
and Petty 2009). Notably, the results are similar when we
assessed brand attitude strength (1) as the average of the
items indicating attitude valence and confidence/certainty
or (2) as a two-factor model with valence and confidence/
certainty as separate second-order factors.

3We do not report the results for attitude valence in isolation,
because (1) our focus is on attitude strength and (2) attitude
strength is more likely to be empirically similar to attachment.
Thus, focusing on attitude strength provides a more rigorous test
of the unique effects of attachment.

4We converted the 0–10 scale to a 1–11 scale to avoid a statisti-

cal bias.

Test of Assumptions

Importance of the two-factor brand attachment model.
We conducted two confirmatory factor analyses (CFAs) of
the items representing attachment, one in which we allowed
both the brand–self connection and the prominence factors
2(3) = 18.37) and one in which we
to correlate (r = .37; χ
2(4) = 223.11). The
forced them to be perfectly correlated (χ
2(1) = 204.74, p < .001) reveals that
chi-square change (∆χ
the first analysis fits the data better, confirming the two-factor
attachment model.

Evidence for convergent and discriminant validity. To
verify that brand attachment and brand attitude strength are
discriminable constructs, we conducted two CFAs, one in
which we allowed both constructs to correlate (r = .66;
2(3) = 3.80) and one in which we forced the two factors to
χ
2(4) = 27.70). The difference
be perfectly correlated (χ
2(1) = 23.90,
between the two models was significant (∆χ
p < .001), suggesting that brand attachment and brand atti-
tude strength are related but empirically distinct. These
results also demonstrate that the brand attachment scale
meets the criteria of convergent and discriminant validity
because it is related to but distinct from brand attitude
strength. Had attachment been simply a stronger form of
attitude strength, we would likely not have observed distinct
factors.

Separation distress is regarded as an emotional indicator
of attachment (Bowlby 1980; Thomson, MacInnis, and Park
2005). That is, the more attached a person is to an entity, the
more distress he or she feels at the prospect of losing the
relationship with that entity. Separation from (loss of prox-
imity to) an attachment object creates emotional distress,
inducing negative feelings such as depression, anxiety, and
a loss of self. Adults reveal distress from attachment figure
loss (e.g., Berman and Sperling 1994; Simpson 1990),
whereas in a consumer context, loss of possessions is also
mourned. Indeed, Bowlby (1980) regards separation dis-
tress as a natural concomitant of attachment. As Hazan and
Zeifman (1999, p. 351) note, “separation distress … is the
data from which the existence and regulator role of the
attachment behavioral system is inferred.” Thus, the exis-
tence of separation distress is regarded as evidence for the
existence of attachment. The 1985 “New Coke” fiasco and
the death of Michael Jackson illustrate two such examples
of the relationship between brand attachment and separation
distress.

Therefore, the validity of the brand attachment scale
would be evidenced by showing a relationship between
attachment (and its components) and separation distress.
We performed a regression analysis to examine whether
brand–self connection and prominence as indicators of
attachment both independently predict this known indicator
of attachment (separation distress). The results reveal two
main effects (i.e., brand–self connection: γ = .50, F(1, 104) =
15.6, p < .001; prominence: γ = .63, F(1, 104) = 11.4,
p < .001). The interaction was not significant (F(1, 104) =
.02). These results strongly suggest that brand–self connec-
tion and brand prominence independently contribute to the

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 7

prediction of separation distress as indicators of brand
attachment.5

Finally, we performed an analysis with a set of models
to show that brand attachment is more strongly related to
separation distress than brand attitude strength. Although
consumers with strong brand attitudes are confident in their
brand assessments, brand attitude strength is less likely to
be strongly related to separation distress than attachment
because it does not reflect a strong bond between the brand
and the self. Thus, evidence for the differential relationship
of these constructs to separation distress would provide fur-
ther evidence that our measure of attachment demonstrates
convergent validity because it is more strongly related to a
known behavioral indicator of attachment.

A set of structural equation models compared brand
attachment and brand attitude strength in relation to separa-
tion distress. A model representing attachment as indicated
by brand–self connection and prominence as second-order
factors showed that brand attachment is more strongly
related to separation distress (γ = .98) than brand attitude
strength (γ = .02; z = 4.39, p < .001; see Figure 1, Panel A).
We replicated these results when we represented attachment
with a first-order model, with brand–self connection and
prominence fixed as a single-order factor (γ = .74 versus γ =
.27) for attachment and brand attitude strength, respectively
(z = 3.94, p < .001; see Figure 1, Panel B). In further support
of a second-order model of attachment, the fit of the first-
2(12) = 85.00) was not as strong as that of
order model (χ
2(10) = 11.50), and the dif-
the second-order factor model (χ
2(2) =
ference in fit between the models was significant (∆χ
73.50, p < .001). This analysis is important because it sup-
ports the notion that the two indicators of attachment are
best represented as subscales of the higher-order attachment
construct. Furthermore, a factor analysis shows that our
two-factor-based brand attachment measure, brand attitude
strength, and separation distress all loaded on separate fac-
tors. As Table 2 shows, all items loaded significantly on
their predicted factors with minimal cross-loadings, sug-
gesting that attachment and attitude strength exhibit dis-
criminant validity. These results provide additional evi-
dence that attachment is not simply a stronger form of

5This independence of brand–self connection and prominence is
also supported by the unique role of brand prominence. We noted
previously that when brand–self connection is instrumentality
(versus identity) based, brand prominence would add precision in
the measurement of attachment. To test this idea, we split the data
into two groups: One group scored high on the “part of me and
who I am” and low on “personally connected” indicators of
brand–self connection, and the other group scored high on the
brand–self connection indicator of “personally connected” and
low on “part of me and who I am.” As we expected, for the former
group, the ability of brand attachment to predict separation distress
was equally high regardless of whether attachment included
brand–self connection and brand prominence or brand–self con-
nection alone (γ = .99 versus γ = .91, ps < .001, respectively).
However, for the latter group, brand attachment was a better pre-
dictor (p < .05) of separation distress when it included both
brand–self connection and prominence than brand–self connection
alone (γ = .99, p < .001 versus γ = .61, p < .05, respectively).
These results confirm the unique role of brand prominence in mea-
suring brand attachment.

8 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

attachment. Had one been a stronger form of another, we
would not have observed such discrimination.

Discussion

Study 2 supports the assumption that brand–self connection
and prominence both contribute to the measurement of
brand attachment. It also supports a second-order represen-
tation of attachment (with brand–self connection and brand
prominence as separate indicators), which in turn supports
the notion that the two subscales are subsumed within the
attachment construct. Finally, it supports our conceptualiza-
tion of attachment and brand attitude strength as related but
distinct constructs both from a measurement perspective
and in terms of their ability to predict separation distress.

Study 3
We designed Study 3 to replicate the results regarding key
assumptions of our two-factor-based brand attachment
model using a different brand. In doing so, we test H1.

Method

Participants and design. One hundred forty-one under-
graduate marketing students completed a booklet
in
exchange for partial course credit. The booklet included
items designed to indicate brand attachment, brand attitude
strength, separation distress, and intentions to perform a set
of ten behaviors that varied in enactment difficulty. The
focal brand was Nike shoes. We conducted the survey in a
group setting.

Measures. We measured brand attachment, brand atti-
tude strength, and separation distress in a manner identical
to Study 2. Respondents again completed two 11-point
item
scale items for each of ten behaviors. The first
assessed the perceived difficulty of performing each behav-
ior (0 = “not at all,” and 10 = “extremely”). The second
assessed respondents’ intentions to perform the behavior in
the future (0 = “not at all,” and 10 = “very likely”). The ten
behaviors were (1) buying Nike shoes; (2) switching from
Nike to non-Nike shoes; (3) recommending Nike shoes to
other people; (4) buying Nike shoes for friends or family;
(5) frequently using products with a Nike logo; (6) paying
more for Nike shoes than for non-Nike shoes; (7) defending
Nike when others speak poorly about it; (8) waiting for
several months to buy Nike shoes rather than buying a
non-Nike shoe right now; (9) spending money, time, and
energy to participate in activities to promote Nike; and (10)
always buying the new model of Nike shoes when it
becomes available.

Results

Measurement results. We conducted two CFAs on the
items representing brand attachment, one in which we
allowed both the prominence and the brand–self connection
2(1) = 3.84, p < .05) and one
factors to correlate (r = .67; χ
2(2) =
in which we forced them to be perfectly correlated (χ
48.70, p < .001). The chi-square change was significant
2(1) = 44.86, p < .001), demonstrating that the first rep-
(∆χ
resentation fits the data better. These results confirm that a

FIGURE 1
Study 2: Simultaneous Estimation of Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength on Separation Distress

A: The Second-Order Model

Part of who
you are

Personally
connected

Automatic
thoughts/
feelings

Thoughts/
feelings come
naturally

Part of who
you are

Personally
connected

Automatic
thoughts/
feelings

Thoughts/
feelings come
naturally

Brand–self
connection

Prominence

Brand
attachment

Attitude valence ×
confidence/certainty

Brand
attitude
strength

B: The First-Order Model

.98*

Separation
distress

.02

Distressed if
discontinued

Difficult to
imagine life
without

Brand
attachment

.74*

Separation
distress

.27*

Distressed if
discontinued

Difficult to
imagine life
without

Attitude valence ×
confidence/certainty

Brand
attitude
strength

*Significant at p < .05.

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 9

TABLE 2
Study 2: Factor Analysis of Brand–Self Connection, Prominence, Attitude Strength, and Separation
Distress

Indicators

Factor 1: To what extent is iPod
part of you and who you are?
Factor 1: To what extent do you
feel personally connected to
the iPod?

Factor 2: To what extent are your
thoughts and feelings toward
iPod often automatic, coming
to mind seemingly on their own?

Factor 2: To what extent do your

thoughts and feelings toward iPod
come to you naturally and instantly?

Factor 3: Attitude valence multiplied

by certainty and confidence.
Factor 4: To what extent would
you be distressed if the iPod
was discontinued?

Factor 4: To what extent is it

difficult to imagine life without
the iPod?

Factor Loadingsa

Factor 1:
Brand–Self
Connection

Factor 2:
Prominence

Factor 3:
Attitude
Strength

Factor 4:
Separation
Distress

.99

.85

.07

.18

.03

.09

.13

.02

.03

.97

.78

.00

.11

.07

.03

.04

.04

.04

.98

.08

.03

.05

.12

.04

.11

.01

.88

.88

aThe percentages of variance explained by the four factors are 63.44%, 14.03%, 8.33%, and 5.23%, respectively, with a total variance
explained of 91.03%.

two-factor model (represented by brand–self connection
and brand prominence) indicates brand attachment better
than a one-factor model.

We conducted two CFAs, one in which we allowed
brand attachment (represented by brand–self connection
and prominence) and attitude strength to correlate (r = .80;
2(3) = 5.10, p > .05) and one in which we forced the two
χ
2(4) = 53.40, p <
constructs to be perfectly correlated (χ
.001). The difference between the two models was signifi-
2(1) = 48.30, p < .001), further supporting the
cant (∆χ
notion that brand attachment and attitude strength are
related but empirically distinct constructs. The results fur-
ther demonstrate the convergent and discriminant validity
of the brand attachment scale as represented by both promi-
nence and brand–self connection. Attachment, as indicated
by the two subscales, is related to but empirically distinct
from attitude strength.6 We obtained results consistent with
those in Study 2 for separation distress (we do not report the
results given space constraints).

Test of H1. To test whether attachment is a better indica-
tor of a consumer’s intent to perform difficult behaviors
(H1), we first validated that the behaviors we examined
indeed varied in difficulty. Respondents’ assessments of the
perceived difficulty of performing each of the ten measured
yielded the following: The three most difficult behaviors
were “always buying the new model”; “spending money,
time, and energy to promote Nike”; and “waiting to buy

6Factor analyses show that all brand–self connection, brand
prominence, attitude strength, and separation distress items load
cleanly on their hypothesized factors.

10 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

Nike versus buying an alternative brand,” with difficulty
levels of 5.87, 5.65, and 5.39, respectively. The second cate-
gory included the following two behaviors: “defending
Nike when others speak poorly of it” and “paying more for
Nike versus non-Nike shoes,” with difficulty scores of 4.93
and 4.44, respectively. The third category included five
behaviors: “buying Nike shoes for others,” “using products
with a Nike logo,” “switching from Nike to non-Nike
shoes,” “recommending Nike to others,” and “buying Nike
shoes for oneself,” with difficulty levels of 3.80, 3.53, 3.52,
3.51, and 3.21, respectively. The three categories represent-
ing different levels of the behavior heirarchy were signifi-
cantly different from one another in their level of difficulty
at the .05 level.

A model estimating brand attachment and brand attitude
strength simultaneously supports H1 (see Figure 2). Consis-
tent with H1, brand attachment better predicts intentions to
engage in behaviors regarded as most difficult (γ = .81, p <
.001) than brand attitude strength (γ = .05, p > .05). The dif-
ference between the two coefficients was significant (z =
3.87, p < .01). Brand attachment also better predicts moder-
ately difficult behaviors (γ = .52, p < .01) than brand atti-
tude strength (γ = .47, p < .01). Again, the difference
between the γ coefficients is significant (z = 2.91, p < .01).
Combined, these results strongly support H1. Though not
hypothesized, we found that brand attitude strength (γ = .46,
p < .01) was as strong a predictor as brand attachment (γ =
.45, p < .01) of brand behaviors regarded as least difficult to
perform (z = .07, p > .05). We discuss this finding further in
the “General Discussion” section.

FIGURE 2
Study 3: Simultaneous Estimation of Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength on Behavioral
Intentions

Part of who
you are

Personally
connected

Automatic
thoughts/
feelings

Thoughts/
feelings come
naturally

Brand–self
connection

Prominence

.81*

Most
difficult
behaviors

.05

Brand
attachment

.52*

Moderately
difficult
behaviors

.47*

Attitude valence ×
confidence/certainty

Brand
attitude
strength

.45*

Least
difficult
behaviors

.46*

Always buying
the new model

Promoting
Nike

Waiting to
buy Nike versus
competitor

Defending
Nike

Paying more
for Nike versus
non-Nike

Buying Nike
for others

Using
products with
Nike logo

Switching
from Nike to
non-Nike

Recom-
mending Nike
to others

Buying Nike
for myself

*Significant at p < .05.

In addition, we compared the predictive power of two
attachment models, one with both brand–self connection
and brand prominence, as indicators of attachment, and one
with only the brand–self connection component. This analy-
sis explores whether brand prominence as an indicator of
brand attachment is necessary for the prediction of behav-
ioral intentions. The results show no significant difference

in the one-component (brand–self connection) versus the
two-component (brand–self connection and prominence)
brand attachment measure’s predictive ability of behaviors:
most difficult to perform (γ = .84 and .82, p < .001, respec-
tively), moderately difficult to perform (γ = .87 and .82, p <
.001, respectively), and least difficult to perform (γ = .82
and .77, p < .001, respectively). The difference in coeffi-

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 11

2(5) = 5.31;
cients and model fit (∆χ
2(11) = 6.90; p > .05, respectively) was not significant.
∆χ
This result is noteworthy, and we explore it further in Study
4 and the “General Discussion” section.

2(7) = 10.62; ∆χ

Discussion

Study 3 replicates the measurement effects we observed in
Studies 1 and 2. In addition, and consistent with H1, the
study supports the idea that brand attachment better predicts
consumers’ intentions to enact difficult behaviors than
brand attitude strength. These results further confirm the
idea that brand attachment and brand attitude strength are
different constructs that have different behavioral outcomes.
Finally, we find that the two- and one-component brand
attachment measures predict intent to perform behaviors
equally well. Because Study 3 relies on intentions to per-
form behaviors versus the actual performance of such
behaviors, Study 4 extends Study 3 by examining the
importance of brand–self connection and prominence as
indicators of attachment. Study 4 also tests the remaining
hypotheses using actual purchase data.

Study 4

Method

Study 4 involved the collaboration with a large European
retail bank listed on the stock exchange. The bank serves
more than 15 million customers across 17 international
markets. Because people’s investments, and in some cases
life savings, are involved, this context is ideal for testing the
ability of both constructs to predict difficult behavior.

We obtained contact details for 2000 customers who
were randomly selected from one of the firm’s branch net-
works. Before our quantitative study, we conducted 41 tele-
phone interviews with randomly selected customers. Our
aim was to discuss the meaning of the items that constituted
our measures with customers and reduce item ambiguity. A
subsequent pretest of the questionnaire with 52 randomly
selected customers explicitly asked participants to point out
any ambiguity in responding to individual questions. We
deemed such pretesting to be necessary because the original
scale was developed in the United States and tested among
U.S. consumers. Use of the scale in Europe necessitated
minor wording changes to ensure question clarity.

We then mailed a finalized version of the questionnaire
with an informative cover letter, a prepaid return envelope,
and a thank you note with a small book of commemorative
stamps worth $3 as an incentive. The cover letter explained
the purpose of the study, assured that individual responses
would not be shared with anyone outside the research team,
and thanked the participant. Three weeks after the first
mailing, we followed up with a small thank you card for
participation and again sent the same questionairre to those
who did not respond to the first mailing. Our sampling
effort generated 701 responses. We dropped four question-
naires because of insufficient questionnaire completion. The
final set of 697 usable responses reflected a 34.85% effec-
tive response rate. We compared early and late responses,
following Armstrong and Overton’s (1977) recommended

12 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

procedure. We found no indication of response bias. More-
over, a check with a manager from the collaborating firm
revealed that the demographic profile of respondents was
representative of the firm’s customer base.

Measures. Measures of brand attachment, brand attitude
strength, and separation distress were identical to those
used in the prior studies.

Dependent measures. We operationalized actual pur-
chase by collecting purchase data on the individual cus-
tomer from the collaborating firm. We measured actual pur-
chase behavior by summing the sales of all investment
products (e.g., investment funds) for each individual cus-
tomer over the most recent six-month period after the sur-
vey. We operationalized brand purchase share by asking
respondents to indicate how many banks (in addition to the
collaborating firm) they are currently using for their various
financial services (e.g., checking account, savings, invest-
ments, loans). When respondents indicated that they exclu-
sively use the collaborating firm brand, we noted purchase
share as 100%. We measured need share by asking respon-
dents to indicate the extent to which they use the collaborat-
ing firm for all their financial services. Questions included
the following: “To what extent out of 100% do you use
[company name] for all your financial services (savings,
investments, loans, etc.)? If you use only [company name]
for your financial services, you indicate 100%. If you use
more than one financial service institution, including non-
banking institutions such as investment firms, insurance
companies, etc., indicate the percentage of your use of
[company name] among all the financial service institutions.”

Control variables. We also collected data on several
control variables. To predict changes in actual behavior that
are not driven by consumer inertia, we included past pur-
chase, which was collected similarly to our customer pur-
chase behavior measure and accounted for the six months
before our survey, as a predictor. We also accounted for
gender and relationship length. Prior research has indicated
the role of relationship length as a likely proxy for customer
inertia (Colgate and Lang 2001) and the positive effect of
gender on brand choice (Meyers-Levy and Sternthal 1991).

Results

The results replicated the previous studies, which tested the
assumptions underlying (1) the conceptual properties of
brand attachment, (2) the two-factor model and the second-
order model of brand attachment, (3) the measure’s dis-
criminant and convergent validity in relation to brand atti-
tude strength,7 and (4) the stronger relationship between

7We provide further evidence that brand attachment is not sim-
ply strong brand attitude in Study 4, in which we observe that atti-
tude strength and attachment differ in time dependency. In Study
4, relationship length does not discriminate between consumers
who have strong versus weak attitude strength (M = 18.29 and
16.35; t(66) = .74, p = .46). In contrast, relationship length is sig-
nificantly related to attachment. Customers with high brand
attachment have a longer relationship with the brand than cus-
tomers whose brand attachment is low (M = 19.38 and 14.03;
t(66) = 2.11, p < .05). This result offers further support that brand
attachment and attitude strength behave differently.

attachment and separation distress in relation to attitude
strength. Given space constraints, we do not report these
results.

Test of H2: actual customer purchase behavior. To test
whether brand attachment predicts actual customer pur-
chase behavior (sales as reported by the company) better
than brand attitude strength, we used a model in which
attachment was represented by prominence and brand–self
connection as second-order factors. The results revealed
that brand attachment significantly predicts actual behavior
(γ = .14, p < .01), even after we accounted for past behavior
(γ = .60, p < .001), relationship length (γ = .03, p > .05), and
gender (γ = .02, p > .05). Brand attitude strength does not
predict actual customer behavior (γ = .05, p > .05) (Figure
3). The difference between the coefficient for attachment
and brand attitude strength was significant (z = 2.44, p <
.01). The result that brand attachment is a stronger predictor
of actual customer behavior than brand attitude strength is
in line with our prediction. A set of analyses comparing
only brand–self connection with brand–self connection and
prominence as indicators of attachment showed that the lat-
ter model demonstrated better prediction (γ = .11 versus γ =
2(8) = 49.83, p < .001).
.18, ps < .001, respectively; ∆χ
These results suggest that attachment (as represented by
both brand–self connection and brand prominence sub-
scales) successfully predicts actual purchase, confirming
that both are useful predictors of actual behavior.

Test of H3: brand purchase share. We tested whether
brand attachment significantly predicts brand purchase
share with a model in which attachment was again repre-
sented by brand prominence and brand–self connection as
second-order factors. The results show that brand attach-
ment was a stronger predictor of brand purchase share
(γ = .65, p < .001) than brand attitude strength (γ = .21,
p < .001), even after we accounted for past behavior (γ = .10,
p < .05), relationship length (γ = .05, p > .05), and gender
(γ = .03, p > .05; Figure 3). The difference between the
effects of brand attachment and brand attitude strength was
significant (z = 8.86, p < .001). These results support H3.
Furthermore, we compared the results of two models, one
in which we represent attachment by the two-factor mea-
sure and one in which we represent attachment by brand–
self connection only. As we expected, the two-component
brand attachment measure predicted brand purchase share
significantly better than brand–self connection alone (γ =
2(8) = 56.40,
.64 versus γ = .20, ps < .001, respectively; ∆χ
p < .001). These results further underscore the importance
of including prominence (with brand–self connection) as a
predictor of brand purchase share.

Test of H4: brand need share. We tested H4 by asking
respondents to indicate the extent to which they use the col-
laborating firm for all their finance services, even services
that are performed by other institutions (e.g., investment
firms, insurance companies). Structural equation models

FIGURE 3
Study 4: Simultaneous Estimation of Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength on Actual Customer
Behavior

Part of who
you are

Personally
connected

Automatic
thoughts/
feelings

Thoughts/
feelings come
naturally

Brand–self
connection

Prominence

Brand
attachment

.14*

Actual
purchase

.05

.65*

.21*

.83*

Purchase
share

Attitude valence ×
confidence/certainty

Brand
attitude
strength

Need
share

.26*

*Significant at p < .05.

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 13

2(8) = 49.20, p < .001).

show that attachment represented by both prominence and
brand–self connection as second-order factors was a signif-
icantly stronger predictor of brand need share (γ = .83, p <
.001) than strong brand attitudes (γ = .26, p < .001; z =
11.86, p < .001) (see Figure 3). Past behavior (γ = .02, p >
.05), relationship length (γ = .03, p > .05), and gender (γ =
.02, p > .05) had no significant effects. These results sup-
port H4. We also compared a model that represented attach-
ment by only brand–self connection with a model in which
both brand–self connection and prominence were indicators
of attachment. Again, we observed that the two-factor brand
attachment model predicted brand need share more strongly
than brand–self connection alone (γ = .82 versus γ = .29,
ps < .001, respectively; ∆χ
Discussion
The use of real purchase data in Study 4 supports H2–H4
and helps us generalize the findings to a context that
involves actual customer behavior. Study 4 demonstrated
that brand–self connection and brand prominence both indi-
cate attachment and that the inclusion of both predicted
company reported sales, brand purchase share, and need
share more strongly than brand–self connection alone. They
also outperformed brand attitude strength as predictors of
these outcomes. We observed these effects even when
the
accounting for alternative factors. Taken together,
results of Study 4 corroborate the important role of brand
attachment and strongly support the notion that brand
attachment and brand attitude strength are different con-
structs that have different outcomes related to behavior,
brand purchase share, and need share.

General Discussion

Summary and Implications

The objective of this article was to address the critical but
unexplored question whether brand attachment adds value
as a construct of interest to marketing and consumer
researchers compared with that of brand attitude strength.
Building on prior work on attachment and the self-expansion
theory, this article make three significant contributions. The
first is a conceptual contribution that articulates the proper-
ties of brand attachment and distinguishes this construct
from brand attitude strength. The second is a measurement
contribution. We developed a managerially viable scale that
taps the indicators of brand attachment. We also demon-
strate that (1) both the brand–self connection and the promi-
nence dimensions are critical and nonredundant indicators
of attachment; (2) the scale is strongly related to a known
emotional indicator of attachment, separation distress, in
support of the scale’s convergent validity; and (3) the brand
attachment scale (as represented by brand–self connection
and prominence) is empirically related but distinct from brand
attitude strength, in support of its convergent and discrimi-
nant validity. The third is a significant managerial contribu-
tion. We hypothesize and find that the more strongly con-
sumers are attached to a brand, the more willing they are to
forsake personal resources to maintain an ongoing relation-
ship with that brand. Thus, they are willing to express an

14 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

intent to engage in difficult behaviors—those that require
investments of time, money, energy, and reputation—to
maintain (or deepen) a brand relationship. In addition to
behavioral intent, we show that attachment represented by
both brand–self connection and prominence is a signifi-
cantly better predictor than brand attitude strength of actual
behaviors. In terms of brand purchase and need share in
particular, managers have much to gain by an effort to build
stronger brand attachment.

In addition to the managerial implications, the results of
the current research offer other important managerial and
further research implications. Although the brand attitude
strength construct may capture a brand’s mind share of a
consumer, attachment is uniquely positioned to capture both
heart and mind share. The finding that attachment better
predicts actual behavior than brand attitude strength is of
significant importance to managers. Brand attitude strength
does not fully reflect the extent to which a brand has suc-
cessfully captured a consumer’s heart. Therefore, when
assessing customer–brand relationships, managers should
incorporate brand attachment in their brand evaluation
matrices. Linking attachment with responses to brand atti-
tude measures and actual purchase data will give managers
a more detailed picture of how current brand management
efforts are related to future sales.

Further Research

Although our findings are provocative, they raise additional
research issues. Given the uniquely strong effects of brand
attachment shown here, additional research is needed on
how marketers can enhance brand attachment (by fostering
brand–self connection and prominence).

In addition to studying brand attachment antecedents,
further research might examine the relative impact of brand
attachment and brand attitude strength on several metrics of
brand equity. According to various metrics, a brand’s finan-
cial value to the firm is typically affected by the brand’s (1)
unit price (Pt), (2) unit marketing costs (MCt), and (3) the
number of units sold (Q). Close examination of these three
components suggests that they are directly tied to and
reflect the nature and intensity of customers’ attachment to
a brand. Thus, the stronger the brand attachment, the higher
the unit price the brand can bear (willingness to pay a price
premium; Thomson, MacInnis, and Park 2005). Strong
attachments also induce a devaluation of competing alterna-
tives (Johnson and Rusbult 1989) and result in greater will-
ingness to stay in the relationship (Drigotas and Rusbult
1992). These intentions and behaviors all influence the sta-
bility of the Q component and reduce the costs of customer
retention. Finally, strong attachments toward brands affect
brand loyalty and willingness to promote a brand and
engender a relative insensitivity to reciprocity by one’s part-
ner (e.g., active marketing effort by a brand to reinforce or
appreciate its customers’ loyalty; Thomson, MacInnis, and
Park 2005). Such outcomes should affect the Q component
and make the MC component more cost efficient. Attitude
strength may be less strongly related to these brand equity
metrics. Thus, although prior research suggests that strong
brand attitudes can be an important driver of brand equity
(which we do not dispute), we propose that there is added

value to examining attachment because it may predict brand
equity drivers (e.g., price, unit marketing costs and the
number of units sold) more strongly than do strong brand
attitudes.

Additional research is also needed to shed light on sev-
eral results we observed in Studies 3 and 4. One issue is that
whereas brand attachment in Study 4 best predicted the
results when attachment was indicated by both brand–self
connection and prominence, in Study 3, only brand–self
connection was necessary. Two reasons may underlie these
results. First, Study 3 predicted intentions, whereas Study 4
predicted actual behaviors. Perhaps prominence is unneces-
sary as an attachment indicator when only intentions (ver-
sus behavior) are assessed. Second, perhaps for most
respondents in Study 3, the brand (Nike) is more identity
based than instrumentality based. We reason that brand
prominence contributes more when attachments are based
on the brand’s instrumentality in goal achievement. How-
ever, further research should examine the boundary condi-
tions under which prominence plays a role as a critical indi-
cator of attachment.

Another noteworthy result comes from Study 3, which
showed that brand attitude strength and attachment are
equally good as predictors of easy-to-perform behaviors
such as brand switching. It is possible that when behaviors
are easy to perform, either attachment or strong attitudes
predict behavior. It is also possible that brand attitude
strength better predicts movement away from a brand (e.g.,
switching) than attachment because strong negative atti-
tudes predict brand rejection. Attachment may better reflect
approach (than avoidance) responses.

Further research should also compare the brand attach-
ment measure we developed here with the pictorial measure
of the inclusion of another person in the self that Aron,
Aron, and Smollan (1992) developed. That measure repre-
sents closeness in terms of the degree of pictorial overlap
between the self (represented as a circle) and another per-
son (represented as a different circle). The greater the over-
lap in the circles, the closer the person is to the other.
Applied to brands, we speculate that Aron and colleagues’
(2005) measure corresponds closely with the brand–self
connection component of attachment and, in particular,
with items that reflect the identity overlap (versus instru-
mentality) of the brand.

Research might also examine whether brand attitude
strength and brand attachment reflect different stages of a

brand relationship, each of which must be managed to
strengthen brand equity. Indeed, Study 4 provides evidence
of such time dependence with brand attachment (see n. 7).
Perhaps the first stage of brand attachment entails relation-
ship establishment, which develops through brand purchase.
This stage is best represented by positive brand attitudes.
Such attitudes may become strong when they are based on
thoughtful processing. When the brand offers resources in
the service of self-expansion, consumers may subsequently
develop strong connections between the brand and the self
as well as mental models of the brand and the self, from
which brand-related thoughts and feelings are easily and
frequently accessed. At this second stage, strong brand atti-
tudes develop into brand attachments. It is perhaps at this
point that the positive relationship between self-associations
with a brand and brand attitudes converge (Gawronski,
Bodenhausen, and Becker 2007; Greenwald et al. 2002;
Prestwich et al. 2010; Tietje and Brunel 2005; Zhang and
Chan 2009). The act of choosing an object can result in the
creation of associations between the self and the chosen
object (Gawronski, Bodenhausen, and Becker 2007; Tietje
and Brunel 2005). The brand’s prominence and its linkage
to the self may influence consumers to invest resources of
their own in the service of maintaining a brand relationship.
Such resources are revealed by brand loyalty, brand
defense, and other behaviors that are difficult to perform
and require the use of valued resources. These behaviors are
typical outcomes of brand attachment. According to this
perspective, attitude strength and brand attachment are not
competing constructs. Rather, they may represent different
stages of a brand–customer relationship. Both are critical.
Whereas brand attachment may represent a more desirable
destination for managers than strong brand attitudes, the
development of strong brand attitudes may be a relevant and
necessary step.

Finally, in this article, we emphasize attachment as a
positive bond between the consumer and the self. Other
research suggests that consumers can have strong negative
dissociations between the brand and the self. Such negative
dissociations can results in brand relationships described as
enmities (Fournier 1998) and motivations to inflict harm on
the brand (as is true with “bad behavior” from sports fans).
Further research on these strong aversive brand relation-
ships as the counterpart of strong attachment relationships
is necessary.

REFERENCES
Ahuvia, Aaron, Rajeev Batra, and Richard Bagozzi (2009), “Love,
Desire and Identity: A Theory of the Love of Things,” in The
Handbook of Brand Relationships, Deborah J. MacInnis, C.
Whan Park, and Joseph R. Priester, eds. New York: M.E.
Sharpe, 342–57.

Akçura, Tolga M., Füsun F. Gönül, and Elina Petrova (2004),
“Consumer Learning and Brand Valuation: An Application on
Over-the-Counter Drugs,” Marketing Science, 23 (1), 156–69.
Alba, Joseph W. and Amitava Chattopadhyay (1986), “Salience
Effects in Brand Recall,” Journal of Marketing Research, 23
(November), 363–69.

——— and Howard Marmorstein (1987), “The Effects of Fre-
quency Knowledge on Consumer Decision Making,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 14 (June), 14–25.

Armstrong, Scott J. and Terry S. Overton (1977), “Estimating
Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 14 (August), 396–402.

Aron, Arthur, Elaine N. Aron, and Danny Smollan (1992), “Inclu-
sion of Other in the Self-Scale and the Structure of Interper-
sonal Closeness,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 63 (4), 596–612.

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 15

———, Debra Mashek, Tracy McLaughlin-Volpe, Stephen
Wright, Gary Lewandowski, and Elaine N. Aron (2005),
“Including Close Others in the Cognitive Structure of the Self,”
in Interpersonal Cognition, Mark W. Baldwin, ed. New York:
Guilford Press, 206–232.

Ball, Dwayne A. and Lori H. Tasaki (1992), “The Role and Mea-
surement of Attachment in Consumer Behavior,” Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 1 (2), 155–72.

Berman, William H. and Michael B. Sperling (1994), “The Struc-
ture and Function of Adult Attachment,” in Attachment in
Adults: Clinical and Developmental Perspectives, Michael B.
Sperling and William H. Berman, eds. New York: Guilford
Press, 3–28.

Bowlby, John (1980), Loss: Sadness and Depression. New York:

Basic Books.

Briñol, Pablo and Richard E. Petty (2009), “Persuasion: Insights
from the Self-Validation Hypothesis,” in Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, Mark P. Zanna, ed. New York: Aca-
demic Press, 69–118.

Chaplin, Nguyen and Deborah Roedder John (2005), “The Devel-
opment of Self-Brand Connections in Children and Adoles-
cents,” Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (1), 119–29.

Cohen, Joel B. and Charles S. Areni (1991), “Affect and Consumer
Behavior,” in Handbook of Consumer Behavior, Thomas S.
Robertson and Harold H. Kassarjian, eds. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 188–240.

Colgate, Mark R. and Bodo Lang (2001), “Switching Barriers in
Consumer Markets: An Investigation of the Financial Services
Industry,” Journal of Consumer Marketing, 18 (4), 332–47.
Collins, Nancy L. (1996), “Working Models of Attachment: Impli-
cations for Explanation, Emotion, and Behavior,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71 (4), 810–32.

——— and Stephen J. Read (1994), “Cognitive Representation of
Adult Attachment: The Structure and Function of Working
Models,” in Advances in Personal Relationships: Attachment
Processes in Adulthood, Vol. 5, Kim Bartholomew and Daniel
Perlman, eds. London: Jessica-Kingsley, 53–90.

Drigotas, Stephen M. and Caryl Rusbult (1992), “Should I Stay or
Should I Go: A Dependence Model of Break-Ups,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62 (1), 62–87.

Escalas, Jennifer E. (2004), “Narrative Processing: Building Con-
sumer Connections to Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psychol-
ogy, 14 (1–2), 168–79.

——— and James R. Bettman (2003), “You Are What They Eat:
The Influence of Reference Groups on Consumers’ Connections
to Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13 (3), 339–48.
Fazio, Russell H. (1995), “Attitudes as Object-Evaluation Associa-
tions: Determinants, Consequences, and Correlates of Attitude
Accessibility,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents and Conse-
quences, Richard E. Petty and Jon A. Krosnick, eds. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 247–82.

——— and Richard E. Petty (2007), Attitudes: Their Structure,
Function, and Consequences. New York: Psychology Press.
———, Mary C. Powell, and Carol J. Williams (1989), “The Role
of Attitude Accessibility in the Attitude-to-Behavior Process,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (3), 280–88.

Fedorikhin, Alexander, C. Whan Park, and Matthew Thomson
(2008), “Beyond Fit and Attitude: The Effect of Emotional
Attachment on Consumer Responses to Brand Extensions,”
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 18 (4), 281–91.

Fishbein, Martin and Icek Ajzen (1975), Belief, Attitude, Intention,

and Behavior. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Fournier, Susan (1998), “Consumers and Their Brands: Develop-
ing Relationship Theory in Consumer Research,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 24 (March), 343–73.

Gawronski, Bertram, Galen V. Bodenhausen, and Andrew P.
Becker (2007), “I Like It, Because I Like Myself: Associative
Implicit
Self-Anchoring and Post-Decisional Change of

16 / Journal of Marketing, November 2010

Evaluations,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43
(2), 221–32.

Greenwald, Anthony G., Mahzarin R. Banaji, Laurie A. Rudman,
Shelly D. Farnham, Brian A. Nosek, and Deborah S. Mellott
(2002), “A Unified Theory of Implicit Attitudes, Stereotypes,
Self-Esteem, and Self-Concept,” Psychological Review, 109
(1), 3–25.

Hazan, Cindy and D. Zeifman (1999), “Pair Bonds as Attachment:
Evaluating the Evidence,” in Handbook of Attachment: Theory,
Research, and Clinical Applications, Jude Cassidy and Phillip
R. Shaver, eds. New York: Guilford Press, 336–54.

Johnson, Dennis J. and Caryl E. Rusbult (1989), “Resisting Temp-
tation: Devaluation of Alternative Partners as a Means of Main-
taining Commitment in Close Relationships,” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 57 (6), 967–80.

Keller, Kevin L. (2003), Strategic Brand Management. New York:

Prentice Hall.

Kleine, Susan S. and Stacey M. Baker (2004), “An Integrative
Review of Material Possession Attachment,” Academy of Mar-
keting Science Review, (January 1), (accessed June 15, 2010),
[available at http://www.amsreview.org/articles/kleine01-2004.
pdf].

Krosnick, Jon A., David S. Boninger, Yao C. Chuange, Matthew
K. Berent, and Catherine G. Carnot (1993), “Attitude Strength:
One Construct or Many Related Constructs?” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 65 (6), 1132–51.

Meyers-Levy, Joan and Brian Sternthal (1991), “Gender Differ-
ences in the Use of Message Cues and Judgments,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 28 (February), 84–96.

Mikulincer, Mario (1998), “Attachment Working Models and the
Sense of Trust: An Exploration of Interaction Goals and Affect
Regulation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74
(5), 1209–1224.

——— and Phillip R. Shaver (2003), “The Attachment Behavioral
System in Adulthood: Activation, Psychodynamics, and Inter-
personal Processes,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psy-
chology, Mark P. Zanna, ed. New York: Academic Press,
53–152.

——— and ——— (2007), Attachment in Adulthood: Structure,

Dynamics and Change. New York: The Guilford Press.

Mittal, Banwari (2006), “I, Me and Mine: How Products Become
Consumers’ Extended Selves,” Journal of Consumer Behavior,
5 (6), 550–62.

Muñiz, Albert and Thomas O’Guinn (2001), “Brand Community,”

Journal of Consumer Research, 27 (4), 412–32.

Park, C. Whan and Deborah J. MacInnis (2006), “What’s In and
What’s Out: Questions on the Boundaries of the Attitude Con-
struct,” Journal of Consumer Research, 33 (June), 16–18.
———, ———, and Joseph Priester (2006), “Beyond Attitudes:
Attachment and Consumer Behavior,” Seoul National Journal,
12 (2), 3–36.

———, ———, and ——— (2009), “Brand Attachment and a
Strategic Brand Exemplar” in Handbook of Brand and Experi-
ence Management, B. Schmitt and D. Rogers, eds. Northamp-
ton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 3–17.

———, ———, ———, and Wan Zhong (2009), “The Connection-
Prominence Attachment Model (CPAM): A Conceptual and
Methodological Exploration of Brand Attachment,” in Hand-
book of Brand Relationships, Chap. 17, Deborah J. MacInnis,
C. Whan Park, and Joseph Priester, eds. Armonk, NY: M.E.
Sharpe, 327–41.

Petty, Richard E., Pablo Briñol, and Kennett G. DeMarree (2007),
“The Meta-Cognitive Model (MCM) of Attitudes: Implications
for Attitude Measurement, Change, and Strength,” Social Cog-
nition, 25 (5), 657–86.

——— and John T. Cacioppo (1986), Communication and Per-
suasion: Central and Peripheral Routes to Attitude Change.
New York: Springer-Verlag.

———, Curtis P. Haugtvedt, and Stephen M. Smith (1995), “Elab-
oration as a Determinant of Attitude Strength: Creating Atti-
tudes That are Persistent, Resistant, and Predictive of Behav-
ior,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents and Consequences,
Richard E. Petty and Jon A. Krosnick, eds. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 93–130.

Prestwich, Andrew, Marco Perugini, Robert Hurling, and Juliette
Richetin (2010), “Using the Self to Change Implicit Attitudes,”
European Journal of Social Psychology, 40 (1), 61–71.

Priester, Joseph R., Dhananjay Nayakankuppam, Monique A.
Fleming, and John Godek (2004), “The A2SC2 Model: The
Influence of Attitudes and Attitude Strength on Consideration
and Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research, 30 (March),
574–87.

Schouten, John W. and James H. McAlexander (1995), “Subcul-
tures of Consumption: An Ethnography of the New Bikers,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 22 (June), 43–61.

Shepphard, Blair H., Jon Hartwick, and Paul R. Warshaw (1988),
“A Theory of Reasoned Action: A Meta-Analysis of Past
Research with Recommendations for Modifications and Figure
Research,” Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (December),
325–43.

Simpson, Jeffry A. (1990), “Influence of Attachment Styles on
Romantic Relationships,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59 (5), 971–80.

Thomson, Matthew (2006), “Human Brands:

Investigating
Antecedents to Consumers’ Strong Attachments to Celebrities,”
Journal of Marketing, 70 (July), 104–119.

———, Deborah J. MacInnis, and C. Whan Park (2005), “The
Ties That Bind: Measuring the Strength of Consumers’ Attach-
ments to Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15 (1),
77–91.

Tietje, Brian C. and Frédéric F. Brunel (2005), “Toward a Unified
Implicit Brand Theory,” in Applying Social Cognition to Con-
sumer-Focused Strategy, Frank R. Kardes, Paul M. Herr, and
Jacques Nantel, eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, 135–54.

Zhang, Hong and Darius K-S. Chan (2009), “Self-Esteem as a
Source of Evaluative Conditioning,” European Journal of
Social Psychology, 39 (6), 1065–1074.

Brand Attachment and Brand Attitude Strength / 17