Article

Towards an epistemology
of consumer culture
theory: Phenomenology
and the context of context

Marketing Theory
11(4) 381–404
ª The Author(s) 2011
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1470593111418796
mtq.sagepub.com

Søren Askegaard and Jeppe Trolle Linnet
University of Southern Denmark, Denmark

Abstract
This paper argues for an epistemological positioning of Consumer Culture Theory (CCT)
research beyond the lived experience of consumers. CCT, it is argued, brought sociocultural
context to consumer research, not least through the introduction of existential phenomenology as a paradigm for CCT studies. However, it is time to expand the contextualization of
lived consumer experiences with another contextualization, this time the one of systemic and
structuring influences of market and social systems that is not necessarily felt or experienced
by consumers in their daily lives, and therefore not necessarily discursively expressed. There
is a need to take into consideration the context of context. We therefore suggest an epistemology for CCT that explicitly connects the structuring of macro-social explanatory frameworks with the phenomenology of lived experiences, thereby inscribing the micro-social
context accounted for by the consumer in a larger socio-historical context based on the
researcher’s theoretical insights.
Keywords
consumer culture theory, context, epistemology, phenomenology, practice theory

Introduction
The interest in cultural perspectives on consumption has risen significantly in the decades around
the recent turn of the millennium. Consumption has moved from being either a matter of regenerating productive forces (sociology), maximizing utility (economics) or a process of acquisition
(business studies) to become a term that seems to permeate the relations between society and

Corresponding author:
Søren Askegaard, Department of Marketing & Management, Campusvej 55, Odense M, DK-5230 Denmark
Email: aske@sam.sdu.dk

382

Marketing Theory 11(4)

individual, be it in the form of social classification and communications systems, identity
formation processes, ritualistic and community building processes, the relationship between the
individual and the state under the reign of new public management, or the search for existentially
fulfilling experiences. A good number of sociologists and anthropologists as well as scholars
from the field of cultural studies have flocked to the study of consumption, and the people
hitherto most interested in the micro-social processes of consumption, consumer behavior
researchers from the marketing discipline, have experienced a fundamental paradigmatic challenge to the prevalent econometric or cognitive social psychological approaches to consumption,
a challenge labeled Consumer Culture Theory (CCT) by some of the most significant challengers
(Arnould and Thompson, 2005).
The aim of this paper is to expand recent calls for more focus on broader analytical frameworks
of CCT (Arnould and Thompson, 2005: 876). What we intend to argue, based on inspiration from
trends within the field of cultural studies, is that in order for CCT to secure a position for itself, the
best way of obtaining such a position is to ‘blend theorization with grounded study’ (Miller, 2007:
25). We are experiencing the institutionalization (cf. Arnould and Thompson, 2007) of CCT
towards a synthesis of sociological, anthropological and cultural studies-derived insights into consumption; a market-attuned hybrid of social science which is by and large situated in business
schools. The path towards an institutionalized establishment as a ‘school of thoughts’ (plural well
intended) necessitates some reflections on its subject matter as well as its epistemological foundations. Naming is categorizing, and categorizing includes putting up boundaries, which ipso facto
leads to processes of inclusion and exclusion. The (on its own terms fairly comprehensive) overview that provided the CCT label in the first place (Arnould and Thompson, 2005) has indeed been
considered provocative by many, especially for its omissions and its alleged attempt to present a
‘totalizing narrative’ of one unified theory – criticized as a hegemonic vision of a highly diverse
and polyphonic field of voices (Arnould and Thompson, 2007). We do not wish to participate in
this debate, which appears from our perspective to be missing the point. In the contemporary marketplace of consumer research (cf. Peter and Olson, 1983) there are, as we see it, mainly benefits to
be gained from gathering the forces under one particular label – as long as its purpose and effect is
the establishment of an inclusive platform of dialogue rather than an exclusive guarding of dogma.
The establishment of common ground beyond the loose paradigmatic assertion that this research is
‘interpretive’ (which research is not?), and the attempts to distinguish this group of research (and
researchers) from other academic communities (e.g. sociologists or anthropologists of consumption), is crucial for scholarly identification, especially of doctoral students.
What knowledge does this field present? What is its reason for being? CCT obviously contributes to the noble and highly relevant process of securing culturally and socially informed
environments at business schools, and thus contributes to ‘capturing the markets from the economists’ (Slater, 2002). But from our experience of cooperating with both sociologists and
anthropologists of consumption, there is a need for bridging the analytical terrain between the
anthropological search for thick description and deep immersion in the field, and the sociological
inclination towards broad social theories and movements often quite remote from emic illustrations of everyday life experiences. Our intention here is to provide some reflections on the
justification of CCT as a field that fills this gap by combining grounded observations and
recordings of market-mediated and mediating practices with social theorization. These reflections
will hopefully move forward the creation of an epistemology that is relevant to and supportive of
CCT research, and possibly even demarcates the latter as distinct from other cultural approaches
to consumption.

Askegaard and Linnet

383

As in all social research, the discussion of the relationship between structure and agency has
both inspired and haunted CCT research (depending on one’s veneration for or fatigue with this
central issue). As we later argue, approaches that stress consumer agency have been vital to the
CCT tradition which can be said to be borne out of a dissatisfaction with too highly structured
approaches to consumer behavior. It is not that the econometrically or psychologically based
approaches to consumer behavior, to which CCT arose in opposition, did not apply a focus on the
individual. But that individual was/is a consumer highly constrained by the assumptions of
rationality and/or cognitive information processing, which underpin the ontology of these two
other ‘major pillars of consumer research’ (Arnould and Thompson, 2007). Here, we must point to
a paradoxical relationship between agency and consumer psychology. Psychology usually gives
primacy to the agentic subject as the locus of power or intention. This excludes or at least relegates
structural and contextual conditions to a secondary role. On the other hand, because of epistemological and methodological assumptions, that agency is restricted to a narrow universe. Agency,
from an econometric or a behavioral decision theory perspective, is almost always relegated to a
secondary position in relation to the controlled environment in which the consumer is situated,
either through experimental design or through the pre-established universe of psychological categories presented by the survey instrument.
The consumer as a free agent is thus confined by the closed categories of the scales or the
controlled environment of the experimental design. Consequently the orientation of much CCT
research has been towards exploring a variety of contexts in which the consumer has been ‘discovered’ as an agent who draws upon market-based resources in constructing his or her own identity. Central to CCT research has been representation of the consumer subject as a reflexive and
empowered identity seeker, navigating its way through the plethora of opportunities provided
by the marketplace, and reflecting often both consciously and critically over the market mediated
messages that embrace him or her.
Adding a micro-social level to the individual as a unit of analysis, research into consumer subcultures or brand communities (e.g. Schouten and McAlexander, 1995; Muniz, Jr and O’Guinn,
2001) has contributed to understanding the consumer not just as an identity seeker but also as a
member of small-scale social unions. Contemporary consumer research has allowed itself to be
inspired by French sociologist Maffesoli and his concept of a new tribalism (Maffesoli, 1988) and
argued for the usefulness of the tribe in understanding consumer behavior from a collective subject
perspective (cf. Cova et al., 2007). The well deserved attention paid to recent research on consumption communities actually serves, for the purpose of this article, to reinforce the impression
that mainstream consumption research has not moved far from an individually focused paradigm: communities of consumption remain distinctly that, an epistemological exotica (Kozinets,
2001; Muniz, Jr and O’Guinn, 2001; Kozinets, 2002).
Additionally, we have recently seen a call for the study of ‘connected consumers’ or consumers
as ‘relational units’, for instance in the form of dyadic, triadic or other micro-constellations of
social unions (e.g. Epp and Price, 2008). This micro-social research, oftentimes drawing inspiration from subcultural analyses of the Birmingham School, has, however, had tendencies to assume
somewhat teleologically that the consumption practices of such groups are consciously directed
towards the construction of a shared collective identity, which although expressed in the terminology of symbols and identity, is nevertheless portrayed as a goal-directed endeavor much akin to
personal identity projects. Not that there are not exceptions. In a compelling analysis of a set of
brand communities, Schau et al. (2009) demonstrate the usefulness of the sociological notion of
practices for understanding patterns of value creation that span different communities. The result

384

Marketing Theory 11(4)

is a kind of catalogue over standard social processes that seem to characterize all or most of such
micro-cultures.
The literature on brand communities and subcultures of consumption has underlined how
consumer identity projects as well as their consumption patterns are highly bound by socially
instituted factors of historical and cultural character. Most obvious, perhaps, is Murray’s (2002)
re-inquiry of Thompson and Haytko’s (1997) study of fashion consumers, underlining the continued relevance of the politics of fashion despite agentic consumers’ playful construction of personalized fashion expression. Other highlighting of social factors include for example the
social construction of lifestyles (Holt, 1997); the role of ideology in the constitution of consumption (Crockett and Wallendorf, 2004); ideological framings of consumer ‘empowerment’
(Shankar et al., 2006; Zwick et al., 2008); applications of Bourdieu’s concepts of capital and
practice (e.g. Holt, 1998; Allen 2002); and the significance of social institutions for consumer–consumption relationships, for example in terms of social categories of the body
(Thompson and Hirschman, 1995; Askegaard et al., 2002); class (Henry, 2005; Üstüner and
Holt, 2010); masculinity (Holt and Thompson, 2004); technology (Kozinets, 2008); and youth
(Kjeldgaard and Askegaard, 2006).
Luedicke et al. (2010) argued for the interplay of ideological and mythological forces in the
construction of a morality of car consumption. Craig Thompson, who was among the initiators of
the phenomenological tradition within CCT, has more recently been the most productive propagator for an ideological inscription of consumption phenomena. He has argued for the strong role
of institutionalized marketplace mythologies in shaping the meaning systems ascribed to
alternative medicine (Thompson, 2004) and in his and his co-authors’ work on natural health
communities – (Thompson and Troester, 2002); on communities of reflexive doubt (Thompson,
2005); on Community Supported Agriculture (Thompson and Coskuner-Balli, 2007); and on the
commercial mythology of the American South (Thompson and Tian, 2008) – the ideological
dimension is underlined time and again. These, and other, studies witness the acknowledgement
with CCT research of the socialized nature of consumption beyond the lived experience of individual consumers.
Most certainly, then, broader analytical frameworks are not unknown even in the earliest CCT
research (e.g. Levy, 1981; McCracken, 1986; Sherry, Jr 1983, 1990). Consequently, we are not
arguing that we are paving completely new roads here; on the other hand, we do think that the aura
of ‘getting close’ to the consumer still forms and informs many aspiring CCT scholars and, as
already stated, we would like to propose an epistemology of CCT research which goes beyond
lived consumer experiences. Furthermore, in spite of recent tendencies to go beyond the individual
in explanations of consumer behavior, the majority of studies within CCT continue to focus on the
individual consumer’s meaning and identity projects.
The purpose of this paper is to further the development of a contextually (socially, culturally,
politically and institutionally) oriented CCT research by providing a set of epistemological
arguments for its usefulness. We aim to do this through a discussion of the emergence and
strength of the highly individualized, experiential focus in most of the consumer research
inscribing itself in the CCT tradition. We continue with a summary of some of the previously
highlighted limitations of an individually centered approach in CCT. While we criticize the
limited usefulness of existential phenomenology for the construction of knowledge of consumer
behavior, we also recognize currents of phenomenological thinking inside and outside CCT that
are explicitly or implicitly based on an epistemology that directs attention to the socially and
culturally embedded consumer.

Askegaard and Linnet

385

The existential phenomenology legacy in interpretive
consumer research
As pointed out by Tadajewski (2006b) in a compelling analysis, the birth of interpretive consumer
research was rooted in motivational theory’s application of an epistemology inherited from indepth psychology and psychoanalysis. While Tadajewski underlines the fundamental similarity
between epistemological and methodological foundations of motivational theory and interpretive
consumer research, it is probably fair to point to the experiential and phenomenological focus as
central in marking out the so-called ‘interpretive turn’ (Sherry, Jr, 1991) in consumer research of
the 1980s. The experiential and naturalistic focus of the works of Holbrook and Hirschman, as well
as the participants in the seminal consumer behavior odyssey (Belk, 1991), worked as a memberchecked insurance against what had been conceived as the interpretive excesses of motivational
theory. Referring back to Levy’s (1959) call for attention to the symbolic nature of consumption,
and drawing on the simultaneous paradigmatic debate in marketing theory (for an overview and
critique, see for example Kavanagh, 1994), the field of consumer research developed a stream
of projects and themes, all of which had as a paradigmatic assumption that human reality (or rather
reality for humans) was not objectively given but always presented itself in the form of meanings,
which had to be interpreted.
Thus, back then, the label interpretivism may have seemed more appropriate than now, almost
30 years later (cf. Arnould and Thompson, 2005). Initially, the term ‘experiential consumption’
(Holbrook and Hirschman, 1982) was often used to emphasise that this stream of research aimed at
getting close to the lived realities of the consumer to extract the universe of meanings applied and
constructed during the consumption processes. The most thorough example of such an existential
approach to consumption was delivered by Belk in his now classical work on consumption and the
extended self (Belk, 1988). Not long after, this new stream of research was identified with the
social analytical tradition of ‘existential phenomenology’ in Thompson et al.’s (1989) seminal call
for ‘putting consumer experience back into consumer research’. This article, which we look at
more closely below, as well as Thompson’s (1997) later suggestion of an equally existential
‘hermeneutical’ approach, formed a standard reference for scientific approaches adopted by much
CCT research in the decade-and-a-half to follow.
And this was quite rightly so, since the emphasis on phenomenology represented a strongly
based reaction against the cognitivism of the information-processing paradigm (deemed unsuited
by interpretivists as a scientific logic to study human behavior). It was a reaction against an overly
abstract representation of consumers in consumer research, against what was seen as relatively
futile attempts at operationalizing and measuring the immeasurable, and a reaction against methodological and conceptual efforts to vindicate the (in actual fact) highly implicated researcher and
his or her research tools. The re-implication undertaken by phenomenological interpretivism
exemplifies the general tendency of postmodern social science to scorn totalizing claims to scientific knowledge about social life, valorizing instead the ‘positioned’ researcher who creates admittedly subjective accounts and interpretations of the world (Haraway, 1988).
Hence, we see a historical pattern, where ‘lived experiences’ of ‘real people’ became the
standard (pun intended) behind which flocks of consumer researchers could rally in the paradigmatic fight against the ‘modellers’ of the ‘normal science view’. The focus on the individual is also
very much in line with contemporary liberatory ideologies celebrating the modern individual’s
plethora of possibilities and resonating with the prevailing mythology of self-actualization.
Furthermore, Arnould and Thompson (2005) find that of the four categories of CCT research, the

386

Marketing Theory 11(4)

most voluminous in terms of publications is the one focusing on ‘consumer identity projects’.
Thus, the legacy of CCT research has been working towards a predominantly agency based view
on the consumer, leading to a relative neglect of the structural foundations and limitations of the
consumers’ experiential universe.

Limitations of individually focused CCT research
Consequently, when we look back on the development of what is now called CCT, the thought
occurs that there have been some negative and unwanted consequences of the existential, phenomenological, hermeneutical or otherwise labeled focus. In a paradoxical way, its focus on
consumer experiences can be said to have served as a continuation of the psychologizing tendency
in consumer research that some of the founding fathers (and mothers!) strived to overcome. Only
the more recent streams of research referred to in the introduction have begun to turn the tide, thus
justifying the updated self-designation of the field: Consumer Culture Theory.
The continued predominance of the individual as a unit of analysis has been challenged by
Moisander et al. (2009a), who argue that
It is important to be attentive to the specific representational systems – the socio-culturally normalized
and institutionalized ways of thinking, talking and representing knowledge about the consumption
agent, object or activity that are available and offered by the researcher to those being studied as
resources for making sense of the topic in the specific context of the study. (Moisander et al.,
2009a: 20)

In a parallel article, Moisander et al. (2009b) argue convincingly for the limitations of the individually and experientially based perspective on consumer culture, which follows from the phenomenological interview being the predominant method of data collection within CCT. Most
importantly, they argue, such a perspective tends to downplay the more critical aspects in contemporary consumer culture, since such a critical approach is not an obvious part of consumers’
lived experiences and thus does not appear in the phenomenological interview. To some extent,
this echoes the insights provided by Holt (1991) concerning the problems of interpretive consumer
research conducted under the guidance of the criteria of naturalistic inquiry, with its focus on
objective criteria for evaluating research quality, such as member checking in order to secure
trustworthiness. Such emphasis on the direct reflection of lived experiences is bound to narrow
possibilities of interpretation. Holt, therefore, underlines the necessity of adding what he calls
insightful interpretation. We would like to add, that although such interpretation is necessarily
subjective, as Holt notes, it must also in order to constitute scientific insight be theoretically
informed, in the way that it makes data speak to social and cultural context; by referring to existing
theory or developing new analytical propositions.
We agree with Moisander and co-authors that for CCT research to progress beyond this onesided attention to the self-realizing individual, new conceptualizations and models are required.
Some of these can be found within sociology and anthropology, as mentioned above, while some
originate within the CCT field, such as brand communities. But, and possibly more fundamentally,
it also requires additional reflection on how researchers of the CCT field generally employ constructs such as ritual, status, traditions, symbolism and so on. Such constructs are often used by
CCT researchers to describe how consumers construct meaningful universes for themselves by
inscribing their practices of consumption in various social logics. However, such phenomena are
not necessarily best understood from a social psychological perspective, i.e. as strategies for the

Askegaard and Linnet

387

individual in terms of satisfying desires, defining selves, and constructing existences. If in the
search for agents who construct meaning we continue to apply overly individualist perspectives,
society cannot become much more than the aggregate of individuals’ choices to engage in this
ritual or that practice for the purpose of carving out an existence for him/herself. From a sociological perspective, the inverse causality should be just as dominant (at least) in our reflections on
contemporary consumer culture. We have known at least since the days of Simmel that individual
selves and intentions are functions of social and cultural practices, as pointed out by Østergaard
and Jantzen (2000).
Miller shows how consumers’ discourses about shopping as a hedonistic pastime negate their
actual practice of daily shopping, which is characterized by a deeply socially embedded caring for
present or hoped-for future relationships (Miller, 1998). But we are still reluctant to give up on the
so hardly won respect for consumer agency. Are we so enamored of the empowered consumer that
we dare not speak about socially structured determinisms? The call here is not to give up the study
of consumer experience, but for situating acts of consumption, their motivations and consequences
in a world that reaches beyond the subjectivity of the agent. What we need to include is a better
understanding of the underlying ideological and mythological forces producing these subjectivities. Which forms of power produce particular forms of consumer agency? And what are the consequences for the relations between individual and society in particular contexts.

Epistemological supports for a more socially embedded
CCT research agenda
We would like to stress how our reflections here are rooted not so much in contemporary conditions of the experiential and reflexive consumer as in more fundamental anthropological considerations concerning the human condition and its epistemology. In order to provide some broader
epistemological grounding for our ensuing reflections on practices and contexts as central concepts
for research in consumer culture, we will initially draw on Douglas’s (1986) theory of institutional
agency.
As we have already evoked, part of our argument here is based on the shortcomings of interpreting consumer behavior exclusively or even predominantly in terms of the individual subject.
We argue for the legitimacy of thinking in terms of collective subjects. This is why we turn to
Douglas’s theory of institutional agency. Douglas tries to establish a sociological epistemology
based on the thinking of Emile Durkheim and Ludwik Fleck, in order to ensure that social facts are
explained by other social facts rather than by being put through a psychological reductionism.
Hence, her arguments are built up around a set of core cases of institutional agency, such as
institutional remembering and forgetting, institutional categorizing, institutional decision making
and not least institutions conferring identity. As such, and this is important for us to underline,
social structures cannot be conceived as simply constraining an otherwise free individual. The
social operations of institutional agency are enabling and constraining at the same time. Douglas
embraced Fleck’s notion of thought style (referred to as for example discourse, conceptual scheme
or ideology by various other philosophers) to indicate the social formation of our individual
expressivity. As Douglas (1986: 13) quotes Fleck for asserting: ‘The individual within the collective is never, or hardly ever, conscious of the prevailing thought style which almost always
exerts an absolutely compulsive force upon his thinking, and with which it is not possible to be at
variance’. Based on Douglas’s reflections, we would argue that it is crucial for the consumer

388

Marketing Theory 11(4)

culture researcher to include an account of the institutional thought styles at stake in a particular
field, well beyond the experienced lifeworld of the consumer.
Beyond the exceptions already mentioned, the general relative failure to include dimensions
of institutional thought beyond and above consumer experiences may well at least partially be
due to reviewer and editorial inclinations to substantiate all claims directly in consumer data.
Paradoxically, CCT authors, reviewers and editors have to a large degree adopted Locke’s
famous empiricist conclusion that nothing is in the mind which was not first in the senses – with
the significant addition that we are talking about the senses of the consumer subject under
investigation. Furthermore, in our search for the concrete consumer experiences rather than
more abstract patterns, we have introduced a tendency to avoid certain consumption phenomena
that do not readily lend themselves to consumer reflection. Some types of consumption are
deeply inscribed in less reflexive consumption practices, for instance the consumption of water,
electricity and similar goods (Gronow and Warde, 2001). In spite of the importance of the latter
consumption areas for social and economic policy, their study is still largely left to utilitarian
approaches.
It therefore makes sense to take a closer look at the practice turn in contemporary theory
(Schatzki et al., 2001) and its consequences for marketplace activities (e.g. Kjellberg and Helgesson, 2007; Andersson et al., 2008) and for consumption (Warde, 2005).

Consumption as practice: Individual experience and social constraints
It should be an assumption on the part of any researcher investigating consumer culture, that while
the consumer perceives his or her actions, desires and intentions as directed specifically to circumstances in the life of themselves or their close peers, these drivers of consumption to a large
extent originate in cultural, societal, economic and political conditions. This does not mean doing
away with accounting for the individual worldview. But we argue that it is imperative to regard
consumption as practice. Among other theoreticians of practice (e.g. Giddens, 1979), the conceptual toolbox of Pierre Bourdieu is well suited for this calibration of our epistemological
apparatus (Bourdieu, 1972 [2007]; Bourdieu, 1984). As consumers act to maximize material,
symbolic and social capital within various types of fields, they may experience themselves as
under no particular constraint from rules or obligations. But this is exactly the point of the concept
of habitus; that the social actor possesses an embodied, pre-reflective competence, having internalized the rewards and sanctions that stem from surrounding social structures, which are thus not the
object of direct reflection. There is indeed a tendency for misrecognition on the part of social
actors, Bourdieu says, as the latter are neither able nor willing to recognize that their practices follow and reproduce social rules for an everyday ‘economic’ maximization of capital in their culture
and social fields. This tendency obviously casts into doubt the adequacy of any research that simply reiterates the claims to individual uniqueness and free self-realization made by consumers; a
valid analysis should also point to the social constraints and cultural continuities which, from
an analytical viewpoint, manifest themselves in consumer practice. This does not mean that there
is social determinism; consumer practice is conditioned by external structures, but it also works
back on these structures, changing them through acts of improvisation. These acts arise continually
in that actors never face a completely predictable outcome of the social symbolic exchanges in
which they engage, and because social rules are always abstract, never prescribing specifically the
conduct that will lead to a desired outcome in any social situation. The analysis of practice thus
encompasses the reproduction of social boundaries that is simultaneous with the ongoing

Askegaard and Linnet

389

formulation of strategies by actors, their improvisation in the face of unanticipated consequences
and ambiguous responses, and their experience of self-actualization, creativity and rebellion.
The benefit of the Bourdieuan approach for consumer research is not primarily that it makes it
possible for consumer researchers to order their empirical material by dividing it into social fields
and kinds of capital, although such attempts at neat analytical mapping seem to dominate much
CCT usage of Bourdieús work. Its real strength, however, lies in the epistemology that underwrites
concepts such as practice, habitus and misrecognition. We do not argue that any analysis of
consumption should necessarily utilize specific Bourdieuan concepts; but the basic analytical
stance to social life that the latter represent serves any analysis of consumption well by safeguarding it from the worst excesses of liberatory ideology and overly individualist epistemologies,
adding a certain analytical distance to consumers’ own accounts of their reasons for acting.

A more contextually oriented consumption research
We are appealing for CCT research to pay increased attention to the contexts that condition
practices of consumption. While ‘context’ is sometimes invoked in research on consumer culture,
the term itself has not received much specific attention. Most profoundly, Arnould et al. (2006)
discuss the significant processes of selecting a rewarding context for gaining theoretic knowledge
about marketplace phenomena. Their insightful chapter itself is witnessing the preoccupation with
the micro-social context of CCT research, even if these authors underline the dangers of overcontextual absorption both for researchers and readers of research output. But what is ‘context’?
A common understanding of contextualization is that it implies appealing ‘to features and
characteristics surrounding a phenomenon in order to illuminate it and to understand or give sense
to it’ (Dilley, 1999). Dilley explains that appeals to context can be distinguished as different kinds
of contextualizing moves, of which the main three are:
1. External context: Articulating ‘a connection between one domain of phenomena . . . and
another’ such as the social life of a group, or wider societal or global structures and processes
surrounding the phenomenon (Dilley, 1999: 12).
2. Internal context: Connections within the domain of the phenomenon under study. An illustrative
example concerns spoken language, where the meaning of one part of an utterance exists only in
relation to other parts of the same utterance. The overall meaning of the full utterance also
involves the social and material contexts of the speaker that were referred to above as ‘external’.
3. Psychological or mental context is the third most common analytical reference, and marks ‘a
shift in attention in the study of meaning from the relationship between signs and the things they
signify in the world towards a focus on the minds of sign-users and their intentions as inner
states’ (Dilley, 1999: 13).
An example of early CCT research that includes the three types of contexts mentioned above is that
of Belk et al. (1991) analyzing the symbolic meaning of collecting and collections. Psychological
or mental context is invoked when describing collectors as people who are intent in creating some
small measure of perfection in a world indifferent or scornful to their plight, or who immerse themselves in the collection as ‘a new realm of experience [where they] can potentially experiment with
a fantasy life’ (Belk et al., 1991: 25). Internal contextualization is used when emphasizing seriality:
how objects such as nutcrackers have no intrinsic meaning as use or aesthetics but solely in relation
to other objects, with which they must share some similarity. External contexts referred to are for

390

Marketing Theory 11(4)

example the ‘heightened acquisitive and possessive orientation that epitomizes the modern
consumer ‘‘culture’’’(Belk et al., 1991: 20), and the act of collecting is seen as ‘an immersion
in acquisitiveness, individualism, competitiveness, and display of personal accomplishments
through material objects – all central values in American culture’ (Belk et al., 1991: 42).
We can thus restate our argument here as one that goes against the overly individualist focus of
some consumption research relying mainly on psychological or mental context. We concur with
Dilley that this approach has little relevance for a fieldwork based discipline. As argued above,
phenomenological approaches must go beyond such tendencies, and we have referred to several
that satisfy this requirement.
To which contexts should consumption research pay attention? Is it enough to have some kind
of context, even if it does not include relations to other human beings? At the risk of contradicting
(but hopefully nuancing) our main argument about the socially embedded consumer, we recognize
that in understanding the meaning of objects to consumers, one does not necessarily have to
foreground the social constructions and values that reside in the surrounding social sphere.
Material layouts and ecological conditions are also relevant contexts. Some very interesting perspectives along the lines of ‘object agency’ have appeared in the works of scholars who, while also
invoking contexts such as the ideologies of society and the agency and intention of consumers, pay
close attention to the consumption object itself as primary context, while also bringing into play the
ideologies of society and the agency and intention of consumers (Borgerson, 2005). A potential for
a certain consumer–object relation can reside in the make-up of the very object itself, such as the
ability of some objects to ‘reveal themselves progressively’ and in the process engage the consumer in an intersubjective relation with the object (Zwick and Dholakia, 2006); or in the role that
material spaces, such as those of the home, have in determining consumers’ consumption habits
(Coupland et al., 2005). Even if the evident cultural and historical variation in the meaning of signs
suggests that the latter is arbitrary (Mick, 1986), there is something to be said for acknowledging
the role of material object functions and ecological conditions in structuring consumer experience
and practice by influencing the horizon of possible meanings and outcomes.
A hugely important discussion about the relation between subject and object underlies this
issue, which at some point needs to be resolved with the social constructivism that underwrites the
notion of consumer culture. A growing number of scholars are considering how experiences
central to some consumer practices, such as sensing the atmosphere of a place, are constituted by
material properties, the effect of which is to some extent not a matter of cultural coding or discursive framing. Some authors criticize semiotics, hermeneutics and discourse analysis for not
comprehending material objects and settings in their immediacy; in how they come forth as a
bodily sensation of presence, but only as signs, the meaning of which is constituted in relation to
other signs, and perceived by the subject’s mind (Ingold, 2000; Gumbrecht, 2004; Miller, 2010).
Miller asserts that it is wrong ‘to treat body praxis as a mere vehicle for the outward expression of
meanings emanating from a higher source in culture or society’ (Miller, 2010: 169). The analytical
challenge posed from that direction is to conceptualize the role of an object ‘in the ways in which it
goes forth from itself’ (Böhme, 1992: 121).
It is a sobering notion that not any and all meanings can be arbitrarily attached to any given
consumer good, as some unsuccessful attempts at branding may remind us. But in spite of such
advances in terms of understanding how meanings may emanate from the immediate material
make-up of the object, an overwhelming body of research in anthropology and sociology suggests
the primacy of social context. So while consumption research may progress by paying increased
attention to consumers’ involvement with the material world, and not only with market meanings

Askegaard and Linnet

391

in the pursuance of identity construction, these foci must be situated within an attention to the
larger social and cultural context.
Now clearly, much research into consumer culture does go beyond ‘mind as context’ and take as
epistemological point of departure that consumption objects and practices signify something in the
world. But still there is a lack of adequate attention to social and cultural context in many analytical works, which focus instead on the agency of consumers and their identity projects. These
invoke mainly psychological context, as mentioned above, for analyzing the symbolic meanings of
consumer goods, and the emotions and preferences of consumers.

Roots of the individualizing tendency in phenomenological
consumer research
We are now better equipped to return to our initial argument. Our critique extends to those studies
of consumption that go beyond the psychological level, and do pay attention to economic and
social conditions of the consumers’ everyday life, but still confine themselves to the context of
their own empirical data. This usage of context, which would be called internal in the terminology
of Dilley, is prevalent in phenomenological CCT-related research, as we argue in this section.
Because the tradition of phenomenology has been a driving force in the CCT focus on experience,
we will take a closer look at the beginnings of CCT phenomenology; the analytical ambitions that
it initially held and how these relate to the present challenges of contextualization facing CCT. We
also look briefly at later CCT-related works that explicitly place phenomenology in the foreground
of their analytical approach. In other words, it is time to revisit the already stated critique of CCT
phenomenology in the light of the various levels of context.
While the ‘phenomenological approach’ referred to in CCT works of the 1990s and 2000s often
employ a de-contextualizing, individualizing perspective, this is not necessarily the direction
pointed out by the programmatic article by Thompson et al. (1989). That article warns against fragmenting consumer experience into independent analytical elements. Such a call for holism can be
seen as an argument for contextual analysis, especially when the article argues that we should seek
to ‘describe experience as it emerges in some context(s)’ (Thompson et al., 1989: 135), thus criticizing the analytical abstraction of consumers’ knowledge from the context that it is attuned to.
A further promise of contextual awareness lies in the notion of figure/ground: while the article is
of course highly attentive to consumer experience, it is also adamant that what draws the attention
of consumers is never independent of background; the two co-constitute each other. Elements of
context exert an influence on the awareness of the consumer and may suddenly impress themselves
as text, a shifting that is itself crucial to consumer experience, as the article suggests. That particular part of the article does not directly concern cultural and social context; it is more
psychologically concerned with the dynamics of attention. But it implies an analysis of what
‘ground’ is, which suggests some sort of contextual understanding.
However, when practiced in CCT-related research, actual phenomenological approaches seem
to be more concerned with interrelating the various parts of consumer experience, than with
placing that phenomenon in a wider social and cultural context. This tendency emerges in the study
of the consumption experience of mothers published by Thompson et al. in 1990, shortly after their
call for a phenomenological consumer research. In the introduction we are briefly reminded that in
the US society of that time, there is a feminist movement thta relates to increasingly egalitarian
marriages. The remainder of the article refers only to what we might call the internal context of
the study at the individual level: the financial situation of informants, the structure of their family,

392

Marketing Theory 11(4)

their expressed personal feelings about shopping and habits as a consumer, the social side of their
shopping with friends and family, and their own attempts at changing their ways of shopping. By
interrelating these different domains of individuals’ experience of consumption and everyday life,
the article arrives at a compelling interpretation around consumers’ attempts at controlling their
shopping: ‘within the context of a perceived crisis, Samantha experiences freedom from the
responsibilities of shopping alone’ (Thompson et al. 1990: 351, emphasis added). While the interpretation of freedom within crisis most likely goes beyond what the informant herself would be
able to state, the range of social phenomena drawn on for interpretation remains narrowly confined
to those that the consumer herself points to as relevant, and which readily lend themselves to interpretation within the data set collected for the specific analysis.
Thus the two founding works of phenomenological CCT do not move beyond the subjective
horizon of the consumer in their analytical approach, even if they show an awareness of the
necessity to contextualize consumers’ lived reality. The consumer experience becomes at once
both text and context: various elements of the consumer experience, which are in themselves
analytical ‘text’, become the context for other elements of that selfsame consumer experience
(even if the descriptive range of that experience is widened considerably compared to measurements of experience fragments undertaken in the labs of consumer behavior psychologists). The
studies we are reviewing here do interrelate different elements of consumer subjectivity in a way
that represents a certain dynamic of text and context, but almost exclusively within a horizon
confined to phenomena that stand out within the set of interview data as such. What are missing are
the various external contexts for consumers’ efforts to exercise control over their shopping, such as
modern individualism and the middle-class morality that makes a carefully managed economy and
a sense of personal style important ways to gain social respect. These contexts are active when consumers navigate, appropriate, reproduce and challenge ‘consumer culture’. External contexts relevant for a study of family shopping would also be those analyzed in more recent works by Miller
and others on the historical changes around the western family; away from patriarchal power and
status towards the sacralization of the child (Miller, 1998) and the societal moralizing and monitoring of relations between parent and child rather than those between spouses (Gullestad, 1992;
Gullestad and Segalen, 1997; Howell and Melhuus, 2001).
If we look at the CCT-related studies that have followed since Thompson and his co-authors’
call for a focus on consumer experience, and which explicitly refer to themselves as phenomenological, we see that the meaning of ‘phenomenological consumer research’ varies for its early
practitioners. It differs to which extent the phenomenological approach draws on context. Mick
and Demoss (1990) refer to Thompson and his co-authors in embracing ‘the emphasis in the phenomenological paradigm on examining context-embedded human experience’, which in 1990
would have signified a move out of the lab and closer to the real-life experience of consumers.
In their analysis of self gifts the authors make brief reference to the ‘Western Protestant ethic’
that finds its full realization in the American ethos of achievement and reward. But apart from
that, interpretation again unfolds within the horizon of the data set. It seems common for consumer research that declares itself as phenomenological to confine itself in this way to the data
collected among a few individuals, and use those as the basis for finding correlations that suggest
segments or personality types of consumers. These works seem to assume that by taking a ‘phenomenological approach’ one is licensed to making merely a broad, emic, non-theoretical
description of a phenomenon. This research seems to be unaware of the analytical potential that
phenomenology holds, instead seeing ‘phenomenological description’ merely as a precursor to
theoretical explanation.

Askegaard and Linnet

393

Often the aim of such phenomenological description is to judge whether a phenomenon fits into
predefined concepts. This results in a fragmentation of consumer experience that does not satisfy
the phenomenological criterion of holism and interrelation set out by Thompson et al. By fragmenting the topic into predefined conceptual categories, as a precursor for controlled measurements and comparisons, the research loses sight of all larger existential issues around consumer
experience, not to say those of consumer culture (e.g. O’Guinn and Faber, 1989; Bergadaà, 1990).
This tendency towards fragmentation is also criticized in more recent CCT-related works that
declare themselves to be phenomenological. Cotte et al. complain that ‘a focus on isolated facets
has likely hindered the growth of more in-depth knowledge on timestyles and their interrelations
with consumer behavior’ (Cotte et al., 2004: 333). We see here the phenomenological spirit of defragmentation that also appeared in the early phenomenological works of Thompson et al. Cotte
et al. (2004) refer to more and wider contexts than those seen in earlier phenomenological works,
such as the pervasiveness of time management in the American ‘market system’; the history and
evolution of the Western notion of time as something that is measured by a clock; American cultural norms of self-improvement; and modern Western culture as such resting on a foundation
metaphor of ‘time is money’. Yet while more contexts are referred to, this is done in an extremely
cursory manner that rarely adds societal and cultural perspectives to the analysis but merely suggestive hints. Moving mainly within the confines of the authors’ own empirical material, the analysis instead focuses on differences between individuals interviewed, and on that basis tries to arrive
at a segmentation that seems rather strained from both a quantitative and qualitative point of view.
The analytical choice of aligning different orientations towards time with different individual personalities is an unhappy one, from the perspective of understanding consumer culture. There is a
strong risk of losing sight of consumer culture in this penchant for shaky segmentations and essentialist perspectives on individual consumers. A true phenomenological focus on consumer culture
might instead look at the coexistence of different orientations within cultures and also within individuals, for whom they can create tensions or function as different modes of perception and selfpresentation across a range of everyday situational contexts.

Phenomenology and the limits of ethnography
In the phenomenological CCT-related works mentioned above, we often get an in-depth, empathic
understanding of consumer experience, seeing consumption truly through the eyes of the consumer. But it is also clear that the influence of phenomenology on consumer research often
amounts to a decoupling from societal and cultural context. The analytical gaze turns inwards
towards the experience of the individuals that were interviewed for the research. Thompson
et al. argue that ‘thematic meanings stand in relation to each other and that the total quality of experience emerges from such interrelationships’ (1990: 359). This is not to be argued with, but the
question is: How narrow or wide a spectrum of relationships should be included in the analysis?
We argue that the range of these meanings should encompass dimensions such as culture, society,
ecology, materiality and history. Some might argue that we would lose sight of the specificities of
consumer culture if we were to refer to the broader social structures and processes that are the subject of various basic disciplines. There is a point in that argument, because when for example
Thompson et al chose not to refer to historical and ideological changes around family life in the
Western world, or middle-class morality, one may say that they invoked instead the one context
that consumer research is concerned with: consumer culture as such. However, it will help any
CCT study in communicating how specific are its findings to consumer culture, if the researcher

394

Marketing Theory 11(4)

considers how his or her particular slice of consumer culture is influenced by or varies from local
culture, ideological conditions, social structures and present historical conditions. A wider contextual awareness would provide consumer research with a cross-cultural sensitivity that could transcend the heavy bias of the American middle-class perspective in our understanding of consumer
culture. It would give consumer researchers a more advanced approach to prioritizing certain analytical connections, and also allow them to draw conclusions of a wider analytical reach, by which
they could enter a dialogue with the basic disciplines of the human and social sciences.
However, researchers that identify with the CCT field still submit works totally devoid of
references to the nationality, gender, age, geographical location, political leanings, etc. of the
informants in question. They are just ‘consumers’ and the ill-defined context referred to is ‘consumer culture’ – often without accounting for any cultural dynamics and norms that would be specific to ‘consumer culture’, apart from long established notions such as the ‘extended self’ that
pertain to consumers’ identity projects.
As we have suggested several times in this paper, some CCT work shows a propensity to turn
inwards, towards one’s own data, a drift which relates to the individualizing and decontextualizing
tendency that is rooted in a particular usage of phenomenological thinking. This happens at the
expense of a dialogue with consumption research undertaken within other disciplines, and it also
impedes the critical, creative reinterpretations of other researcher’s data that are crucial to theoretical innovation in any field. Such closure has not decreased with the increasing popularity of
ethnographic methods, in spite of all the other benefits of the latter. We agree with Holt (Holt,
2003) that for the understanding of consumers and markets that CCT and for which other disciplines strive, cultural analysis is a necessary analytical tool for charting the fluctuations and
contradictions in the ideologies of a society, which provides answers that do not as such depend on
a particular set of empirical material collected through ethnography or other methods. Cultural and
social dynamics are legitimate points of analysis even if they are not immediately apparent in
informants’ utterances and practices. However, the venturing of more far-reaching analytical perspectives is curtailed by the fetichization of empirical data that appears again and again in CCT
research.

A phenomenological approach to social context
As mentioned above, the phenomenological influence on CCT is partly responsible for the tendency of the latter to give priority to individual psychology at the expense of social context. This
critique however does not imply that psychologizing is an inherent weakness of phenomenological
analysis, but rather that this is how phenomenology has been operationalized in consumption
research. Indeed, some currents of phenomenological thinking distinguish themselves by taking as
their point of departure the fundamentally social nature of human existence, analyzing how
individuals merge their worldviews and participate in each other’s experiences, and how their
constructions of identity represent cultural and historical continuities in dealing with the boundary
between the particular and the universal. These phenomenological approaches resonate with our
call for a context-attentive epistemology. Within the hermeneutic endeavor of interpretation, they
are more attentive than other phenomenological approaches to the ‘whole’ side of the dialectic of
part and whole, that is, to the larger context of experience. They retain the detailed description of
experience, but also refer to extra-experiential contexts on theoretical and methodological grounds.
In his writings on phenomenological anthropology, Michael Jackson uses the concept of
intersubjectivity to denote the fundamental traits of mutuality, interconnectedness and negotiation

Askegaard and Linnet

395

that characterize human existence. The concept posits that an ongoing social process of give and
take among subjects is always adjunct to their experience of being in the world (Jackson, 1996;
Jackson, 1998). We inhabit a social field where our identities and selves are continually under
formation through processes that include shared experience and mutual empathy, but also ongoing
negotiation, conflict, and individual struggles to resist or dominate each other. For all cultures ‘it is
possible to outline a domain of action and understanding in which people expect to be able to grasp,
manipulate, and master their own fate’ (Jackson, 1998: 19). In that perspective, consumption
practices like other everyday actions can be seen as attempts at navigating the uneasy relationship
between the particular and the universal. In that context, one phenomenological approach might be
to ask what kind of goods are perceived to support vs threaten one’s control of the border between
everyday life and the world beyond. Taking such an analytical stance to social practice enriches
CCT by grounding it in a deeper understanding of both the universal existential parameters of
social life, and the particulars of culture. CCT has a unique potential to provide a particular
analytical understanding of modernity by investigating how acts of consumption facilitate the
universal intersubjective endeavor of seeking ‘a balance between the world one calls one’s own
and a world one deems to be not-self or other’ (Jackson, 1998: 18). Moving between these worlds,
playing them off against each other, negotiating their boundaries – this constitutes the central
dynamic of human action to which the concept of intersubjectivity refers. The ‘existential’ thus
cannot be analytically decoupled from the social. This mode of phenomenological thinking clearly
resonates with a consumption research that draws upon sociology and anthropology in seeing the
individual experience of consumption as constituted within reciprocal relations between the individual and its social groups, the materiality, and the wider fields of society, culture and state.
Understanding consumption as a social act, and the dynamics of communities of consumption,
is also facilitated by a phenomenology that sees individuals as socially embedded, such as that of
Schutz (1970). Psychologists have used his thesis of the alter ego as a way to escape the monadism
that looms large in the field of psychology (Auburn and Barnes, 2006). Schutz conceptualizes how
in a ‘reciprocal witnessing’ between individuals, each individual relates to the experience of the
situation by the other, and a ‘we-relationship’ arises (Schutz, 1970: 32). Thus in people’s experience, e.g. of material objects of consumption, other people’s viewpoints upon those objects are
implicated, and so is the assumption of the inner life of these other people. Individuals do not
reflect over this complex dynamic, which in everyday moment-to-moment consciousness collapses
into what is experienced as one; which is another reason why any profession on the part of our
informants of ‘making my own choices’ has to be approached with a healthy dose of analytical
attention to context.
If these examples of context-aware phenomenology sound like they are attuned to individual
psychological and existential issues, let it be said without a doubt that all phenomenology has
an inherent inclination towards methodological individualism (Overgaard and Zahavi, 2009). But
this does not preclude phenomenological thinkers from focusing on social embedment, as exemplified in this section by the intersubjective perspectives of Jackson and Schutz’s, attention to
dialogic interweavings between cognition and the social world. The bottom line is that CCT tendencies towards solipsism are a needless consequence, even if one makes the legitimate analytical choice of utilizing a phenomenological approach and place individual experience at the
centre.
What this discussion also suggests is that as researchers, our choice of conceptual tools cannot
be separated from questions of ontology and even ideology. As we have stated above, overly
individualist epistemologies in consumption research may be influenced by a liberalist ideology of

396

Marketing Theory 11(4)

self-emancipation. With each analytical concept that one employs, one also implies an answer to
fundamental ontological questions such as: What is the ‘state of nature’ of man as a social animal? How does the self develop? How does human cognition work? Is there free will? We
argue for a more contextually sensitive epistemology that emphasizes the social structuration
of consumer practices and how all ideals, whether individualist or not, reside in a collectively
shared imaginary.

Towards a context of context
It is a legitimate analytical strategy to represent consumer as being motivated by their ‘identity
project’; but if the analysis aims for an elucidation of ‘consumer culture’, it should acknowledge
the cultural, historical and societal conditions that make this identity and the means of attaining it
attractive and legitimate in the first place. While some consumption research offers compelling
ethnographic accounts of everyday face-to-face interactions among consumers in ‘close contexts’,
such as brand communities or families, and while we want to retain that focus on ‘close social context’, we argue also for being attentive to the context of contexts: societal class divisions, historical
and global processes, cultural values and norms.
The task of contextualization is to explain consumers’ choices by referring both to the structuring force of such large-scale contexts, and the meaningful projects that arise in everyday sociality. It is in their everyday social context that society’s norms are made relevant to people; this is
where they become concrete and manifest themselves as a form of lived ideology. But the task of
the consumption researcher is to balance the understanding of this face-to-face immediacy and the
subjective concerns of the consumer with the way that cultural, societal and historical structures
and processes embed these intersubjective dynamics.
The need to contextualize contexts becomes especially acute when we look at communities of
consumption that are highly responsive to, and the subject of, cultural norms, juridical structures
and direct political intervention. One such community would be the family. Rather than merely
assuming the primordial need for families or dyads within families to have ‘identity’, analyzing the
role of consumption in constructing family identity (Epp and Price, 2008) begs the question of
what role the kinship norms of culture and the prevailing ideologies of society play in specifying
who can call themselves ‘a family’, envisioning how households should ideally be structured, and
naturalizing family structures and values. Paying attention to such dynamics is not necessarily
meant to imply a politically charged critique of values and ideologies, but rather as an advance
towards more satisfactory accounts of why certain practices of consumption unfold like they do,
using theoretical tools that make us able to comprehend the structuring effect of culture and
ideology. Looking at the ways that everyday consumption practices reproduce larger cultural and
social frameworks is also a matter of asking not only how consumption is influenced by social
forms and processes, but how it participates in the constitution of society.
Of course there is a limit to the range of contexts that can and should be referred to. There are
always other, larger, even more external contexts that impose themselves as relevant. As Dilley
says ‘Context suffers the . . . problem of infinite regress of contextualizing, contextualizing
contexts and so on’ (1999: 16). It will always be an analytical choice to cordon off a part of the
analytical field and present it as a contextual domain. Furthermore, dependence on context is a kind
of limited relativism, which can in the extreme lead to a particularism that makes subjects of study
analytically incomparable, by encapsulating them within their respective unique and intricate
connection to context. Since making certain connections always implies making disconnections,

Askegaard and Linnet

397

which are ultimately an analytical choice, we suggest that the task is to present this choice as a
conscious one, and let it be the subject of scholarly debate.

Concluding thoughts: Towards an epistemology of consumer
culture theory
Contemporary epistemology sustains the notion that knowledge does not directly reflect reality but
is a theoretical structuration of it. Furthermore, given the interdisciplinarity of CCT, we must
operate with a complex constellation of plural theoretical structurations. The present paper is not
an attempt to hegemonize any particular theoretical or empirical approach. It is an attempt to carve
out an epistemological space for an emerging field of CCT. This epistemological space is neither
deeply phenomenological in the anthropological tradition of emic descriptions of contextualized
social phenomena, nor is it sociologically ‘grand’ theorization on a more aggregate level, although
it contains elements of both of these. Compared to sociologies of consumption, the strength of CCT
has always been the inclusion of rich and detailed accounts of real-life experiences of consumers as
single persons or in small groups. On the other hand, as we have discussed, this has led to negligence of those (predominantly social) elements of forces shaping consumer lives that are not
necessarily part of ordinary consumer experiences. This phenomenologically inspired empiricism
is in constant risk of falling subject to the fallacy described by Louis Dumont: ‘In social science in
general, it is a fallacy to claim, as it is often done, that traits, elements, or individuals are more
tangible than sets or wholes’ (Dumont, cited in Bouchet, 2007: 32). The focus on lived experiences
should not lead CCT to repeat the individualizing tendencies of the remainder of the consumer
research community. Experiences are individualized, but the element of ‘lived’ draws our attention
to the conditions under which these experiences unfold, conditions that are not necessarily experienced per se. In that case, we miss the specificity of the social. As noted by Bouchet (2007: 43),
‘the identification within the social of a space beyond intentionality means the possibility to reflect
upon the complexity of the social bond’.
The epistemology of CCT as it is emerging from the best of the work produced by CCT scholars
is exactly that analysis of consumer lifeworlds, which takes into account the influences of social
forces beyond personal rationality or irrationality. The focus on market systems as promoted
through the more recent work of Craig Thompson is one example. CCT is at its best a fruitful
encounter between a rich context and solid theory – but it is usually not content to let knowledge
emerge solely from the field (as in some anthropological traditions). Insight into the complex
intertwining of the individual and the social in consumption contexts as it manifests itself in
consumer lives and life conditions is, for us, the axis around which an epistemology of CCT is built
up. The social always speaks through the consumer – with or without the consumer’s awareness. ‘I
am in the world that is in me’, explains French sociologist and philosopher of science Edgar Morin
on several occasions.
Morin’s dictum, as well as the double nature of social structure as enabling and constraining, is
reminiscent of Morin’s dialogical notion of complexity and his notion of the uni-duality of thought
(Morin, 1986; cf. also Kofman, 1996). This uni-duality is best expressed through the dialogic, a
recursive relationship between two concurrent and antagonistic parts, which as a model is a constitutive element in Morin’s philosophy of complexity. Unlike dialectics, none of the conflicting
logics is resolved but remains co-constitutive each of the other. Examples of such a dialogic, of
which Morin’s writings are replete, are relations between body and mind (and the related empiricism–rationalism dialogic), or individual and society. Morin (1986), in a discussion of the

398

Subjectivism
Unintelligibility
Subjectivism
Arbitrariness
Arbitrariness
Drifting
Confusion

Marketing Theory 11(4)

Comprehension/explanation
Concrete/abstract
Participation/detachment
Analogic/logic
Imagination/verification
Uncertainty/certainty
Blurring/precision

Objectivism
Disincarnation
Incomprehension
No creativity
No invention
Dogmatism
Abstract rigidity

Figure 1. The dialogic of knowledge and its pitfalls (excerpt from Morin, 1986: 184)

anthropology of knowledge, argues that the process of thinking and thus the formation of
knowledge takes place in a series of dialogical relations between different mental operations.
These may be summarized in the overarching dialogic of comprehension, an empathic mode of
knowledge close to Verstehen in the Weberian sense of the term, and explanation, referring to a
logical–rational–empirical style of knowledge The dialogic represents an open reasoning, where
any attempt to ignore the complexity of the uni-duality of thought will lead to totalizing and dogmatic visions of the world. For example no thinking is possible without rationality, argues Morin,
but a hegemonic assumption of rationality leads to a rationalized, dogmatic and closed reasoning.
Hence there are good epistemological reasons for keeping the dialogic open and each side ‘in
check’ by the built-in antagonisms, says Morin, because there are pitfalls on each side of the delicate and uncertain construction of knowledge. This dialogic of empathic understanding and logical
reasoning can, according to Morin, be broken down into a number of constituent dialogics. As he
writes: ‘The thought, in its organizing/creative movement, is a complex dialogic of activities and
operations which engages the complementary/antagonistic competences of the mind/brain’
(Morin, 1986: 182). As illustrated in the central column in Figure 1 below, this indicates ‘the complex character of the act of thinking; it evokes perpetually in itself in a complementary way virtually
antagonistic processes which otherwise would tend to exclude each other’ (Morin, 1986). CCT arguably took a giant leap towards expansion beyond a few marginalized scholars through the courageous
endeavor of an Odyssey. Hence, it is only too obvious to invite contemporary CCT scholars to consider their process of thinking as an ‘uninterrupted dialogical dynamism, a navigation between the
contrary Scylla’s and Charybdis’s towards which the thought will be drawn by any hegemony of one
side of its antagonistic processes’ (Morin, 1986). Knowledge must then be constituted through the
complex dialogic of its constituting antagonisms. This dialogic, then, engages the oscillation between
analysis (of parts) and synthesis (of the whole), between the particular and the general, between the
empirical (based on observation) and the rational (based on logic).
However, as indicated by the parable of Scylla and Charybdis, knowledge must always toe the
line and keep engaging its antagonistic forces. Rather than an equilibrium, it is for Morin a matter
of a recursive process or, as he puts it, a whirlwind of constant regulation. To the extent that this
regulation is not successful, knowledge degrades and falls into one of the pitfalls indicated in the
left and right columns of the figure.
In a CCT context, the reasoning behind the rise of interpretivism in the 1980s can be seen as a
move towards the left side of this figure in an attempt to challenge models of knowledge that
strove for logical, detached and verifiable explanations of consumer behavior. The latter would
sacrifice insights into consumer realities for theoretically precise and (oftentimes) mathematically abstract descriptions, which left very little flesh and blood on the portrait of consumers
(Thompson et al., 1989). That the CCT tradition is in itself a scene for such dialogues among

Askegaard and Linnet

399

paradigms is evident in for example the discussion of researcher participation illustrated by the
debate pro (Gould, 1991) and contra (Wallendorf and Brucks, 1993) introspection as a legitimate
method within CCT research.
Applying the dialogics of Morin to the history of CCT research, we would argue that the need to
bring consumers alive as real people; and that an individualistic operationalization of the phenomenological tradition in consumer research has lead the CCT field to a situation where it
sometimes applies an overly comprehension-oriented approach to consumer experiences. In an
understandable reaction to the objectivism of the correlation coefficient hegemony, CCT research
has employed an occasionally too comprehensive and subjectivist approach, where informants’
experiential outpourings about their consumption whereabouts are not, or only to a small extent,
interpreted and/or criticized against alternative explanatory or motivational frameworks. Consequently, the application of macro-systemic and social theoretical concepts for understanding the
lifeworlds of consumers that go beyond what can immediately be detected in consumer accounts
of lived experiences have been the exception rather than the rule.
What we are arguing here is (obviously, we hope) not a return to the ‘normal science’ period
advocated by logical empiricists in the early debates concerning the interpretive turn in consumer
research (cf. Østergaard and Jantzen, 2000). Nor do we wish to engage in the compelling debate on
the possibilities of overcoming paradigmatic incommensurabilities (Davies and Fitchett, 2005;
Tadajewski, 2008), since we consider ourselves to be at home in a broad constructivist tradition,
which does not preclude visiting other paradigms and being inspired by the ways of their inhabitants. This article is not a critique of the multiple methods adopted and applied with great success
by contemporary CCT researchers – nothing could be further from our agenda than establishing an
a priori delimitation of the plethora of expressions of consumer culture and its behavioral practices
that the CCT researchers have introduced over the last two decades, including videographies,
poems, performances, stereoscopies and more. For reasons of boundary expansion, we strongly
favor these ventures and explorations, even if we do not always find all such ventures eventually
fruitful. What we do want to point out is the need for investigating the social institution of consumption and how it shapes our lives and choices beyond our individual identity projects. This will
provide stronger explanatory frameworks in a number of CCT studies and rid the field of its worst
solipsistic tendencies.
Our discussion has obvious linkages to the debate about relationships between contexts and
theoretical insights in CCT research (Arnould et al., 2006). Like Arnould and his co-authors, we
acknowledge the importance as well as the dangers of researcher immersion in the context. But we
also think that we draw attention to an additional fact: whereas their purpose is to reflect on how
variations in (emic) context generate possibilities for different theoretical (etic) contributions, as
well as the tight relationship between emic and etic conceptualization, we advocate for more
degrees of freedom in terms of applying etic constructs that are not readily traceable in the emic
context to the interpretation etic constructs. We hope that by introducing the notion of context of
contexts and rooting it in a Morinian dialogic, we have sustained a sufficiently solid argument for
such daring theoretical leaps, not of faith but of interpretation.
It should thus be clear that we are not arguing for turning CCT research into a business-school
based section of the sociology of consumption. The strength of CCT research in contemporary contributions to understanding consumer culture is exactly its ability to base its vast majority of
insights on rich descriptions based on (largely qualitative) empirical research on consumers’ lived
experiences as well as their living conditions. We are thus skeptical about a use of theory that
negates consumers as agentic components of the market system. As noted by Thompson (2007:

400

Marketing Theory 11(4)

122) in his endorsement of Eric Schlosser’s analysis of the American fast-food industry, Fast Food
Nation, we should acknowledge
the importance and realpolitik value of investigating a defined market system within commercial
culture, rather than making sweeping generalizations that presupposes the operation of a singularly
dominant ideology (e.g. McDonaldization) or pathological zeitgeist (e.g. affluenza). Teasing out these
complexities calls for muckraking scholarship that unpacks critical institutional details about how a
market system functions and the specific effects that emanate from its organizational structures and
processes.

These specific effects, we may add, are not least found in the daily life and consumption conditions
as they are lived by the people (in their roles as consumers) that we investigate.
In the context of the structure–agency debate, then, our reflections here should not be taken as a
dismissal of consumer agency, but rather as a word of warning against letting contemporary
individualism, whether it expresses the ideologies of the cold war period (Tadajewski, 2006a);
humanist psychology and its influence on an American popular culture of self-actualization
(Illouz, 2008); or contemporary neoliberalism (e.g. Shankar et al., 2006; Zwick et al., 2008) overshadow the notion that the human being is first and foremost a social and cultural animal. Consumers consistently navigate, but only to a limited degree conduct, let alone create, the social
universe of meanings that attach to consumer goods and practices – and then most often according
to a score that they have not written themselves.
References
Allen, D.E. (2002) ‘Towards a Theory of Consumer Choice as Sociohistorically Shaped Practical Experience:
The Fits-Like-a-Glove (FLAG) Framework’, Journal of Consumer Research 28(4): 515–32.
Andersson, P., Aspenberg, K. and Kjellberg, H. (2008) ‘The Configuration of Actors in Market Practice’,
Marketing Theory 8(1): 67–90.
Arnould, E.J. and Thompson, C.J. (2005) ‘Consumer Culture Theory (CCT): Twenty Years of Research’,
Journal of Consumer Research 31(4): 868–82.
Arnould, E.J. and Thompson, C. (2007) ‘Consumer Culture Theory (and We Really Mean Theoretics):
Dilemmas and Opportunities’, in R. W. Belk and J. F. Sherry Jr (eds) Research in Consumer Behavior 11,
pp. 3–22. Oxford: Elsevier.
Arnould; E.J., Price, L. and Moisio, R. (2006) ‘Making Contexts Matter: Selecting Research Contexts for
Theoretical Insights’, in R. W. Belk (ed.) Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Marketing, pp.
106–25. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Askegaard, S., Gertsen, M. and Langer, R. (2002) ‘The Body Consumed: Reflexivity and Cosmetic Surgery’,
Psychology and Marketing 19(10): 793–812.
Auburn, T. and Barnes, R. (2006) ‘Producing Place: A neo-Schutzian Perspective on the ‘‘Psychology of
Place’’’, Journal of Environmental Psychology 26: 38–50.
Belk, R.W (1988) ‘Possessions and the Extended Self’, Journal of Consumer Research 15(2): 139–68.
Belk, R.W. (ed.) (1991) Highways and Buyways: Naturalistic Research from the Consumer Behavior
Odyssey. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research.
Belk, R.W., Wallendorf, M., Sherry, J.F., Jr and Holbrook, M.B. (1991) ‘Collecting in a Consumer Culture’,
in R. W. Belk (ed.) Highways and Buyways: Naturalistic Research from the Consumer Behavior Odyssey.
Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research: 178–215.
Bergadaà, M.M. (1990) ‘The Role of Time in the Action of the Consumer’, Journal of Consumer Research
17(3): 289–302.
Böhme, G. (1992) ‘Atmosphere as the Fundamental Concept of a New Aesthetics’, Thesis Eleven 36: 113–26.

Askegaard and Linnet

401

Borgerson, J. (2005) ‘Materiality, Agency, and the Constitution of Consuming Subjects: Insights for
Consumer Research’, in G. Menon and A. R. Rao (eds) Advances in Consumer Research XXXII, pp.
439–43. Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research.
Bouchet, D. (2007) ‘The Ambiguity of the Modern Conception of Autonomy and the Paradox of Culture’,
Thesis Eleven 88(February): 31–54.
Bourdieu, P. (1972 [2007]) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Cotte, J., Ratneshwar, S. and Mick, G.D. (2004) ‘The Times of Their Lives: Phenomenological and Metaphorical Characteristics of Consumer Timestyles’, Journal of Consumer Research 31(2): 333–45.
Coupland, J.C., Iacobucci, D. and Arnould, E. (2005) ‘Invisible Brands: An Ethnography of Households and
the Brands in Their Kitchen Pantries’, Journal of Consumer Research 32(1): 106–18.
Cova, B., Kozinets, R. and Shankar, A. (2007) ‘Tribes INC: The New World of Consumer Tribalism’, in B.
Cova, R. Kozinets and A. Shankar (eds) Consumer Tribes, pp. 3–26. Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Crockett, D. and Wallendorf, M. (2004) ‘The Role of Normative Political Ideology in Consumer Behavior’,
Journal of Consumer Research 31(3): 511–28.
Davies, A. and Fitchett, J. (2005) ‘Beyond Incommensurability? Empirical Expansion on Diversity in
Research’, European Journal of Marketing 39(3): 272–93.
Dilley, R. (1999) ‘Introduction: The Problem of Context’, in R. Dilley (ed.) The Problem of Context, pp. 3–46.
Oxford: Berghahn.
Douglas, M. (1986) How Institutions Think. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Epp, A.M. and Price, L.L. (2008) ‘Family Identity: A Framework of Identity Interplay in Consumption
Practices’, Journal of Consumer Research 35(1): 50–70.
Giddens, A. (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure, and Contradiction in Social
Analysis. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gould, S.R. (1991) ‘The Self-manipulation of My Pervasive, Perceived Vital Energy through Product Use: An
Introspective–Praxis Perspective’, Journal of Consumer Research 21(March): 719–22.
Gronow, J. and Warde, A. (2001) Ordinary Consumption. London: Routledge.
Gullestad, M. (1992) The Art of Social Relations. Essays on Culture, Social Action and Everyday Life in
Modern Norway. Oslo: Scandinavian University Press.
Gullestad, M. and Segalen, M. (eds) (1997) Family and Kinship in Europe. London and Washington, DC:
Pinter.
Gumbrecht, H.U. (2004) Production of Presence. What Meaning Cannot Convey. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Haraway, D. (1988) ‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial
Perspective’, in D. Haraway (ed.) Simians, Cyborgs, and Women, pp. 183–201. New York: Routledge.
Henry, P. (2005) ‘Social Class, Market Situation, and Consumers’ Metaphors of (Dis)empowerment’, Journal
of Consumer Research 31(March): 766–78.
Holbrook, M.B. and Hirschman, E. (1982) ‘The Experiential Aspects of Consumption: Consumer Fantasies,
Feelings, and Fun’, Journal of Consumer Research 9(2): 132–40.
Holt, D.B. (1991) ‘Rashomon Visits Consumer Behavior: An Interpretive Critique of Naturalistic Inquiry’, in
R. H. Holman and M. R. Solomon (eds) Advances in Consumer Research XVIII, pp. 57–62. Provo, UT:
Association for Consumer Research.
Holt, D.B. (1997) ‘Poststructuralist Life Style Analysis: Conceptualizing the Social Patterning of Consumption in Postmodernity’, Journal of Consumer Research 23(March): 326–50.
Holt, D.B. (1998) ‘Does Cultural Capital Structure American Consumption?’, Journal of Consumer Research
25(1): 1–25.
Holt, D. B. (2003) ‘What Becomes an Icon Most?’, Harvard Business Review 81(3): 43–9.
Holt, D.B. and Thompson, C.J. (2004) ‘Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption’, Journal of Consumer Research 31(2): 425–40.

402

Marketing Theory 11(4)

Howell, S. and Melhuus, M. (eds) (2001) Blod – tykkere enn vann? [Blood – thicker than water?] Bergen:
Fagbokforlaget.
Illouz, E. (2008) Saving the Modern Soul: Therapy, Emotions and the Culture of Self-Help. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Ingold, T. (2000) The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill. London:
Routledge.
Jackson, M. (1996) Things as They Are: New Directions in Phenomenological Anthropology, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Jackson, M. (1998) Minima Ethnographica. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kavanagh, D. (1994) ‘Hunt versus Anderson: Round 16’, European Journal of Marketing 28(3): 26–41.
Kjeldgaard, D. and Askegaard, S. (2006) ‘The Glocalization of Youth Culture: The Global Youth Segment as
Structures of Common Difference’, Journal of Consumer Research 33(2): 231–47.
Kjellberg, H. and Helgesson, C-F. (2007) ‘On the Nature of Markets and their Practices’, Marketing Theory
7(2): 137–62.
Kofman, M. (1996) Edgar Morin. From Big Brother to Fraternity. London: Pluto Press.
Kozinets, R.V. (2001) ‘Utopian Enterprise: Articulating the Meanings of Star Trek’s Culture of Consumption’, Journal of Consumer Research 28(1): 67–88.
Kozinets, R.V. (2002) ‘Can Consumers Escape the Market? Emancipatory Illuminations from Burning Man’,
Journal of Consumer Research 29(1): 20–38.
Kozinets, R.V. (2008) ‘Technology/Ideology: How Ideological Fields Influence Consumers’ Technology
Narratives’, Journal of Consumer Research 34(6): 864–81.
Levy, S.J. (1959) ‘Symbols for Sale’, Harvard Business Review 37: 117–24.
Levy, S.J. (1981) ‘Interpreting Consumer Mythology: A Structural Approach to Consumer Behavior’,
Journal of Marketing 45(Summer): 49–61.
Luedicke, M., Thompson, C.J. and Giesler, M. (2010) ‘Consumer Identity Work as Moral Protagonism: How
Myth and Ideology Animate a Brand-Mediated Moral Conflict’, Journal of Consumer Research 36(6):
1016–32.
McCracken, G. (1986) ‘Culture and Consumption: A Theoretical Account of the Structure and Movement of
the Cultural Meaning of Consumer Goods’, Journal of Consumer Research 13(1): 71–84.
Maffesoli, M. (1988) Le temps des tribus [The Time of the Tribes]. Paris: Meridiens Klincksieck.
Mick, D.G. (1986) ‘Consumer Research and Semiotics: Exploring the Morphology of Signs, Symbols, and
Significance’, Journal of Consumer Research 13(2): 196.
Mick, D.G. and DeMoss, M. (1990) ‘Self-gifts: Phenomenological Insights from Four Contexts’, Journal of
Consumer Research 17(December): 322–32.
Miller, D. (1998) A Theory of Shopping. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Miller, D. (2010). Stuff. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Miller, T. (2007) Cultural Citizenship: Cosmopolitanism, Consumerism, and Television. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press.
Moisander, J., Peñaloza, L. and Valtonen, A. (2009a) ‘From CCT to CCC. Building Consumer Culture
Community’, in J. F. Sherry Jr and E. Fischer (eds) Explorations in Consumer Culture Theory, pp. 7–33.
London: Routledge.
Moisander, J., Valtonen, A. and Hirsto, H. (2009b) ‘Personal Interviews in Cultural Consumer Research –
Post-structuralist Challenges’, Consumption, Markets and Culture 12(4): 329–48.
Morin, E. (1986) La connaissance de la connaissance. Paris: Seuil.
Muniz, A.M., Jr and O’Guinn, T.C. (2001) ‘Brand Community’, Journal of Consumer Research 27(4):
412–32.
Murray, J.B. (2002) ‘The Politics of Consumption: A Re-inquiry on Thompson and Haytko’s (1997) ‘‘Speaking of Fashion’’’, Journal of Consumer Research 29(3): 427–40.
O’Guinn, T.C. and Faber, R.J. (1989) ‘Compulsive Buying: A Phenomenological Exploration’, Journal of
Consumer Research 16(2): 147–57.

Askegaard and Linnet

403

Østergaard, P. and Jantzen, C. (2000) ‘Shifting Perspectives in Consumer Research: From Buyer Behaviour to
Consumption Studies’, in R. Elliott and S. Beckmann (eds) Interpretive Consumer Research, pp. 9–24.
Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press.
Overgaard, S. and Zahavi, D. (2009) ‘Phenomenological Sociology – The Subjectivity of Everyday Life’, in
M. H. Jacobsen (ed.) Encountering the Everyday: An Introduction to the Sociologies of the Unnoticed, pp.
93–115. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Peter, J.P. and Olson, J. (1983) ‘Is Science Marketing?’, Journal of Marketing 47(3): 111–25.
Schatzki, T., Cetina, K.K. and von Savigny, E. (eds) (2001) The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory.
London: Routledge.
Schau, H.J., Muñiz, A.M., Jr and Arnould, E.J. (2009) ‘How Brand Community Practices Create Value’,
Journal of Marketing 73(5): 30–51.
Schouten, J. and McAlexander, J.H. (1995) ‘Subcultures of Consumption: An Ethnography of the New
Bikers’, Journal of Consumer Research 22(1): 43–61.
Schutz, A. (1970) Alfred Schutz on Phenomenology and Social Relations, ed. and with an introduction by H.
R. Wagner. Chicago, IL and London: University of Chicago Press.
Shankar, A., Cherrier, H. and Canniford, R. (2006) ‘Consumer Empowerment: A Foucauldian Interpretation’,
European Journal of Marketing 40(9/10): 1013–30.
Sherry, J.F., Jr (1983) ‘Gift Giving in Anthropological Perspective’, Journal of Consumer Research 10(2):
157–68.
Sherry, J.F., Jr (1990) ‘A Sociocultural Analysis of a Midwestern American Flea Market’, Journal of Consumer Research 17(1): 13–30.
Sherry, J.F., Jr (1991) ‘Postmodern Alternatives: The Interpretive Turn in Consumer Research’, in T.
Robertson and H. Kassarjian (eds) Handbook of Consumer Research, pp. 548–91. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Slater, D. (2002) ‘Capturing the Markets from the Economists’, in P. du Gay and M. Pryke (eds) Cultural
Economy: Cultural Analysis and Commercial Life, pp. 60–77. London: Sage.
Tadajewski, M. (2006a) ‘The Ordering of Marketing Theory: The Influence of McCarthyism and the Cold
War’, Marketing Theory 6(2): 163–99.
Tadajewski, M. (2006b) ‘Remembering Motivation Research: Toward an Alternative Genealogy of Interpretive Consumer Research’, Marketing Theory 6(4): 429–66.
Tadajewski, M. (2008) ‘Incommensurable Paradigms, Cognitive Bias and the Politics of Marketing Theory’,
Marketing Theory 8(3): 273–97.
Thompson, C.J. (1997) ‘Interpreting Consumers: A Hermeneutical Framework for Deriving Marketing
Insights from the Texts of Consumers’ Consumption Stories’, Journal of Marketing Research 34(4):
438–55.
Thompson, C.J. (2004) ‘Marketplace Mythology and Discourses of Power’, Journal of Consumer Research
31(1): 162–80.
Thompson, C.J. (2005) ‘Consumer Risk Perception in a Community of Reflexive Doubt’, Journal of
Consumer Research 32(2): 235–48.
Thompson, C.J. (2007) ‘A Carnivalesque Approach to the Politics of Consumption (or) Grotesque Realism
and the Analytics of the Excretory Economy’, ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 611(1): 112–25.
Thompson, C.J. and Coskuner-Balli, G. (2007) ‘Countervailing Market Responses to Corporate Co-optation
and the Ideological Recruitment of Consumption Communities’, Journal of Consumer Research 34(2):
135–52.
Thompson, C.J. and Haytko, D.L.(1997) ‘Speaking of Fashion: Consumers’ Uses of Fashion Discourses and
the Appropriation of Countervailing Cultural Meanings’, Journal of Consumer Research 24(1): 15–42.
Thompson, C.J. and Hirschman, E.C. (1995) ‘Understanding the Socialized Body: A Poststructuralist
Analysis of Consumers’ Self-conceptions, Body Images, and Self-care Practices’, Journal of Consumer
Research 22(2): 139–53.

404

Marketing Theory 11(4)

Thompson, C.J. and Tian, K. (2008) ‘Reconstructing the South: How Commercial Myths Compete for
Identity Value through the Ideological Shaping of Popular Memories and Countermemories’, Journal of
Consumer Research 34(5): 595–613.
Thompson, C.J. and Troester, M. (2002) ‘Consumer Value Systems in the Age of Postmodern Fragmentation:
The Case of the Natural Health Microculture’, Journal of Consumer Research 28(4): 550–71.
Thompson, C.J., Locander, W.B. and Pollio, H.R. (1989) ‘Putting Consumer Experience back into Consumer
Research: The Philosophy and Method of Existential Phenomenology’, Journal of Consumer Research
16(2): 133–46.
Thompson, C.J., Locander, W.B. and Pollio, H.R. (1990) ‘The Lived Meaning of Free Choice: An Existential–Phenomenological Description of Everyday Consumer Experiences of Contemporary Married
Women’, Journal of Consumer Research 17(December): 346–61.
Ûstüner, T. and Holt, D.B. (2010) ‘Toward a Theory of Status Consumption in Less Industrialized Countries’,
Journal of Consumer Research 37(June): 37–56.
Wallendorf, M. and Brucks, M. (1993) ‘Introspection in Consumer Behavior: Implementation and Implications’, Journal of Consumer Research 20(3): 339–59.
Warde, A. (2005) ‘Consumption and Theories of Practice’, Journal of Consumer Culture 5(2): 131–53.
Zwick, D. and Dholakia, N. (2006) ‘The Epistemic Consumption Object and Postsocial Consumption:
Expanding Consumer-object Theory in Consumer Research’, Consumption, Markets and Culture 9(1):
17–43.
Zwick, D., Bonsu, S.K. and Darmody, A. (2008) ‘Putting Consumers to Work’, Journal of Consumer Culture
8(2): 163–96.

Søren Askegaard is Professor of Consumption Studies at the Department of Marketing and Management,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense. His research interests have been focused on consumer culture(s),
globalization processes, and contemporary technologies of self and body. More recently, he has become interested in consumption, markets and marketing as social institutions. His work has appeared in a number of
internationally renowned journals, including Journal of Consumer Research, for which he is an Associate
Editor. He is the co-author of a major European textbook in consumer behavior. In spite of all this, he tends
to think of himself as a nice chap. Address: Department of Marketing and Management, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark. [Email: aske@sam.sdu.dk]
Jeppe Trolle Linnet is a PhD, anthropologist and post doc at the Department of Marketing and Management,
University of Southern Denmark. His post doc focuses on the social and material means whereby experiences
of atmosphere are constituted across home life, urban space and public arenas for consumption. The commercial orchestration of homeyness or ‘hygge’ is a main empirical focus. His previous research concerns temporality and spatiality, middle-class values, the cultural underpinnings of family consumption, and the
phenomenological discussion of subject–object relations. He has also done long-term ethnographic work and
published on the Baltic post-Soviet transition. Address: Department of Marketing and Management, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark. [Email: jtr@sam.sdu.dk]

