Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing

ISSN: 1049-5142 (Print) 1540-6997 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

College Students’ Intention to Volunteer for Nonprofit Organizations: Does Brand Image Make a
Difference?
Dea Mariska Febriani & Juhri Selamet
To cite this article: Dea Mariska Febriani & Juhri Selamet (2020) College Students’ Intention
to Volunteer for Non-profit Organizations: Does Brand Image Make a Difference?, Journal of
Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 32:2, 166-188, DOI: 10.1080/10495142.2019.1656136
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2019.1656136

View supplementary material

Published online: 28 Aug 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 2145

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wnon20

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING
2020, VOL. 32, NO. 2, 166–188
https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2019.1656136

College Students’ Intention to Volunteer for Non-profit
Organizations: Does Brand Image Make a Difference?
Dea Mariska Febriani

a

and Juhri Selamet

b

a

Department of Psychology, Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas, USA; bDepartment of
Advertising, Public Relations and Media Design, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado,
USA
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

Non-profit organizations (NPOs) are still struggling to recruit
volunteers. While the impact of the organizational brand
image on recruitment has been investigated in for-profit organizations, there is a dearth of similar studies in non-profit
settings. Addressing this problem, this quantitative study
examines the effect of NPOs’ brand image, including brand
personality as the symbolic function and recognition reward as
the instrumental function, on the intention to volunteer for
college students. The results from 133 participants showed
a significant difference in the intention to volunteer between
participants exposed to NPOs with certain brand personalities
and NPOs with no brand personalities at all. A significant
difference was also found between participants offered recognition reward and those who were not. These results indicate
the importance of brand image in increasing volunteering
intention, which informs NPO practitioners to create better
strategies to increase their success in recruiting volunteers.

Brand personality; college
students; intention to
volunteer; organizational
brand image; recruitment;
recognition reward

Introduction
Despite their noble vision to change the world or make the world a better
place, non-profit organizations (NPOs) are still struggling to recruit volunteers. The volunteering positions are usually driven by charitable mission,
have no monetary compensation, and offer no career opportunities. In other
words, the nature of the jobs in NPOs are unpaid with a short-term commitment to the organizations. With these characteristics, NPOs already have
disadvantages as they have little benefits to offer compared to for-profit
organizations.
Data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) shows that volunteer
rate in the USA slightly decreases by the end of 2015 compared to 2011.
There is a consensus among scholars that there is increasing competition in
nonprofits’ environment (Weerawardena, NcDonald, & Mort, 2010). Growth
CONTACT Dea Mariska Febriani
dfebrian@g.emporia.edu
University, Emporia, KS
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.
© 2019 Taylor & Francis

Department of Psychology, Emporia State

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

167

in nonprofit organizations leads to intensive competition for scarce
resources, including the volunteers (Bussell & Forbes, 2002).
This is unfortunate because volunteers are critical for the organizations.
Not only they help carrying out the daily activities, but they also help
spreading the message or mission statement of the organizations.
Finkelstein (2008) even argued that nonprofit organizations would not survive without the assistance of volunteers. Additionally, they are more likely to
make charitable gifts (Farrow & Yuan, 2011). Getting more volunteers would
mean greatly not only for the NPOs but also for the society, as they
contribute to the continuation of the good deeds delivered by the
organizations.
Furthermore, a study by Ntamere (2012) showed a significant correlation
between volunteer numerical strength and nonprofits’ sustainability. This
means that the adequate number of volunteers can make the organization
more sustainable. Since volunteers play such an important role, the
researcher suggested that strategic positioning through strategic volunteer
recruitment and management is important to give nonprofits sustainability
leverage. Because of this significance, an adequate recruitment strategy to
attract volunteers is more than necessary for non-profit organizations.
Past research showed that organizational attraction was strongly influenced by the applicant’s perceptions of job and organizational characteristics
such as pay, advancement and career opportunities, or organizational structure (Cable & Graham, 2000; Lievens, Decaesteker, Coetsier, & Geirnaert,
2001). However, they are not the only attributes that influence the applicants.
Their initial attraction to the organization is also based on the symbolic
meanings that they associate with the organizations, including the persondescriptive trait inferences associated with organizations, or brand personalities (Aaker, 1997). Borrowing instrumental-symbolic framework from marketing literature, Lievens and Highhouse (2003) confirmed that both
attributes form the brand image, a critical aspect of the organizational
attraction, defined as a mental representation of the organization based on
individual applicant’s beliefs, ideas, and impression (Malik, Naeem, &
Munawar, 2012).
A number of researches have been done in an attempt to investigate the
relationship between organizational brand image and how they affect organizational attractiveness from the perspective of employee recruitment (e.g.,
Cable & Turban, 2001; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003; Slaughter et al., 2001).
However, the aforementioned relationships in nonprofit settings are rarely
explained. There is lack of research explaining how brand image, including
the instrumental and symbolic function of the organizational brand, might
affect the applicants to volunteer for nonprofit organizations.
In order to address this limitation, this study is proposed to examine the
effect of the brand image, constitutes both the symbolic and the instrumental

168

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

aspects, on the intent to volunteer. More specifically, the study will investigate this topic on college student populations in The United States, considering they are one of the main targets for recruitment activities (Berthon,
Ewing, & Hah, 2005). It is also necessary to investigate the effect of brand
image on these demographic characteristics because according to The US
Bureau of Labor Statistics (Bls.gov, 2016), there are not many people volunteering in this group (16–24 years old), compared to Caucasian women age
35 to 54 years old as the group who are more likely to volunteer. The results
of the study will inform practitioners in nonprofit settings about the influence of both symbolic and instrumental aspects on the intention to volunteer
so that they are able to make a stronger strategy to increase their success rate
on recruiting volunteers.
Literature review
NPOs’ brand image in recruiting volunteers
Unlike profit-oriented organizations, nonprofit organizations do not aim to
generate and share profit (Wolf, 1999). They are driven by certain missions
to increase critical and visible position in political, social, and economic life
(Frumkin, 2002). Obiyan (2006) explained that the goal of nonprofit organizations is to alleviate the suffering of the poor or the disadvantaged group,
not only by providing their needs but also by challenging them to engage in
participatory and collaborative solution to their problems. Therefore, the
main focus of nonprofits organizations is not to gain profit but to make
life easier for the people in need.
In order to achieve their missions, nonprofit organizations rely on the
volunteers as one of the most important contributors. The ability to recruit
the correct persons suited for the volunteering roles is vital (Lysakowski,
2002). Successful volunteer attraction and recruitment require carefully
planned activities that will put into consideration the problem of time
constraint, skills and talents required, and the provision of volunteers’
needs (Volunteer Canada, 2001, as cited in Ntamere, 2012).
Bowen et al. (2001) strongly believed that perception of an organization is
a significant part of the attractiveness tied to the recruitment of volunteers.
The perception of the organization can be explained by the concept of the
brand image. Research views brand image as a collection of ideas, feelings,
and attitudes that consumers have about brands (Gardner & Levy, 1955;
Schmitt, 2012). More specifically in an organizational setting, Lievens (2007)
defines an organizational brand image as people’s global impression that is
based on loose structures of knowledge and beliefs about the organization.
He explained that image is the product of the cognitive reactions and
associations of customers, investors, employees, and applicants to an organization’s name. Images may change due to organizational behavior

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

169

including how it shares and presents information to the public through the
media, advertising, and corporate websites.
Lievens (2007) identifies two general components of the organizational
brand image. First, the instrumental attributes, which are usually a group of
objective attributes that people associate with any organization. Job/organizational characteristics play an important role as the instrumental attributes,
such as salary, incentives, benefits, positions, career opportunities, organizational structure, size, and work location (Cable & Graham, 2000; Lievens
et al., 2001). However, job/organizational characteristics are probably less
useful in early stages because there is limited information about the differences among organizations to be perceived (Lievens & Highhouse, 2003).
The second component is the symbolic attributes, which are trait-related
inferences from an organization. Compared to instrumental attributes, symbolic attributes are different in a way that they are subjective, abstract, and
intangible (Lievens, 2007; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003). They also help to
convey the personalities that people assign to organizations (Aaker, 1997),
which play a key role in the overall perception of the image that influences
the types of individuals attracted to the organization.
According to Keller (1993), the positive brand image directly impacts
brand equity and consumer behavior, and this transcends to the nonprofit
context. Chiagouris (2005) claimed that an attractive brand image is more
important for organizations in nonprofit settings compared to commercial
companies and that an effective one can significantly increase numbers of
donors, members, and volunteers. It has also become the integral part of
a nonprofit organization’s promotional activities, through its ability to shape
the volunteer candidates’ attitudes toward the organization and to influence
their actions, including their intention to apply for volunteering activities
(Bendapudi, Singh, & Bendapudi, 1996).
In constructing certain images, recruitment activities are very important.
Recruitment is a series of efforts carried on by an organization with the
primary purpose of identifying and attracting potential employees, starting
with identifying an appropriate pool of applicants, persuading them to
pursue and ultimately accept employment after going through several selection processes (Barber, 1998). In regards to nonprofit organizations, the
recruitment activities aim to attract volunteers. A variety of recruitment
methods are used by nonprofits to recruit volunteers, such as informal
word of mouth and promotion by the existing members, or formal recruitment efforts such as advertisement on local media, posters and leaflets, notice
boards, or online media including email and social networking sites
(Connolly, 2014; Roach, 2013).
Chapman, Uggerslev, Carroll, Piasentin, and Jones (2005) conducted
a meta-analytic study to evaluate the impact of recruitment practices on
applicant attraction and job choice behavior. The study showed the

170

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

importance of organizational brand image (ρ = .48) as predictor of organizational attraction. Marketing research has consistently shown that organizational brand images are easily recognizable, influence the attraction of job
applicants to organizations, and serve to unify and embed employees within
an organization (Allen, Mahto, & Otondo, 2007; Scott & Lane, 2000; Siguaw,
Mattila, & Austin, 1999). Research also showed that the brand image has
a significant effect on the applicant’s intention to apply, a decision during
recruitment and that companies with a strong brand image would be preferred over those with weak or negative brand image (Cable & Turban, 2001;
Lemmink, Schuijf, & Streukens, 2003).
It is suggested that organizational branding is an effective recruitment
practice. It allows the organizations to highlight specific attributes that will be
perceived by the volunteer candidates. By utilizing both instrumental and
symbolic attributes in the recruitment processes, nonprofits can shape the
organizational brand image in order to attract more volunteers.
Recognition reward as the instrumental attributes
Motivations to volunteer have been explained in terms of altruism and
egoism. Kottasz (2004) argued that egoistic motivation might be associated
with tangible recognition, physical outputs, and compensation expectations.
Many studies have found a correlation between effective volunteer management programs, including recognition activities, and the efficacy of volunteer
activities (Brudney & Nezhina, 2005; Hager & Brudney, 2004).
In order to maintain and improve volunteers’ satisfaction from this motivation perspective, the volunteer recognition program is currently considered
a vital management tool (Fisher & Ackerman, 1998; Jung & Nam, 2008).
Volunteer recognition is generally described as an expression of gratitude or
appreciation for volunteers’ contributions (Fisher & Ackerman, 1998). The
types of volunteer recognition can be categorized into intangible and tangible
(Sue, 1996). The intangible volunteer recognition may be shown by expression of gratitude, while the tangible may take forms of small gifts, souvenirs,
certificates, or awards. With a limited monetary compensation and career
advancement, recognition rewards can play an important role as instrumental attributes that a nonprofit organization can offer for volunteers in the
early stage of recruitment.
Brand personality as the symbolic attribute
A common approach to capture the symbolic attributes of a brand image is
through the use of brand personality as it tends to serve as the self-expressive
functions (Aaker, 1997). A key assumption of measuring organizational
brand personality is the understanding that people can make an assessment
of personality even if they have had limited exposure to the organization
(Lievens & Highhouse, 2003; Slaughter, Zickar, Highhouse, & Mohr, 2004).

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

171

Applicants can easily associate human traits to an organization based on
limited exposure to advertising media, corporate web sites, or recruitment
materials (Highhouse, Thornbury, & Little, 2007; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003;
Slaughter et al., 2004). Brand personalities can be shaped directly through the
personality of the people associated with the organization, such as the CEO
or endorsers. They can also be influenced indirectly by the brand name,
symbols, logo, advertising style, distribution channel, and other productrelated attributes (Plummer, 1985; Batra, Lehmann, & Singh, 1993).
Brand personality has been found as a predictor to consumers’ psychological feelings toward a brand such as perceived brand quality, brand affect,
brand trust, intimacy, satisfaction, and brand attachment (Aaker, Fournier, &
Brasel, 2004; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003), which can ultimately influence
general applicant attraction, intentions to pursue employment, perceptions of
reputation, and the likelihood that applicants would accept job offers
(Slaughter et al., 2004).
In response to the lack of agreement among scholars concerning how to
measure brand personality, Aaker (1997) developed a framework of brand
personality consisting of five dimensions: Sincerity, Excitement, Competence,
Sophistication, and Ruggedness. Aaker’s Brand Personality Inventory (BPI) is
one of the most widely used tools for measuring brand personality and has
been applied to a variety of industries.
Research suggests that applicants may draw inferences on organizational
brand personality traits based on any information presented by the organization, such as the company’s missions, employees or CEO, advertising practices, and brand associations such as brand name, symbol, logo, design,
slogans, and distribution channel (Aaker, 1997; Batra et al., 1993). A study
by Boudreaux and Palmer (2007) suggested the image, color, and layout
displayed in a product can significantly affect perceived brand personality.
Labrecque and Milne (2012) conducted a study to figure out how different
color influence how the consumers perceived brand personality. The study
was constructed on the assumption that esthetic stimuli could potentially
stimulate and shape people’s perceptions through referential meaning
(Zeltner, 1975). Another assumption in the study was the associative learning
of visual information as a key mechanism for quick decision-making and
survival, which develops during the early stage of visual processing (Schlack
& Albright, 2007). The study found that there were positive relationships
between the presented colors and brand personalities perceived by the
participants. More specifically, the study showed that white and pink correlate with sincerity, red correlates with excitement; blue correlates with competence; purple, pink, and black correlate with sophistication, and brown
correlates with ruggedness.
Beside the hue, Labrecque and Milne (2012) also found that the saturation
and value of colors influence the perceived brand personality. Saturation is

172

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

the amount of pigment in color, measured on a scale from low (gray and
washed out) to high (vivid), whereas value is the amount of lightness to
darkness measure by a scale from low (black) to high (white). The study
provided evidence that saturation has a positive relationship with excitement
and ruggedness, as well as negative relationship with sophistication and
sincerity, while value has a negative relationship with ruggedness and competence. Drawing on these findings, it is suggested that practitioners are able
to manipulate the colors in their marketing strategies to create the intended
brand personality.
In addition to color, research in psychology and design (e.g., Bartram,
1982; Lewis & Walker, 1989) supports that semantic associations can be
derived from the physical characteristics of type fonts, and that the association linked to type font used in print advertisements are transferred to the
brand (Childers & Jass, 2002). A study by Henderson, Giese, and Cote (2004)
revealed four impression dimensions (pleasing/displeasing, engaging/boring,
reassuring/unsettling, prominent/subtle) that may occur from various types
of font design consisting of six factors (elaborateness, harmony, naturalness,
flourish, weight, and compression).
Using the Henderson et al.’s (2004) results, Grohmann, Giese, and
Parkman (2013) conducted a study to investigate the effect of different type
font on the perceived brand personality. The results suggested that sincerity,
excitement, and sophistication are enhanced when harmonious, natural, and
flourish type fonts are used. Whereas ruggedness and competence perceptions increased with the use of harmonious, natural, heavy, and flourish type
fonts. The results supported the framework of semantic influences of type
font association that the font designs shape brand personality perceptions
when consumers are unfamiliar with the brand.
Hypotheses development
As previously described, job/organizational characteristics are strong predictors of organizational attractiveness. In profit-oriented companies, these
characteristics can be easily derived to salary, incentives, benefits, positions, career opportunities, organizational structure, size, and work location (Cable & Graham, 2000; Lievens et al., 2001). For non-profit
organizations, the job/organizational characteristics are limited as there
are neither monetary compensations nor career advancement opportunities for the volunteers. Consequently, NPOs clearly have disadvantages
in regards to attracting volunteers compared to profit companies.
However, this does not necessarily mean that nonprofits do not have any
instrumental aspect to offer to the volunteering candidates. As previously
explained, recognition rewards can play an important role as instrumental
attributes that a nonprofit organization can offer for volunteers in the
early stage of recruitment.

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

173

Despite many studies that have provided evidence regarding the effect
of recognition reward on volunteer satisfaction and continuity (e.g., Fisher
& Ackerman, 1998; Jung & Nam, 2008; Lee & Jung, 2006), there is
a dearth of research investigating the effect of recognition reward to the
attractiveness of the organization during the recruiting process. Therefore,
part of this study is conducted to examine the relationship between
recognition reward as the instrumental aspect of the brand image and
the intent to volunteer. For practicality consideration, recognition reward
in this study is operationalized as the tangible reward in the form of the
certificate of appreciation offered in the recruitment advertisement.
Considering that recognition reward positively influence volunteer satisfaction and continuity of volunteer activities (Fisher & Ackerman, 1998;
Jung, 2011), we derive the following hypothesis:
H1: There is a significant difference on the intent to volunteer between
potential applicants who are offered a recognition reward and who are not
offered any recognition reward.
As the symbolic attribute of organizational brand image, brand personality
holds an important role in influencing consumers’ psychological feelings toward
the organization, including the applicant’s intention to apply and decision
during recruitment (Aaker et al., 2004; Cable & Turban, 2001; Lemmink et al.,
2003; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003). Aaker (1997) developed a framework of
brand personality comprises of five dimensions (excitement, competence, sincerity, ruggedness, sophistication), with each dimension influences brand attractiveness differently. However, most of the studies in regards to the relationship
between brand personality and attractiveness in nonprofit settings are rarely
explained. Therefore, this study also investigates the following hypothesis:
H2: There are significant differences on the intent to volunteer among potential
applicants exposed to each of the five brand personality dimensions compared
to potential applicants who are not exposed to any brand personalities.
Research about brand personality found that each dimension in Aaker’s BPI
may have a different impact on potential applicants. Lievens and Highhouse
(2003) found that “innovation” (equivalent to “excitement”) and “competence”
plays more important role in attracting applicants. Further, they explained that
pursuing a job in an organization that is considered to be innovative or competent enables them to express parts of their self-concept and personality that are
held in high regards by others. A study by Zentes, Morschett, and SchrammKlein (2008) confirmed that “competence,” “sincerity,” and “excitement” were
three most influential traits positively affecting consumer’s loyalty, and among
them “sincerity” has the strongest influence.

174

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Another study on brand personality was conducted by Rampl and
Kenning (2014), which provided empirical support for a significant correlation between several brand personality traits and employer brand affect and
trust. The study showed that “sincerity” has a significant effect on both
employer brand trust and affect, due to an effect of feeling secure when
dealing with a sincere employer organization. The study also found that
Excitement and ruggedness both had a greater effect on brand affect, since
they may be particularly useful for eliciting emotions associated with
a specific employer brand. However, the effect of ruggedness was surprisingly
negative, indicating lower levels of positive brand affect with increased
ruggedness perceptions. This result may be specific for employer brands,
because ruggedness may indicate an organization with much competition
and tough consequences for an employee’s everyday work life, resulting in
less positive affect. On the other hand, the study found that “sophistication”
had a significant effect on brand affect, but no significant effect on brand
trust. In contrary to Lievens and Highhouse’s (2003) findings, Rampl and
Kenning (2014) found that the brand personality trait of competence was not
a significant predictor of either brand affect or brand trust. Potentially, the
effect of competence is specific to the industry and functions investigated,
which was a consultancy. The weak influence may be due to the fact that
consultancies are commonly characterized by high proficiency (Fink &
Knoblach, 2011). In nonprofit settings, competence dimension may not be
significant due to the nature of the job that usually does not require specific
competencies. From these findings, the following hypothesis is proposed:
H3: The organization brand personalities of “sincerity” and “excitement” have
stronger effects on the applicant’s’ intent to volunteer than those of “competence”, “sophistication”, and “ruggedness”.
Since both instrumental and symbolic attributes influence the creation of
the organizational brand image, it is possible that there is an interaction
effect between the recognition reward as the instrumental function and brand
personality as the symbolic function in predicting the intent to volunteer of
the potential applicants. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H4: There is an interaction effect between brand personality and recognition
reward on the intent to volunteer.
Method
The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of nonprofit organizations’
brand image, which constitutes brand personality as the symbolic function
and recognition reward as the instrumental function, on college students’

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

175

intent to volunteer. This research is divided into two parts. Study 1 was
conducted using survey technique with a purpose to develop the instrument
that will be used for the experiment. Study 2 is the main experimental study
that was conducted to test the four hypotheses. The independent variables
are recognition reward and brand personality. The dependent variable is the
intention to volunteer. The methods of this study including research design,
instruments, participants, procedures, and the statistical analysis are
described below.

Participants

The participants in both parts of the study were selected using a snowball
availability sampling approach using social media such as Facebook, online
newsletters, and email requests from student populations in The United
States. In all, 250 college students participated, with 117 participated in
study 1 and 133 participated in study 2.

Design and instruments

An explanatory quantitative design with surveys and experimental techniques
were used in this research. More details on the instruments are described
below.
Demographics
The participants were asked to fill in their gender, age, and year in school
(freshman, sophomore, junior, senior, or graduate) to describe the demographic characteristics.
Brand personality
This construct serves as the symbolic attribute and the first independent
variable (IV). Aaker’s (1997) brand personality inventory (BPI) was used in
study 1 to measure brand personality dimensions representativeness of each
self-developed brand. The original inventory consists of 42 items rated on
a 7-point Likert scale concerning the ability to describe a brand’s characteristics. High levels of reliability were found in every dimensions: sincerity = .93,
excitement = .95, competence = .93, sophistication = .91, and ruggedness = .90.
In the attempt to increase participation rate, we used the shortened version
with 15 items that has been proven reliable (Orth & Malkewitz, 2008). In study
2, the five brands developed in study 1 were used to represent the five brand
personality dimensions.

176

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Recognition reward
This variable serves as the instrumental attribute and the second IV. Each
group received both the advertisement that offers no reward and another
advertisement that offers a recognition reward. The recognition reward was
offered in the form of appreciation certificate.
Intention to volunteer
The applicant’s intention to volunteer was measured with a one-item survey
rated on a 7-point Likert scale. The item shows after each recruitment
advertisement of the NPOs was presented. Volunteer intention is the dependent variable (DV) of the study.
Procedures
Study 1: development of the brand personality instrument
Before administering the main study, a study to assess the representativeness
of the brand personalities on the instrument needed to be conducted. First,
researchers developed five NPO brands and slogans to represent each dimension of brand personality from Aaker’s framework (1997). The brands were
developed from existing brands that are perceived as rugged, exciting, sincere, sophisticated, and competent. Past research on color and type font
(Labrecque & Milne, 2012; Ridgway, 2011; Henderson et al., 2004;
Grohmann et al., 2012) were used as the criteria to choose the visual
representatives of the brands associated with each personality. Each brand
then modified partially to prevent participants associating the brands with
existing organizations.
Then, each participant received an email with the link to an online survey
platform and was randomly assigned into one of the five groups. In each
group, participants were shown one brand, and then they were asked to rate
how strong that brand describes the traits chosen from Aaker’s Brand
Personality Inventory.
Study 2: hypotheses testing
This study is the main part of the research, in which the four hypotheses
were tested. For this part of the study, the participants were assigned into six
groups randomly using excel software. Their names were arranged in a single
column in a systematic order and then we created a second column of
random numbers generated by the RAND() function and sort them by
those random numbers. Once the randomizations were done, we then sent
each of them an email with a link to the surveys in an online survey platform.
The first five groups were exposed to both the symbolic and instrumental
attribute of the brand image, whereas the one control group was not exposed
to the full brand image.

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

177

Group A, B, C, D, and E were exposed to recruitment advertisements with
one different organizational brand for each group, while group F was
exposed to recruitment advertisements without any organizational brand.
All six groups were given two advertisements with one advertisement offers
a certificate as the recognition reward, and one does not offer a certificate.
After the advertisement of each organization, the participants in all groups
were asked to rate how much they want to volunteer for that organization.

Statistical analysis

For study 1, a one-way ANOVA was used to identify whether or not the
targeted traits have higher rates than the other traits. For study 2, a two-waymixed ANOVA and follow-up contrast test for the within-group factor were
utilized to analyze the data and test the hypotheses. T-tests were also conducted to check the balance of the covariates (age, gender, and level of study)
between the control group and the treatment groups.
Hypothesis 1 examines the statistical difference in the intent to volunteer
between potential applicants who were offered recognition reward and
potential applicants who were not offered recognition reward. To test this
hypothesis, a repeated measure or within-group comparison using t-test was
conducted with recognition reward as the IV and intent to volunteer as DV.
Hypothesis 2 proposed statistical differences in the intent to volunteer
among potential applicants exposed to the five brand personality dimensions.
A between-group ANOVA was conducted to test this hypothesis with brand
personality as the IV and intent to volunteer as DV.
Hypothesis 3 proposed that sincerity and excitement have stronger
effects on the applicant’s’ intent to volunteer than competence, sophistication, and ruggedness. To test this hypothesis, the follow-up contrast tests
were utilized.
Hypothesis 4 examines the interaction effects between brand personalities
and recognition reward on the intent to volunteer. The interaction effect was
analyzed using the ANOVA results. The estimated marginal means were also
used to determine the nature of the interaction.

Results
This chapter includes the description of the sample and the demographic
profile, the ANOVA results for study 1 and representativeness of the brands
used on the instrument, as well as the ANOVA results for study 2 that tested
the four hypotheses.

178

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Sample characteristics
Study 1
For the first part of the study, a total of 117 participants were recruited.
Participants consisted of 63 (53.8%) females and 52 (44.4%) males.
Two percent of the participants preferred not to disclose their gender. The
age of the participants ranged from 18 to 44 years old, with 39.3% of them
were between the ages of 18–24, 53.8% of them were 25–34 years old, and
6.8% of them were 35–44 years old.
Study 2
A total of 133 college students participated in the second part of the
study. Among these, 43.6% were males, 55.6% were females, and .8% did
not disclose their gender. Consistent with the previous part of the study,
the age of the participants ranged from 18 to 44 years old. More specifically, 46.6% were 18–24 years old, 42.9% were 25–34 years old, and
10.5% were 35–44 years old. There was no significant difference between
the control group and the treatment groups in terms of age and gender.
The table showing means differences and the balance tests are shown in
table 3.1.

Results of study 1

A one-way ANOVA was conducted to test the representativeness of the
brands used on the brand personality instrument. Each brand was analyzed
using a repeated-measure ANOVA, and the results showed significant differences between most of the targeted traits and the other traits.
The first brand was aimed to represent competence. The result showed
a significant difference between the traits from competence facet (intelligent,
competent) and the other traits (F(4, 150) = 5.814, p = .000, r = .39). Post hoc
tests revealed that the competence traits are rated significantly higher than all
of the other traits. The results indicating this can be found in Table 3.2, Table
3.3, and Figure 3.1.
The second brand was targeted to represent sincerity. The results showed
a significant difference between the traits from sincerity facet (genuine,
sincere) and most of the other traits (F(4, 95) = 7.262, p = .000, r = .55).
Post hoc tests revealed that the sincerity traits are rated higher than all of the
other traits, and significantly higher than ruggedness. The results indicating
this can be found in Table 3.4, Table 3.5, and Figure 3.1.
The third brand was aimed to represent excitement. The result showed
a significant difference between the traits from excitement facet (exciting,
spirited) and most of the other traits (F(4, 110) = 6.397, p = .000, r = .48).
Post hoc tests revealed that the excitement traits are rated higher than

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

179

ruggedness, and significantly higher than all of the other three. The results
indicating this can be found in Table 3.6, Table 3.7, and Figure 3.1.
The fourth brand was developed to represent ruggedness. The result
showed a significant difference between the traits from ruggedness facet
(masculine, rugged) and most of the other traits (F(4, 95) = 4.745, p =
.002, r = 0.45). Post hoc tests revealed that the ruggedness traits are rated
higher than competence and excitement, and significantly higher than sincerity and sophistication. The results indicating this can be found in Table
3.8, Table 3.9, and Figure 3.1.
The fifth brand was targeted to represent sophistication. The result showed
a significant difference between the traits from sophistication facet (charming, sophisticated) and most of the other traits (F(4, 110) = 9.372, p = .000,
r = .58). Post hoc tests revealed that the sophistication traits are rated higher
than sincerity and excitement, and significantly higher than competence and
ruggedness. The results indicating this can be found in Table 3.10, Table 3.11,
and Figure 3.1.
Based on these results, all the targeted traits are rated higher than the other
traits. Although not all the differences are significant, the statistical differences were observable. Moreover, the effect sizes of all the differences were
relatively large (>.37), which means that the effect of the brands largely
contributed to the traits perceived. According to Cohen’s (1988) guidelines,
an effect size is considered small at .1, medium at .24, and large at .37.
Therefore, we concluded that all the brands were representative and ready to
be used for the main study.
Results of study 2

The second part of the study was conducted to test the four hypotheses
proposed. A two-way-mixed ANOVA and follow-up contrast test for the
within-group factor were utilized to analyze the data.
Hypothesis 1 posited that there is a significant difference in the intent to
volunteer between potential applicants who are offered a recognition reward
and who are not offered any recognition reward. The test of within-subject
showed a significant difference between the two groups (F(1, 254) = 10.04,
p = .002), which supported the hypothesis. The descriptive statistics are
depicted in Table 3.12.
The ANOVA also provided support for hypothesis 2 (F(5, 254) = 9.09, p =
.000), which proposed that there are significant differences on the intent to
volunteer among potential applicants exposed to each of the five brand
personality dimensions compared to potential applicants who are not
exposed to any brand personalities. Compared to the control group, all the
groups with visual representatives of the brand scored significantly higher on
the intent to volunteer. These results are presented in Table 3.13 and 3.14.

180

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Hypothesis 3 proposed that sincerity and excitement have stronger effects
on the applicant’s’ intent to volunteer than competence, sophistication, and
ruggedness. The survey showed that the intention to volunteer score for the
sincerity brand was the highest compared to the other brands. However,
none of the differences were significant. Similarly, the excitement brand was
not significantly different than the others. These results did not fully support
hypothesis 3. The results also showed no interaction effect between recognition rewards and brand personality, which rejected hypothesis 4. These
results are presented in Figure 3.2.
Discussion
This chapter discusses the major findings in regards to the theories and past
research. The implications and contributions of the findings are also described
in this chapter, as well as the limitations and suggestions for future research.
Discussion of findings

The findings of this study supported hypothesis 1 and 2. These results showed
that both instrumental and symbolic aspects of the organization that were
presented in the recruitment advertisements influenced the intention to volunteer on college students. More specifically, hypothesis 1 supported the importance of recognition reward as the instrumental attribute, while hypothesis 2
supported the importance of brand personality as the symbolic attribute.
These results were consistent with previous studies that showed the influence
of brand image on the potential applicants’ intention to apply in profit-oriented
companies (e.g., Aaker et al., 2004; Cable & Graham, 2000; Lievens et al., 2001;
Lievens & Highhouse, 2003). Therefore, this study provides empirical evidence
that the roles of brand image in recruitment process can be extended to nonprofit settings. It can be suggested that brand image for a non-profit organization is important in the volunteer recruitment process, as it is important in
employee recruitment for profit-oriented organizations.
The support for hypothesis 1 was evidence that recognition reward influences college students’ intention to volunteer. It has been found in previous
studies that additional benefits from volunteer activities such as recognition
and appreciation might influence the continuity of volunteer activities
(Fisher & Ackerman, 1998) and improve volunteers’ satisfaction (Jung,
2011; Jung & Nam, 2008). The results of this study extend the impact of
recognition rewards. It can be seen from this study that not only influencing
continuity and volunteer satisfaction, recognition rewards was also found to
be contributing to attracting volunteers.
Further, hypothesis 2 was supported in this study. It expands to nonprofits the
notion that brand personality can be a predictor to the applicants’ psychological

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

181

feelings that can ultimately influence general applicants attraction and intention
to apply for the job (Aaker et al., 2004; Lievens & Highhouse, 2003; Slaughter
et al., 2004). The results showed that applicants preferred to volunteer for
organizations that showed at least the idea of their personalities through the
brand logo and slogans, compared to the organizations that did not show its
personality at all. This is also consistent with past research that showed companies with the strong brand image would be preferred over those with weak or
negative brand image (Cable & Turban, 2001).
However, the results of this study did not reveal any interaction between the
instrumental and symbolic function. This means that the recognition reward as
the instrumental attribute has the same effect no matter what the brand personality is. Vice versa, the existence of a brand personality impacts the intention to
volunteer whether or not the applicants are offered the recognition reward. In
other words, the impact of each attribute is independent of one another.
The surveys showed that the participants were more willing to volunteer for
organizations that presented the brand personalities through the brand logo and
slogans, compared to the organizations without any presented brand personalities. However, significant differences among the five types of brand personality
were not found. The results did show that the volunteer intentions were higher
for the organization with the brand personality of sincerity, which could partially
support hypothesis 3, but the differences in the other personalities were not
significant. This was not consistent with previous research that showed the
different effect of different brand personalities (e.g., Lievens & Highhouse,
2003; Rampl & Kenning, 2014; Zentes et al., 2008).
The results of these non-significant differences might occur because all the
different types of brand personality gave about the same impact to the participants, or it might also cause by the inadequate personalities of each brand
presented on the instrument. In this study, the brand personalities are perceived
only from the logos and slogans presented in the ads, while in reality, brand
personalities are not only perceived by them. Another possible cause of the nonsignificant results was the confounding variable that might have occurred during
the process of study 1. The brands that were used in this study were taken from
real-life brands. Some participants might be familiar with the actual companies
producing those brands. Thus, their intention to volunteer might also be caused
by their perception of the actual companies. More details on this issue are
discussed in the limitation section.
Theoretical and practical implications
Theoretical implication
Most of the researchers on the organizational brand image have focused on
its influence on potential applicants for jobs in profit-oriented organizations.
The findings of this study contribute to expanding the body of knowledge

182

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

regarding brand image and intention to apply for volunteering positions in
non-profit settings. This study used the instrumental-symbolic framework to
explain the brand image, which enriches the results of the study. According
to this framework, instrumental and symbolic attributes contribute to form
the perception of the brand image, and the findings of this study showed that
both of the attributes influence the intent to volunteer. This supports the
notion that brand image is an important variable that influences the outcome
of a recruitment process.
The results of study 1 contribute to the research that relates to color, font,
and slogans of a brand and the relations to the perceived brand personalities.
Following the findings from past research, the colors of the logos presented
in this study were blue for competence, green for sincerity, red for excitement, brown for ruggedness, and black for sophistication. The font types
used were high on weight and harmony and low on elaborate for competence; high on natural, harmony, and flourish for sincerity; high on elaborate,
natural, and flourish for excitement; high on natural and flourish and low on
weight for sophistication; and high on weight and flourish for ruggedness. All
the slogans presented to the participants included at least one synonym word
from each brand personality facet. Since not all the results were significant,
a conclusion that different colors, font types, and slogans presented on the
recruitment advertisements influenced the ratings on traits associated with
the organizations could not be made. However, some of the results showed
significant differences. For example, the traits in competence facet were rated
significantly higher than the other traits when the participants were presented a brand with the color blue and a certain font type that was low on
design factor elaborate and high on design factor weight and harmony. These
results show that the participants perceived different types of personality only
from the logo and slogans, supporting the assumption that people can make
an assessment of personality even if they have had limited exposure to the
organization (Lievens & Highhouse, 2003; Slaughter et al., 2004).
Nevertheless, further research with bigger sample size is recommended to
validate this assumption for all types of brand personalities.
Practical implication
The results of this study provide empirical support for the importance of
brand image, including recognition reward and brand personalities, in the
recruitment process for volunteering positions in non-profit organizations.
These findings suggest that non-profit practitioners should consider all the
instrumental and symbolic factors of the organization’s brand image when
advertising their volunteering opportunities.
Since NPOs have limited instrumental benefits such as pay and career
advancement, a simple certificate of appreciation or other forms of recognition
rewards offered in the recruitment ads might be helpful to attract more people.

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

183

Providing recognition rewards do not take a high budget, and it shows potential
applicants that the organization cares and appreciates them for their time and
efforts. This could be an efficient way that non-profit practitioners can do to
increase their volunteers without sacrificing a high cost.
This study also suggests that non-profit practitioners should take into
account the brand personality of their organization and show it to the
potential applicants at least visually through the brand logo and verbally
through the slogan. As explained in the past research, the presentation of the
brand in the organization’s promotional activities can shape the volunteer
candidates’ attitudes toward the organization and influence their actions,
including their intention to apply for volunteering activities (Bendapudi
et al., 1996). The recruitment advertisement can be one of the media that
practitioners can use to present their brand personalities, but in reality, they
can also use other ways to show the organizations’ brand personalities such
as through the people (CEO, endorsers), advertising styles, symbols, or other
product-related attributes.
Limitations and future research

This study has several limitations. First, the study used visual cues based
on color and type font to represent brand personalities. As explained
earlier, brand personalities can be shaped not only from the visual cues
on the recruitment ads, but also directly through the personality of the
people associated with the organization and indirectly through the brand
name, symbols, logo, advertising style, distribution channel, and other
product-related attributes (Aaker, 1997; Plummer, 1985; Batra et al.,
1993). Although there are empirical supports that color and font type
influence people’s perception of brand personalities (e.g., Labrecque &
Milne, 2012; Grohmann et al., 2012), the effect might not be powerful.
The non-significant differences on the perceived traits were consistent
with this notion. As discussed in the discussion section, this might
influence the observed differences of the intent to volunteer among
different brand personalities. The non-significant differences observed
in the results might be caused by the inadequate personalities of each
brand that only came from the logos and slogans.
Moreover, it is possible that a confounding effect distorted the results of
the study. As explained in the discussion section, some of the brands might
look too similar to the original brands, and the participants might be
influenced by their perception of the actual organizations. For example,
brand 3 was derived from a soft drink product. The participants might not
be willing to volunteer not because of the brand personality perceived from
the logo and slogans presented in the study, but because of the image of the
soft drink company that they already had. This might explain why the intent

184

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

to volunteer for brands with competence and excitement were rated lower
than the other brand personalities. It is possible that they were rated lower
because of the prior perception about the original organizations. Therefore,
future studies displaying stronger brand personalities involving other factors
would be helpful to get more comprehensive results on the effect of each type
of brand personality on volunteering intention.
Second, the results of this study might not be generalizable for populations
across cultures, since all participants are college students in the USA. As
pointed out by Aaker (1997) herself, the concept of brand personality may
not remain robust in different cultures because of the antecedents.
Additionally, the effect of color as one of the antecedents of the brand
personalities may be different from culture to culture. Future research is
needed to examine the extent to which the effect of color and type font on
brand personalities and the effect of brand personalities on the volunteering
intentions are stable across cultures.
Third, this study used Aaker’s brand personality framework as the symbolic attribute. However, Venable, Rose, Bush, and Gilbert (2005) have
developed a framework of brand personality for nonprofits, which has several
differences with Aaker’s that were developed using profit-oriented companies. The nonprofit brand personality framework consists of four dimensions: integrity, ruggedness, sophistication, and nurturance. The empirical
supports of this framework are not as comprehensive as Aaker’s, especially
regarding visual attributes such as color and type font. However, for future
research, utilizing Venable et al.’s framework might be a better fit for the
nonprofit settings.
Related to the methodology, some limitations arose due to the small
sample size. Experimental technique was used in order to test the score
differences among control group and all other groups with manipulated
IVs, participants were divided into these groups, thus more sample should
be used to gain an adequate statistical power. The non-significant results in
this study might have occurred not because there was no effect, but simply
because of the sample size. Additionally, the participants were recruited using
a snowball availability sampling approach online. The students who were
voluntarily participated might not be representative of all students in
the USA.
Furthermore, the results of this study should be interpreted cautiously.
Readers must keep in mind that the dependent variable in this study was the
intent to volunteer, which was not a behavioral outcome. A potential volunteer might have an intention to volunteer, but in reality, does not actually
apply for the job. Other factors should be taken into consideration when
connecting the intent to volunteer and the behavior of volunteering itself.
As a result of conducting this research, it can be concluded that incorporating both component of brand image in recruiting volunteer is

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

185

advantageous for nonprofit organizations. Based on the results, recognition
reward as the instrumental attribute affects the intent to volunteer, thus can
be utilized to attract more volunteers. However, this study shows significant
results for several brand personalities yet non-significant results for several
others. Further research is necessary to validate the effect of brand personality to the intent to volunteer. More research is also needed to investigate the
interaction between the instrumental and symbolic attributes, as well as the
effect of these attributes to other variables related to volunteering behavior in
nonprofit organizations.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

ORCID
Dea Mariska Febriani
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2759-7348
Juhri Selamet
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4136-2484

References
Aaker, J. (1997). Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of Marketing Research, 34(3),
347–356. doi:10.2307/3151897
Aaker, J., Fournier, S., & Brasel, S. A. (2004). When good brands do bad. Journal of Consumer
Research, 31(1), 1–16. doi:10.1086/383419
Allen, D. G., Mahto, R. V., & Otondo, R. F. (2007). Web-based recruitment: Effects of
information, organizational brand, and attitudes toward a Web site on applicant
attraction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1696–1708. doi:10.1037/00219010.92.6.1696
Barber, A. E. (1998). Recruiting employees: Individual and organizational perspectives.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Bartram, D. (1982). The perception of semantic quality in type: Differences between designers
and non-designers. Information Design Journal, 3(1), 38–50. doi:10.1075/idj.3.1.04bar
Batra, R., Lehmann, D. R., & Singh, D. (1993). The brand personality component of brand
goodwill: Some antecedents and consequences. Pp. 67–82, In D. A. Aaker & A. Biel (Eds.),
Brand equity and advertising. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bendapudi, N., Singh, S. N., & Bendapudi, V. (1996). Enhancing helping behavior: An
integrative framework for promotion planning. Journal of Marketing, 60(3), 33–49.
doi:10.2307/1251840
Berthon, P., Ewing, M. J., & Hah, L. L. (2005). Captivating company: Dimensions of attractiveness in employer branding. International Journal of Advertising, 24(2), 151–172.
doi:10.1080/02650487.2005.11072912
Bls.gov. (2016). Volunteer rate down slightly for the year ending in September 2015 : The
economics daily: U.S. bureau of labor statistics. Retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/opub/
ted/2016/volunteer-rate-down-slightly-for-the-year-ending-in-september-2015.htm.

186

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Boudreaux, C. A., & Palmer, S. E. (2007). A charming little Cabernet: Effects of wine label
design on purchase intent and brand personality. International Journal of Wine Business
Research, 19(3), 170–186. doi:10.1108/17511060710817212
Bowen, P., Chatterton-Luchuk, L., Hiscott, R., Mackenzie, R., Sanderson, J., Shouldice, J.,
Stratton, B. (2001). A matter of design: job design theory and application to the voluntary
sector. Volunteer Canada. Retrieved June 2, 2009, From EBSCO database.
Brudney, J., & Nezhina, T. (2005). What is old is new again: Effectiveness with volunteer
programs in Kazakhstan. International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations,
16(3), 293–308. doi:10.1007/s11266-005-7726-y
Bussell, H., & Forbes, D. (2002). Understanding the volunteer market: The what, where, who
and why of volunteering. International Journal of Non-profit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 7(3), 244–257. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1479-103X
Cable, D. M., & Graham, M. E. (2000). The determinants of job seekers’ reputation perceptions. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 929–947. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1099-1379
Cable, D. M., & Turban, D. B. (2001). Establishing the dimensions, sources and value of job
seekers’ employee knowledge during recruitment. Research in Personnel and Human
Resources Management, 20, 115–163.
Chapman, D. S., Uggerslev, K. L., Carroll, S. A., Piasentin, K. A., & Jones, D. A. (2005).
Applicant attraction to organizations and job choice: A meta-analytic review of the
correlates of recruiting outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 928–944.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.5.928
Chiagouris, L. (2005). Non-profit brands come of age. Marketing Management, 14(5), 30–33.
Childers, T. L., & Jass, J. (2002). All dressed up with something to say: Effects of typeface
semantic associations on brand perceptions and consumer memory. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 12(2), 93–106. doi:10.1207/S15327663JCP1202_03
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). New York,
NY: Routledge Academic.
Connolly, A. J. (2014). The use and effectiveness of online social media in volunteer
organizations (3629306). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(1561559474). Retrieved from https://emporiastate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.
proquest.com/docview/1561559474?accountid=27180
Farrow, H., & Yuan, Y. (2011). Building stronger ties with alumni through Facebook to
increase volunteerism and charitable giving. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 16, 445–464. doi:10.1111/jcmc.2011.16.issue-3
Fink, D., & Knoblach, B. (2011). Management consulting. Bonn: Wissenschaftliche
Gesellschaft fu ¨r Management und Beratung.
Finkelstein, A. (2008). Volunteer satisfaction and volunteer action: A functional approach.
International Journal of Social Behavior & Personality, 36(1), 9–18. doi:10.2224/
sbp.2008.36.1.9
Fisher, R., & Ackerman, D. (1998). The effect of recognition and group need on volunteerism:
A social norm perspective. Journal of Consumer Research, 25, 262–275. doi:10.1086/209538
Frumkin, P. (2002). On being nonprofit. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gardner, B. B., & Levy, S. J. (1955). The product and the brand. Harvard Business Review, 33
(2), 33–39.
Grohmann, B., Giese, J. L., & Parkman, I. D. (2013). Using type font characteristics to
communicate brand personality of new brands. Journal of Brand Management, 20(5),
389–403. doi:10.1057/bm.2012.23
Hager, M., & Brudney, J. (2004). Volunteer management practices and retention of volunteers.
Washington, D.C., USA: The Urban Institute.

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

187

Henderson, P. W., Giese, J. L., & Cote, J. A. (2004). Impression management using typeface
design. Journal of Marketing, 68(4), 60–83. doi:10.1509/jmkg.68.4.60.42736
Highhouse, S., Thornbury, E. E., & Little, I. S. (2007). Social-identity functions of attraction to
organizations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 103, 134–146.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2006.01.001
Jung, J. (2011). The effects of recognition on volunteer activities in Korea: Does it really
matter? International Review of Public Administration, 16(2), 33. Retrieved from https://
emporiastate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/920572917?
accountid=27180
Jung, J., & Nam, K. (2008). Development of recognition program and research on the current
status. Seoul, South Korea: Ministration of Public Administration and Security.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand
equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22. doi:10.1177/002224299305700101
Kottasz, R. (2004). Differences in the donor behavior characteristics of young affluent males
and females: empirical evidence from Britain. International Journal of Voluntary and
Nonprofit Organizations, 15(2), 181–203. doi:10.1023/B:VOLU.0000033180.43496.09
Labrecque, L. I., & Milne, G. R. (2012). Exciting red and competent blue: The importance of
color in marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 40(5), 711–727.
doi:10.1007/s11747-010-0245-y
Lee, K., & Jung, J. (2006). A study on the Korean practice of volunteer recognition and
reward. Korean NPO Review, 5(1), 101–135.
Lemmink, J., Schuijf, A., & Streukens, S. (2003). The role of corporate image and company
employment image in explaining application intentions. Journal Of Economic Psychology,
24, 1–15. doi:10.1016/S0167-4870(02)00151-4
Lewis, C., & Walker, P. (1989). Typographic influence on reading. British Journal of
Psychology, 80(2), 241–257.
Lievens, F. (2007). Employer branding in the Belgian Army: The importance of instrumental
and symbolic beliefs for potential applicants, actual applicants, and military employees.
Human Resource Management, 46(1), 51–69. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1099-050X
Lievens, F., Decaesteker, C., Coetsier, P., & Geirnaert, J. (2001). Organizational attractiveness
for prospective applicants: A person-organization fir perspective. Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 50, 30–51. doi:10.1111/1464-0597.00047
Lievens, F., & Highhouse, S. (2003). The relation of instrumental and symbolic attributes to
a company’s attractiveness as an employer. Personnel Psychology, 56(1), 75–102. Retrieved
from https://emporiastate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/
220143369?accountid=27180
Lysakowski, L. (2002). The importance of volunteers in a capital campaign. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7(4), 325–333. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)
1479-103X
Malik, M. E., Naeem, B., & Munawar, M. (2012). Brand image: Past, present and future.
Journal of Basic and Applied Scientific Research, 2(12), 13069–13075.
Ntamere, C. (2012). Volunteer numerical strength, recruiting and managing volunteers as
a measure of nonprofit’s sustainability (3536443). Available from ABI/INFORM Collection;
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (1315240539). Retrieved from https://emporias
tate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/1315240539?accountid=
27180
Obiyan, S. A. (2006). A critical examination of the state versus non-governmental
Organizations (NGOs) in the policy sphere in the global South: Will the state die as the
NGOs thrive in Sub. African and Asian Studies, 4, 3.

188

D. M. FEBRIANI AND J. SELAMET

Orth, U. R., & Malkewitz, K. (2008). Holistic package design and consumer brand impressions. American Marketing Association, 72, 64–81. doi:10.1509/jmkg.72.3.64
Plummer, Joseph T. (1985), "Brand Personality: A strategic concept for Multinational
Advertising," in Marketing Educators' Conference. New York: Young & Rubicam, 1–31
Rampl, L. V., & Kenning, P. (2014). Employer brand trust and affect: Linking brand
personality to employer brand attractiveness. European Journal of Marketing, 48(1),
218–236. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/EJM-02-2012-0113
Ridgway, J. L. (2011). Brand personality: Consumer’s perceptions of color used in brand logos
(1521049). Retrieved from ABI/INFORM Collection; ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
Global. (1114502638) https://emporiastate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://search.proquest.
com/docview/1114502638?accountid=27180
Roach, E. G. (2013). Volunteer communication and media richness: Recruiting, communicating with, and retaining volunteers (1544194). Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (1436254003). Retrieved from https://emporiastate.idm.oclc.org/login?url=
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1436254003?accountid=27180
Schlack, A., & Albright, T. D. (2007). Remebering visual motion: neural correlates of
associative plasticity and motion recall in cortical area MT. Neuron, 53, 881–890.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.02.028
Schmitt, B. (2012). The consumer psychology of brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 22
(1), 7–17. doi:10.1016/j.jcps.2011.09.005
Scott, S. G., & Lane, V. R. (2000). A Stakeholder approach to organizational identity.
Academy of Management Review, 25, 43–62. doi:10.5465/amr.2000.2791602
Siguaw, J. A., Mattila, A., & Austin, J. R. (1999). The brand-personality scale. Cornell Hotel
and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 40, 48–55.
Slaughter, J. E., Zickar, M., Highhouse, S., Mohr, D. C., Steinbrenner, D., & O’Connor, J.
(2001). Personality trait inferences about organizations: Development of a measure and tests
of the congruence hypothesis. Paper presented at the 16thAnnual Conference of the Society
for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, San Diego, CA.
Slaughter, J. E., Zickar, M. J., Highhouse, S., & Mohr, D. C. (2004). Personality trait inferences
about organizations: Development of a measure and assessment of construct validity.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 85–103. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.89.1.85
Sue, V. (1996). New competencies for volunteer administration. Darien, IL, USA: Heritage Arts
Publishing.
Venable, B. T., Rose, G. M., Bush, V. D., & Gilbert, F. W. (2005). The role of brand
personality in Charitable giving. Journal of The Academy of Marketing Science, 33, 295–
312. doi:10.1177/0092070305276147
Weerawardena, J., NcDonald, R. E., & Mort, G. S. (2010). Sustainability of nonprofit
organizations: An empirical investigation. Journal of World Business, 45, 346–356.
doi:10.1016/j.jwb.2009.08.004
Wolf, T. (1999). Managing a nonprofit organization in the twenty-first century. New York,
NY: Fireside Rockefeller Center.
Zeltner, P. M. (1975). John Dewey’s aesthetic philosophy. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John
Benjamins.
Zentes, J., Morschett, D., & Schramm-Klein, H. (2008). Brand personality of retailers–an
analysis of its applicability and its effect on store loyalty. The International Review of Retail,
Distribution and Consumer Research, 18(2), 167–184. doi:10.1080/09593960701868282

