Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Public Economics
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s ev i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / j p u b e

Warm glow, information, and inefﬁcient charitable giving☆
C. Null ⁎
Department of Global Health, 1518 Clifton Road, Emory University, Atlanta GA 30322, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 31 May 2009
Received in revised form 15 June 2010
Accepted 29 June 2010
Available online 6 July 2010
Keywords:
Charitable giving
Experiment
Allocative efﬁciency
Warm glow
Risk aversion

a b s t r a c t
More than 200 donors participated in a framed ﬁeld experiment which consisted of a series of decisions
about how to divide a gift between a set of similar charities. Most subjects simultaneously gave to multiple
charities with similar missions even when the social beneﬁt of gifts to different charities were not equal, as
proxied by the matching rates applied to subjects' gifts. Taking each subject's preferences over the set of
charities as given, these choices resulted in substantial inefﬁciencies: subjects forfeited social surplus
(matching funds) equal to 25% of the value of their gifts. Suggestive evidence indicates that warm glow utility
derived from the act of making a gift, which can lead to a love of variety even among similar charities, and risk
aversion over the social value of charitable gifts are both important factors motivating donors who make socially
inefﬁcient gifts. Additionally, few subjects were willing to pay for information that could have enabled them to
increase the social beneﬁt of their gifts, although many of these subjects also forfeited potential personal gains in
an investment decision, casting some doubt on this interpretation. The possibility that the personal value of
information might not be equal to the social value might help explain why there are so few rigorous evaluations of
aid programs: such evaluations are costly to charities and might not be valued by donors.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Charitable giving in the U.S. is big business. In 2008, Americans are
estimated to have made donations totaling $307 billion, or 2% of GDP
(Giving USA Foundation, 2009). However, while the total sum of
money being donated is quite large, it is divided across myriad
charities in a very disaggregated way by many individual donors. Over
65% of households are estimated to have given to charity in 2008
(Giving USA Foundation, 2009) and a recent random sample of
Americans shows that most gifts are relatively small, with two-thirds
of the reported gifts less than $100 and a median gift of $50 (The
Center on Philanthropy at Indiana University, 2007). There are over
500,000 public charities in the U.S. registered with the IRS, and over
60% of these are small operations with less than $100,000 in annual
revenue (National Center for Charitable Statisics at The Urban
Institute, 2009). With so many donors and charities and no social
planner or market mechanism to solve coordination problems, the
potential for inefﬁcient allocations is a serious concern.
Nonetheless, we know relatively little about how donors choose
which charities to support. We can infer that any donor who
☆ This reseach is based upon work supported by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship. Any opinions, ﬁnding, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the
views of the National Science Foundation. I also gratefully acknowledge funding from
the Institute for Business & Economic Research (Dissertation Research Award) and the
Xlab (Graduate Student Mini-Grant) at the University of California, Berkeley.
⁎ Tel.: + 1 404 712 1924; fax: + 1 404 727 4590.
E-mail address: clair.null@emory.edu.
0047-2727/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.06.018

simultaneously gives to more than one charity does so because her
expected marginal utility from each charity is equal. In the next
section I argue that there are two aspects of the donation allocation
decision that could lead to equal marginal utilities, even between
charities that produce the same public good and thus might otherwise
be substitutes. First, a donor might be motivated by something other
than the output her gift to a charity produces, deriving private “warm
glow” utility directly from the act of making the gift (Andreoni, 1990).
Second, charitable contributions can be thought of as credence goods
since the donor never knows the true value of her gift in terms of what
the charity produced (Darby and Karni, 1973). As in the standard
investment decision framework, donors who are risk averse over the
social value of contributions might choose a portfolio of charitable
giving that has a lower expected productivity in exchange for a
reduction in the variance of charitable output.
In observational data it would be impossible to determine if a
donor gives to multiple charities because doing so maximizes her
warm glow utility or because she is diversifying her charitable
portfolio as a result of risk aversion, or because of some combination
of the two factors. Similarly, it would be difﬁcult to precisely quantify
charities' productivities. To overcome both of these identiﬁcation
challenges, I designed and conducted a framed ﬁeld experiment
which allows me to take each donor's preferences over a set of
charities as given, based on her initial allocations.1 Then, by changing
1
According to the taxonomy of experiments proposed by Harrison and List (2004) a
framed ﬁeld experiment imposes a set of rules but makes use of ﬁeld context and a
nonstandard subject pool.

456

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

the matching rates received by the charities, a proxy for the social
beneﬁt of donations, and inducing risk over whether or not the
matching funds would be received by the charity, I can identify
whether donors are solely motivated by the social beneﬁt of their gifts
or whether other considerations such as warm glow and risk aversion
lead to inefﬁcient allocations. I focus on forgone matching funds as a
quantiﬁable measure of inefﬁciency in the experiment: if a donor
initially gives to two charities when they have the same matching
rate, and then continues to give to both of them in a later scenario
even if one of them now receives a much higher matching rate than
the other, the magnitude of the inefﬁciency is deﬁned as the
difference in the matching rates times the size of the gift to the
charity with the lower rate (the forgone matching funds).
In this modiﬁed dictator game, subjects were ﬁrst asked to divide a
gift between a charity they currently supported and a set of three
charities which have similar mission statements (CARE, Mercy Corp,
and/or Oxfam America). In the second stage of the budgeting process,
when they were asked to allocate their gift between the three charities
which are arguably substitutes, 70% of the subjects gave money to more
than one charity. When one of the charities that a subject supported
became exogenously more productive (in the sense that it had a higher
matching rate), very few subjects perfectly substituted into that charity,
giving it their entire gift. Rather, the majority of subjects weakly
substituted, moving a larger share of their total giving into a highervalued charity but continuing to allocate at least some of their total
giving to the now lesser-valued charities. In the process, subjects who
did not perfectly substitute contributed to major inefﬁciencies in the
allocation of gifts across charities (taking initial preferences as given),
forfeiting matching funds equal to 25% of total un-matched giving. Weak
substitution could be consistent with either risk aversion or warm glow,
and although the experimental design did not conclusively separate
these two motivations, decisions that involve risk over matching rates
suggest that both likely play a role in donors' decisions.
An alternate test of how much subjects cared about the social
beneﬁt of their gifts indicates that relatively few subjects were willing
to pay for information about matching rates that could have enabled
them to increase the value of their gifts. When they were told the
distribution of matching rates but not how the rates would be
assigned to charities, only 40% of subjects were willing to give up a
small portion of their endowments in order to ﬁnd out which charity
would receive the highest rate; the rest preferred to allocate their gifts
without knowing what they would be worth to the charities. While
many of these subjects also chose not to purchase personally
proﬁtable information in an investment scenario, casting some
doubt on the results about the value of information to donors, this
should nonetheless be concerning for those who argue that rigorous
evaluations of aid projects are too rare (Duﬂo, 2004; Savedoff and
Levine, 2006 ). The possibility that donors might place so little value
on information about the relative social beneﬁts of different programs
could help explain why so few charities are willing to undertake costly
evaluations of their projects.
This paper bridges the broad research ﬁelds of charitable giving and
generosity in experimental dictator games, extending the existing
literature by exploring the importance of risk aversion and a more
general form of warm glow as factors that inﬂuence donors' decisions of
which charities to support.2 In that regard, this research complements
2
Camerer (2003) provides an overview of dictator games such as those used in
laboratory tests of altruism and social preferences by Andreoni and Miller (2002),
Charness and Rabin (2002), and Fisman et al. (2007). Eckel and Grossman (2003) ﬁnd
that subjects in dictator games are more generous to charities when contributions are
matched rather than subsidized, with important implications for income tax policy.
Karlan and List (2007) and Meier (2007) provide evidence from ﬁeld experiments that
donors are responsive to the “price” of their gifts in terms of matching rates. Other
ﬁeld experiments have compared various fundraising mechanisms such as lotteries,
challenge grants, and matching grants (Landry et al., 2006; List and Lucking-Reiley,
2002; Rondeau and List, 2008).

two recent publications that also used dictator games in framed ﬁeld
experiments with unconventional recipients (welfare beneﬁciaries and
diabetic smokers) in order to study dictators' sensitivity to how their
gifts would be spent, though neither of these papers tested as rigorously
for motivations as I do (Fong, 2007; Jacobsson et al., 2007). Several
authors have investigated substitution in charitable giving, but this
work has been more frequently concerned with crowding out of private
donations by public contributions (Andreoni, 1989; Ribar and Wilhelm,
2002; Andreoni and Payne, 2008) rather than with a single donor's
choice between gifts to multiple charities. Reinstein (2006) and (2007)
are the only other studies, aside from this one, to consider one
individual's substitution patterns between charities, but neither of these
papers is able to assess the magnitude of inefﬁciencies or the likely cause
of imperfect substitution as my experiment allows me to do. The
experimental nature of my data allows me to probe reasons why donors
do or do not substitute between charities, and the fact that all of the
experimental subjects are donors outside the laboratory strengthens the
relevance of their experimental choices.
In the next section, I explain a simple theoretical framework for
understanding how donors with different types of preferences will
allocate their gifts in the experiment, which is described in Section 3.
In Section 4, I present the empirical results. Section 5 discusses
limitations of the experimental design and alternative interpretations
of the results and Section 6 concludes.
2. Theoretical framework
The basic goal of this study is to characterize donors' preferences
over charities which could be considered substitutes in that they
produce the same thing. These charities use the donations they
receive in order to produce the same public good Y which is an
argument of the donor's utility function.3 Ultimately, a donor chooses
the bundle of consumption goods and charitable donations that
maximizes her utility, but here I abstract away from the question of
private consumption versus charity and focus on only the allocation of
donations across charities, as in the second step of a two-stage
budgeting process, in keeping with the experimental setup.
Speciﬁcally, let Y = f(gi + G− i) where gi denotes donor i's gift, and
gifts from all others are summed as the quantity, G− i. These gifts are
then converted into the public good according to the production
function f(⋅). Following Andreoni (1990) we can deﬁne a pure altruist
as a donor i whose utility function over private consumption ci and the
public good Y is u(ci, Y), whereas a purely warm glow donor's utility
function is u(ci, gi) such that the donor cares only about her gift to the
charity gi and not at all about the public good.4 Warm glow implies
that someone else's donation is not a perfect substitute for one's own
donation and helps explain the fact that private contributions to
public goods are not perfectly crowded out by public contributions, as
would be the case if all donors were purely altruistic.5
3
For example, CARE, Mercy Corps, and Oxfam America (the charities used in the
experiment) all have very similar mission statements and could be considered to
“produce” poverty alleviation, which is a public good for everyone who cares about the
welfare of the world's poor (i.e. whenever anyone makes a gift to one of these charities,
everyone who cares about the welfare of the poor is better off).
4
Duncan (2004) proposes an alternative model of “impact philanthropy” in which
donors derive utility from personally increasing the level of public good production,
drawing on both the altruistic and warm glow theories. As such, impact philanthropy
is based on beliefs about others’ gifts and the initial endowment of the public good,
neither of which are meaningfully different across the various experimental scenarios
used to classify preference types in this paper. For this reason, impact philanthropy
does not offer useful predictions for choices in the experiment.
5
In perhaps the most direct possible test, Crumpler and Grossman (2008) designed
an experiment in which subjects’ contributions to charities perfectly crowded out
contributions made by the experimenters. Nonetheless, over half of the experimental
subjects chose to contribute from their own experimental payouts, even though they
could not increase the net amount the charities received from the experiment.
Previously, in another laboratory study, Andreoni (1993) found that private
contributions to a public good were not perfectly crowded out by taxes.

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

For simplicity, assume that each dollar given to charity j by donor i
produces mj units of the public good. While it is likely that the
charities' production functions exhibit diminishing marginal returns
to donations globally, it is not unreasonable to assume that they are
approximately linear over the range of gifts that any one donor would
contribute. Clearly, a purely altruistic donor will make gifts only to the
charity(ies) with the highest value of m. In contrast, I assume that the
marginal warm glow utility of donations to charity j is decreasing.6 A
purely warm glow donor considers only the marginal warm glow
utility she would derive from giving to each of the n charities when
making her allocation decision, and is likely to make smaller gifts to
several charities because the marginal utility of a gift to any single
charity is decreasing in the size of the gift. More realistically, a donor
who is motivated by both altruism and warm glow will weakly
substitute toward a more productive charity but persist in giving to
multiple charities even if their marginal public good productivities are
not equal, because for such a donor the marginal warm glow utility
she derives from multiple gifts outweighs the inefﬁciencies in public
good production that arise from supporting less productive charities.
However, donors do not know the true value of m for any given
charity, either because they do not know the shape of the charity's
production function or because they have imperfect knowledge about
others' gifts and thus do not know where the charity is currently
located along its production function. As an alternative to modeling
charitable gifts as simply another consumption good, due to
uncertainty over what gifts will be worth in terms of public good
production the donor's decision is more accurately modeled as the
choice of a portfolio of risky assets in which donors maximize their
expected utility based on their priors about the distribution of m for
each charity. By deﬁnition, a donor who is risk averse over the
production of the public good will be willing to accept a lower
expected level of public good production as long as the variance of
public good production is also lower. This reduction in risk can be
achieved by giving to charities whose marginal social productivities
are not positively correlated.
In the experimental setting, it is possible to exogenously shift the
matching rates (productivities) and observe how donors respond. In
the notation of the framework above, donors who are risk neutral and
purely altruistic will perfectly substitute. Determining whether
donors who only weakly substitute do so because of warm glow or
risk aversion is not as straightforward. As described in the next
section, I use variation in the degree of risk over matching rates to
identify risk averse donors, and categorize the warm-glow donors as
those who do not perfectly substitute but also do not respond to
additional risk.
3. The experiment
The experiment was designed to 1) identify the degree to which
decisions about allocations between charities are motivated by a
desire to maximize production of the public good versus other factors
such as warm glow or risk aversion and 2) quantify the extent of
inefﬁciencies that resulted from weak substitution in an empirical
setting. The identiﬁcation strategy relies on observing each subject's
sequence of allocation decisions in which there was exogenous
variation in the level and degree of risk over matching rates applied to
gifts to the charities. To address concerns about external validity, I
recruited members of service clubs (Kiwanis, Lions, and Rotary) to
6
In the classic Andreoni deﬁnition, a donor experiences warm glow over her total
charitable donation, rather than over gifts to individual charities. To that extent, the
warm glow I consider in this paper is a subset of the broader deﬁnition. Since warm
glow over total donations would not affect the donor's choice of which charities to give
to, such a donor would be indistinguishable from a purely altruistic donor in terms of
substitution patterns between charities. Because there are no efﬁciency consequences
of such preferences, I do not devote further attention to the more general case of warm
glow over total contributions.

457

participate in the experiment, so that everyone in the subject pool was
known to be a donor in real life.7
Prior to the experiment subjects were informed that after the
experiment one decision for one subject at the session would be
randomly selected to be paid (anonymously) in real money according
to the chosen subject's decisions in the experiment. Provisions for
protecting the subjects' conﬁdentiality were explained, informed
consent was obtained, and then the subjects progressed through the
experiment (full text available in Online Appendix A). The author read
the instructions aloud but they were also printed on the response
forms so that subjects could proceed at their own pace. Subjects
recorded their decisions, their response forms were collected, and
then the author gave a guest lecture on the topic of the research at the
club meeting. There was a manila envelope containing a thank you
note for each participant identiﬁcation number, which subjects could
claim prior to departure; the subject whose decisions were randomly
selected for payment found the payments in this envelope. More
details on the logistics of the experiment are provided in Online
Appendix B.
In the ﬁrst stage of the budgeting process, subjects divided a $100
gift from the author's research grant between their service club and a
group of three charities (CARE, Mercy Corps, and Oxfam). Subjects
were told that gifts to the charities would be matched by the research
grant at a rate of 50¢ per dollar given and that they would be able to
specify which of the charities in particular they wanted to give the
money to in following decisions.8,9 Subjects were given the charities'
mission statements as listed on the independent charity evaluator
CharityNavigator.org and assured that all three of these secular charities
had received the highest ranking for being “ﬁscally responsible and
ﬁnancially healthy”.
After having set the total amount that they wanted to give to the
charities, subjects were asked to specify how they wanted to divide
the gift between the three charities in eight situations with varying
matching rates and degrees of risk. As promised, the matching rate
was always at least 50¢ and in some cases was more. The variation in
matching rates proxied for changes in the charities' productivities, in
the sense that a higher matching rate led to a larger gift for the charity
and thus increased production of the public good.10 Speciﬁcally, each
subject allocated her gift under the following scenarios:
1. Equal $1 matching rates for all three charities.
2. Matching rates of 50¢, $1, and $1.50 (order randomly assigned to
the three charities).

7
All three of these clubs are global organizations, each with its own international
foundation, so the choice of the charities as the alternative beneﬁciaries in the
experiment was broadly consistent with the subjects’ interests. While Rotary is
perhaps best known among the three for its campaign to eradicate polio, Kiwanis'
activities to prevent iodine deﬁciency disorders and the Lions’ commitment to eye
health have each had global impact.
8
The author explained that the availability of matching funds for gifts to the
charities did not reﬂect a judgment about the worthiness of the charities relative to the
host club, but rather was intended to compensate for the fact that clearly everyone
present was comfortable giving money to the club whereas they might not be familiar
with the charities. The matching funds were meant to make the decision between the
charities and the club non-trivial.
9
Matching rates in subsequent decisions were often much greater than 50¢, but I
informed subjects of only the minimum matching rate so as not to create uncertainty
in the original allocation decision between the club and the charities. The discrepancy
has no bearing on the analysis, since it is not the total gift to the three charities that is
the outcome of interest, but rather how that amount is divided between the charities
under the different scenarios.
10
No explicit connection was made between matching rates and productivity during
the experiment since that might have primed subjects to substitute more than the
benign references to matching rates. It is not essential that subjects understand the
implied relationship between matching rates and productivity, so long as they
understood the mathematical relationship between their gifts, the matching rates, and
the amounts of money the charity ultimately received, since the latter is my
experimental measure of social beneﬁt.

458

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

3. Matching rates of 50¢, $1.25, and $1 (paired with the random
assignment in the prior decision).
4. Equal matching rates as in decision 1 but with 20% risk that each
charity would not receive the matching funds (risks across
charities were independent, determined by 3 separate rolls of a
10-sided die).
5. Unequal matching rates as in decision 2 but with 20% risk that each
charity would not receive the matching funds.
6. Equal matching rates with risk as in decision 4 but with the option
to purchase delivery guarantees (i.e. accept a guaranteed but lower
matching rate).11
7. Unequal matching rates with risk as in decision 5 but with the
option to purchase delivery guarantees (i.e. accept a guaranteed
but lower matching rate).
8. Matching rates of $1.50 for two charities and $3 for one charity
(unspeciﬁed assignment of rates to charities); information about
which matching rate was assigned to each charity could be
purchased for $5 deducted from the total gift – alternately, the
subject could opt not to purchase the information and divide her
gift without knowing the assignment of matching rates to charities.

male. Ages ranged from 18 to 87 with a mean and median of 52 and
56 years, respectively.
4.1. Budget ﬁrst-stage and initial allocations
Subjects in the experiment were quite generous to the group of
charities. Panel A of Fig. 1 shows a histogram of gifts to the charities
from the ﬁrst stage of the budgeting process. Around half of the
subjects gave either $50 or $100 to the charities, with almost all of the
rest choosing gifts that were multiples of either $10 or $25.
Only 35 subjects (17% of the total sample) gave their entire gift to a
single charity when the matching rates were equal. As shown in Panel
B of Fig. 1, the majority of subjects (70% of the total sample) split their
gifts across all three of the charities.
4.2. Responses to changes in matching rates
4.2.1. Substitution
Subjects' responses to changes in matching rates are categorized in
Table 1. While perfect substitution was quite rare, weak substitution
was quite common. More detail on the extent of substitution is shown

Decision 1 deﬁnes each subject's set of “preferred charities” (those
that the subject gives to when matching rates are the same for all
three charities). Decisions 2 and 3 were designed to test whether
subjects who initially gave to multiple charities would treat their
preferred charities as perfect substitutes when the matching rates
changed.12 Among subjects who did not perfectly substitute, these
decisions allow me to check that preferences are consistent with
standard utility maximization theory as well as gauge the extent of
the inefﬁciencies that arise when subjects do not perfectly substitute.
Decisions 4–7 were designed to explore the degree to which
allocations were motivated by risk aversion. In decision 4, subjects
who are risk averse will spread their gifts equally between their
preferred charities. In decision 5, subjects who are sufﬁciently risk
averse will forfeit higher matching rates in order to allocate their gifts
more equally. In decisions 6 and 7, the delivery guarantee option
allows sufﬁciently risk averse subjects to revert to their preferred
allocations as in decisions 1 and 2. Finally, decision 8 tests whether
subjects care about the social beneﬁt of their gifts.
A follow-up questionnaire elicited basic demographic data (age
and sex), and asked subjects if they had ever “heard of/supported with
time or money/or had a personal connection to” the three charities
prior to the experiment.

4. Results
A total of 205 subjects participated in the study over the course of
16 sessions at Kiwanis, Lions, and Rotary club meetings in the East Bay
region of California (details provided in Online Appendix B).
Participating clubs ranged in size from fewer than ten to more than
thirty members, but were generally demographically similar with the
exception of one club which was a college campus afﬁliate of Rotary
and had much younger members than the other clubs. Two-thirds
of the 151 subjects who provided demographic information were
11
This is essentially an insurance policy, but I did not frame it that way because I was
concerned that there might be a social norm of purchasing insurance without
considering the ﬁnancial value as carefully.
12
Consistent with the theory described above, I assume that subjects experience
warm glow from the amount of their donation that they allocate to a charity and not
from the donation plus matching rates, in keeping with the assumption that matching
rates proxy for productivity and the deﬁnition of altruism as utility over the public
good. This distinction is perhaps less clear in the context of the experiment since the
public good is also measured in dollars, but by deﬁnition utility over one's donation
plus the attendant matching rates is altruism. Subjects were asked to write down the
amount of their donation they wanted to allocate to each charity, not the amount of
the donation plus matching funds.

Fig. 1. First stage budget decisions and initial allocations across charities. Notes:
Subjects' responses when asked to divide $100 between their club and a set of three
charities (CARE, Mercy Corps, and Oxfam America), under the conditions that 1) in the
subsequent decisions they would be able to choose which charity(ies) of the three in
particular to give the money to and 2) gifts to the charities would be matched at a rate
of 50¢ per dollar. The number of charities receiving gifts from a subject is calculated
based on responses to decision 1, in which all three charities had the same matching
rate. Eighteen of the 205 subjects skipped this section of the experiment.

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

459

Table 1
Substitution in response to changes in matching rates.
Summarizing results from decisions 2–3
(unequal matching rates) relative to
decision 1 (equal matching rates)
Perfectly substituted
Weakly substituted
Allocated less efﬁciently
Mixed evidence
Never changed allocation
Preference for 1 charity
Gave only to club
Missing data
Total number of subjects

14
62
23
6
44
23
12
21
205

Notes: In decision 2 matching rates were 50¢, $1, and $1.50 (order randomly assigned
to the three charities); in decision 3 matching rates were 50¢, $1.25, and $1 (order
paired with the random assignment in the prior decision). Subjects are categorized as
having perfectly substituted if in both decisions they moved their entire gift into the
one of their preferred charities that had the highest matching rate. Weak substitution
occurred when subjects moved some but not all of their gift into a preferred charity
with a higher matching rate. Subjects who gave more of their gift to a charity whose
matching rate was lower than that of other preferred charities are referred to as having
allocated less efﬁciently. Subjects who perfectly substituted once and allocated less
efﬁciently once are counted as having “mixed evidence” on substitution.

in Fig. 2 which compares the share of each subject's total gift given to a
particular charity before and after the matching rates change.13 In the
ﬁgure, perfect substitution appears as observations for which the
highest-valued preferred charity lies along the y = 1 line, i.e. the
highest-valued charity received 100% of the subject's gift when
matching rates differed between the three charities, whereas
observations between the 45∘ line and the y = 1 line depict weak
substitution, i.e. the highest-valued preferred charity's gift increased
when it was more highly valued relative to decision 1 but did not
reach 100% of the subject's gift. In contrast, observations for which the
highest-valued charity falls below the 45∘ line represent subjects who
actually reallocated some of their gifts into charities that were less
valuable when the matching rates were changed, treating the social
value the charities produced as complements.14 Finally, observations
along the 45∘ line correspond to cases in which the subject left the
charity's share of the total gift unchanged between decision 1 (equal
matching rates) and decisions 2 and 3 (unequal matching rates). As is
clear from Fig. 2, the majority of subjects weakly but not perfectly
substituted in response to changes in matching rates, with those
farther from the y = 1 line generating larger inefﬁciencies. In general,
the subjects' responses were quite consistent between decisions 2 and 3.
4.2.2. Constant allocations
Forty-four subjects (21% of the total sample) maintained the exact
same allocations even when matching rates changed. There are three
possible explanations for this behavior: ﬁrst, the subjects could have
been exerting minimal effort in the experiment and not seriously
considering the different scenarios; second, they could have been
confused by the experimental protocol; or third, they could have been
truly impervious to changes in the matching rates and degree of risk
associated with gifts to the three charities (an extreme form of warm

13
Data on charities with the highest matching rates is both necessary and sufﬁcient
to show perfect substitution. Weak substitution is sometimes only evident from data
on charities with the lowest matching rates since subjects might have only reallocated
between the two lesser-valued charities, leaving the share received by the charity with
the highest matching rate unchanged.
14
Alternatively, subjects who appear to be treating the charities as complements (by
giving less to the one with the higher matching rate) could also be exhibiting risk
aversion if they perceive that there is uncertainty over the process by which gifts and
matching funds are converted into the public good. Choices in the decisions with risk
over matching rates allow me to distinguish between subjects who view the charities
as complements and those who give less to charities with higher matching rates
because of risk aversion, as discussed in the next subsection.

Fig. 2. Substitution across charities in response to changes in matching rates. Notes:
Data on allocations from decisions 1 (x axis) and 2–3 (y axis) . Graph excludes
observations in which the subject never gave any of the gift to the charity in question or
always gave the entire gift to the charity in question. See Section 4.2.1 for a description
of the substitution patterns depicted in this ﬁgure.

glow). Unfortunately, it is impossible to distinguish between these
three hypotheses with the available data, although a robustness check
described in Section 4.6 suggests that confusion might be an
important factor. Demographic characteristics of these subjects also
provide few clues as to why they did not respond to changes in the
matching rates (details available from the author upon request).
Regardless of the factors that led these subjects to be unresponsive
to changes in matching rates, it is clear that such behavior is inefﬁcient
from the point of view of maximizing production of the public good
(in this case, matched contributions to the charities). Moreover, it
seems quite plausible that in real-world decisions about charitable
giving, donors might also be effort-minimizers, confused, or motivated entirely by warm glow. To be conservative, I exclude these 44
subjects when trying to determine why subjects did not perfectly
substitute so that my estimates are a lower bound on the degree of
warm glow and risk aversion (and the resulting aggregate inefﬁciencies) in this sample of donors.
4.2.3. Rational choices
Comparing subjects' allocations between the three budget sets,
only four subjects' choices violate the Weak Axiom of Revealed
Preference (WARP).15 All other subjects' choices were consistent with
WARP so there is no reason to believe the data were generated by a
process other than standard utility maximization. Thus, the weak
substitution observed in the experiment is a rational choice and can
be interpreted as contributing to true inefﬁciency.
4.2.4. Inefﬁciency
The relative inelasticity of gifts with respect to changes in
matching rates led to large sums of money being left on the table in
the form of unclaimed matching funds. Taking as given preferences
from the ﬁrst decision in which the matching rates were equal and
excluding subjects who did not respond to changes in matching rates,
imperfect substitution resulted in forfeited matching funds ranging
from $2.50 to $112.50 per subject, or 25% or more of their un-matched
gift to the charities for half of the subjects way changes in matching
15
This is similar to the rate of violations in Andreoni and Miller (2002) but much
lower than the rate of violations in Fisman et al. (2007), likely because the former
paper observed choices under 8-11 budget sets whereas the latter observed choices
under 50 different budget sets.

460

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

rates. Summing up the losses over both decisions, the total of over
$3600 represents almost 25% of the total un-matched gifts to charities.

Table 2
Reallocations in response to changes in risk among subjects who gave to multiple
charities.
Panel A

4.3. Risk aversion
What causes subjects to substitute weakly but not perfectly? One
possibility is that even though observable matching rates changed,
subjects were reluctant to invest too heavily in a single charity when
they have incomplete knowledge of its effectiveness. The experiment
did not attempt to measure subjects' priors over the distributions of
the three charities' relative productivities, but the exogenous risk that
matching funds would not be delivered to the charities makes it
possible to observe how they respond to additional risk. From this we
can infer whether or not their reluctance to substitute could be at least
partially driven by their original perceptions of the real-world risk
associated with the three charities. Speciﬁcally, in decision 4, when
the matching rates are equal, risk averse subjects will divide their gift
as evenly as possible between their set of preferred charities since the
risks associated with matching funds for each charity are independent. Subjects who do not adjust their allocations in response to the
additional risk are unlikely to have originally split their gifts because
of risk aversion.
Unfortunately, decision 4 was not very informative since so many
subjects had initially split their gifts equally as shown in Panel A of
Table 2.16 In decision 5, when matching rates differed between
charities, there was more scope for subjects to change their
allocations, since fewer subjects had split their gifts equally in the
absence of risk, but we cannot conclusively infer a lack of risk aversion
based on this decision, since even risk averse subjects might not
spread their gifts more equally when doing so requires the subject to
sacriﬁce a higher matching rate. Panel B of Table 2 summarizes the
results from decisions 4 and 5. While some subjects who did not
perfectly substitute between multiple charities in the ﬁrst three
decisions might have been motivated by risk aversion, there is also a
group of subjects who show no evidence of risk aversion (or even
exhibited risk loving preferences) and who therefore must have
chosen to support multiple charities because of warm glow.17
For the remaining subjects who did not perfectly substitute but for
whom decisions 4 and 5 were uninformative, the delivery guarantee
purchase decisions provide an indication of risk aversion regardless of
the initial allocation of gifts.18 Of course, ﬁnding that a subject chooses
not to purchase a delivery guarantee does not necessarily mean that
she is not risk averse, only that she is not sufﬁciently risk averse for
the purchase to be utility maximizing given the cost of the guarantee
and the degree of risk over matching funds. With that caveat in mind,
based on the decision to purchase delivery guarantees, I ﬁnd evidence
of risk aversion for an additional 11 subjects for whom decisions 4 and
5 were uninformative.

16
To be conservative, I assume that subjects perceived $10 as the smallest increment
in which gifts could be divided. For example, I would count a $100 gift that was
divided $30/$30/$40 between the three charities as being equally divided. While some
subjects did divide gifts in $5 increments and a few even divided in $1 increments, $10
increments were much more common in subjects’ allocations.
17
Among the 14 subjects who perfectly substituted in response to changes in
matching rates and therefore appeared to be pure altruists, the extra risk was enough
to induce seven (50%) of these subjects to spread their gifts more equally and sacriﬁce
higher matching rates.
18
In practice, subjects “purchased” the delivery guarantee by agreeing to accept a
lower matching rate that was a sure thing. The price of a guarantee against the 20% risk
of matching funds not being received was 12.5¢ for each 50¢ of matching funds, so that
only sufﬁciently risk averse subjects should want to purchase a guarantee. A table in
the experimental protocol clearly listed the price of the guarantee and the value of a $1
gift with the guarantee and without the guarantee, contingent upon the roll of a die.

Reallocations
across preferred
charities:

Decision 4 (risk) relative
to decision 1 (no risk)
(equal matching rates)

Decision 5 (risk) relative
to decision 2 (no risk)
(unequal matching rates)

Divided gift more equally
Divided gift less equally
No change in how gift was
divided
Gift initially divided equally
Missing data necessary for
comparison
Total number of subjects
(did not perfectly substitute)

9
9
14

19
12
36

54
4

19
4

91

91

Panel B
Summarizing results from decisions 4–5
(risk) relative to decisions 1–2 (no risk)
Evidence of risk aversion
Evidence of risk loving
Mixed evidence on risk preferences
No change in response to risk
Uninformative test
Missing data necessary
for comparison
Total number of subjects
(did not perfectly substitute)

18
12
7
11
38
5
91

Notes: Includes subjects from Table 1 who weakly substituted, allocated less efﬁciently,
or had mixed evidence. Subjects are counted as risk averse if they reallocated their gifts
across preferred charities more equally in at least one of the decisions and did not
consolidate gifts in either decision, risk loving is deﬁned as the reverse, and mixed
evidence on risk preferences refers to subjects who were risk averse in one decision and
risk loving in the other. Subjects categorized as “No change in response to risk” were
those who could have allocated more equally in decision 4 when matching rates were
equal but did not and also made no changes in their allocations in decision 5 when
matching rates were not equal; those who had no capacity to reallocate more equally in
decision 4 are counted as having an “Uninformative test” provided that they did not
change their allocations in decision 5.

4.4. Willingness to pay for information
The ﬁnal decision in the experiment investigated whether or not
subjects were willing to pay for information about the assignment of
matching rates to charities. This choice mimics the real-world tradeoff between spending money on programs and spending money on
evaluations in order to improve program efﬁciency.
Altruistic subjects whose donation was at least $20 and gave to all
three charities, or whose total gift is greater than $35 and gave to two
charities, should ﬁnd it proﬁtable to purchase the information. As
shown in Fig. 3, the majority of subjects met these criteria, but fewer
than half actually purchased the information.19
Unfortunately, many subjects have missing data on their allocations in decision 8 so it is difﬁcult to say conclusively whether those
who purchased the information would have made use of it.20 Among
those who purchased information and did record their allocation
decisions, many reallocated money into the charity with the highest
matching rate but again fewer than half of them substituted perfectly,
19
Of course, other subjects might also have been willing to purchase the information
despite having not previously given to certain charities since the matching rates in this
decision were much higher than those in prior decisions. Indeed, six subjects who
would not have been predicted to purchase the information, on the basis that they had
only given to a single charity in all prior decisions, nonetheless did so.
20
The prevalence of missing data in this decision is likely due to the logistics of how
the information purchase was handled in the experiment. Information about which
charity would receive the $3 matching rate was only provided after everyone had
made their purchase decisions. After this delay, many of the subjects who had
purchased information did not make the effort to record their allocations in response
to knowledge about the matching rates.

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

Fig. 3. Decisions to purchase information about pairings of matching rates to charities.
Notes: Subjects' responses when asked if they wanted to spend $5 of their gift in order
to ﬁnd out which of the three charities would have a $3 matching rate, knowing that the
other two would each receive matching rates of $1.50. “Efﬁcient to buy information
about charities” refers to subjects whose gift was at least $20 and gave to all three
charities at some point during the experiment or whose gift was at least $35 and gave to
two of the charities at some point during the experiment. See Section 4.4 for a
description of the personal investment robustness check.

consistent with behavior in earlier decisions, even though the
efﬁciency costs were much larger in this case. The bigger inefﬁciency
in this case comes from subjects who chose not to purchase
information. These subjects forfeited matching funds ranging from
30 to 150% of the value of their unmatched gifts, with the median
donor sacriﬁcing matching funds exactly equal to the value of her
unmatched gift, a truly staggering sum.
Did subjects simply not care about the potential to substitute into the
charity with the highest matching rate? Given the evidence from prior
decisions, this seems quite plausible and the data are broadly consistent
with this possibility. Referring back to substitution patterns in decisions
2 and 3, 70% of the subjects who had perfectly substituted purchased
information whereas only 40% of those who weakly substituted did so.
Another possible explanation for why so few subjects purchased the
information is that they simply did not understand the cost of not doing
so. In order to gauge whether or not subjects could decide “correctly” in
the absence of warm glow, a subset of subjects were asked to repeat
decision 8 for personal proﬁt, with the opportunity to keep for
themselves the money earned from this one decision round.21 Rather
than having the option to give to three charities with different matching
rates, subjects were asked to divide the amount of their donation
between three generic investment options labeled simply A, B, and C,
one of which had a $3 rate of return with the other two earning $1.50 per
dollar invested. Again, information regarding the assignment of rates of
return to investment options was available for purchase at a cost of $5
(deducted from the investment). This exercise indicates that indeed
some subjects may not have understood the consequences of their
decision not to purchase information since among those for whom it
would have been personally proﬁtable, roughly 40% opted not to
purchase information as shown by the middle line in Fig. 3.22 That said, a
third of those who inefﬁciently chose not purchase information
regarding charities' matching rates did purchase information in the
investment decision, indicating that they had the ability to assess

21

This question was added to the experiment after the ﬁrst 5 sessions had been held.
This is almost deﬁnitely an upper bound on the fraction of subjects who would
make such a poor ﬁnancial decision in real life. Some of these subjects probably did not
read the question carefully, since the experiment was almost over and the wording
closely resembled that of the prior question about charities. Another possibility is that
1
this behavior is more evidence of the heuristic.
22

n

461

whether or not the cost of the information was worthwhile in terms of
the ability to earn higher rates of return. This discrepancy is illustrated in
Fig. 3 as the vertical distance between the percent of subjects who
purchased information about the personal investment and those who
purchased information about the charities' matching rates.
Fig. 3 also suggests a concerning pattern in how subjects seem to
have approached the information decisions. We would expect the
percent of subjects who purchase information to be increasing in the
size of their gifts, since the cost of the information was ﬁxed but the
ﬁnancial beneﬁt of the information is greatest for subjects whose gifts
are larger; this is also true for the personal investment decision. The
fact that these curves are so ﬂat might be an indication that subjects
thought only about the ﬁxed cost of information and not how it
related to the higher payouts they could earn, either for the charities
or themselves.
I conclude that the results of the information purchase decision are
not necessarily meaningful for all subjects, since some might not have
been able to accurately judge the value of information in terms of the
potential to capture higher matching rates. Nonetheless, roughly onethird of subjects who were capable of assessing the value of
information inefﬁciently chose not to purchase, with major consequences in terms of forfeited matching funds. Since information
actually reduces risk in this situation, these inefﬁcient choices must
result from warm glow. Puzzlingly, there seems to be much higher
willingness to pay for a delivery guarantee that eliminates downside
risk over matching rates than there is for information that enables
subjects to lock in a higher matching rate when there is risk over
which charity will be most valuable. Loss aversion and framing effects
might help explain some of the difference, but this paradox warrants
further investigation in future work.

4.5. Classifying preference types
Unfortunately, the experimental design does not allow me to
conclusively determine the relative importance of warm glow versus
risk aversion as motivating factors for inefﬁcient giving. On one hand I
cannot identify warm glow separately from risk aversion and on the
other hand the experimental measures of risk aversion were
uninformative for many subjects who had no scope for reallocating
their gifts in response to exogenous risk. Nonetheless, by synthesizing
the data on substitution patterns and responses to risk it is clear that
both are likely relevant characteristics of the subjects' preferences, as
shown in Table 3. Bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals for the
proportion of subjects of each type (excluding those who maintained
constant allocations) indicate that warm glow and risk aversion are
roughly equally important in subjects' choices not to perfectly

Table 3
Classifying preference types.
No evidence of risk aversion
Pure altruist
Both altruist and
warm glow
Pure warm glow

Risk averse

Perfectly substitutes
n = 14 [7–21% of sample]
Does not perfectly substitute,
Does not perfectly substitute,
responds to risk
does not respond to risk
n = 42 [31–51% of sample]
n = 46 [35–55% of sample]
Maintains constant allocations throughout n = 44

Notes: “Perfectly substitutes” means that the subject gave all of her gift to the one of her
preferred charities with the highest matching rate. “Responds to risk” refers to subjects
who spread their gifts more equally among their preferred charities when exogenous risk
over matching funds was introduced or purchased a delivery guarantee if the initial test
was uninformative. Number of subjects in each cell synthesizes data in Tables 1 and 2.
Twenty-four subjects were missing data and 35 gave their entire gift either to their club or
a single one of the charities. Bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals for the proportion of
subjects of a given type are shown in brackets, excluding subjects who gave constant
allocations throughout.

462

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

Fig. 4. Results from experienced subjects. Notes: The top two panels correspond to Fig. 1 and depict subjects' responses when asked to divide $100 between oneself and a set of three
charities (CARE, Mercy Corps, and Oxfam America). See Figures 2 and 3 for details on the data and interpretations of the lower two panels.

substitute. In terms of both the dollar amounts and the percentages of
subjects' gifts that were forfeited in terms of unclaimed matching
funds, both motivations contributed equally to the aggregate
inefﬁciencies.

4.6. Results from experienced subjects
The subjects participating in the experiment were all experienced
donors, in contrast to most laboratory studies of altruism which rely on
experienced subjects, the majority of whom are undergraduate
economics and psychology students. One potential problem with the
novel subject pool, however, is that they were generally unfamiliar with
this sort of study. As a result they might not have fully understood that
their decisions could have real monetary consequences or might have
been confused about the details of the different decisions. As a
robustness check, in this section I present evidence from an additional
191 experienced subjects who participated in the experiment and were
unlikely to have been confused by the protocol.23 In general, the
experimental choices made by the two subject pools are remarkably
similar, despite major demographic differences.24

The only modiﬁcation to the experimental protocol described in
Section 3 and Online Appendix A was that the outside option for the
experienced subjects was to keep the gift for oneself, rather than keep
it for one's club.25 Unsurprisingly, experienced subjects showed less
generosity toward the charities relative to the experienced donors'
allocations, as evidenced by the differences between the upper left
panel of Fig. 4 and Panel A of Fig. 1. One difference between the two
subject pools' choices is that there was much more heterogeneity in
the size of the gifts that the experienced subjects gave to the charities
relative to the experienced donors, perhaps indicating that the
experienced subjects took a more sophisticated approach to solving
the allocation problem. Nonetheless, the experienced subjects were
just as likely as the experienced donors to divide their gifts across all
three charities in the baseline decision with equal matching rates as
shown in the upper right panel of Fig. 4.
The experienced subjects' responses to changes in matching rates
were also quite similar to those of the experienced donors, as shown
in the lower left panel of Fig. 4.26 Although some experienced subjects
did perfectly substitute into whichever of their preferred charities had
the highest matching rate, weak substitution was again much more
common. At the same time, experienced subjects were twice as likely
as among experienced donors to treat the charities as complements,

23

Professional subjects were recruited through the Xlab at U.C. Berkeley.
The average age among the experienced subjects was 21 and only 43% were male. I
did not collect data on race from the experienced donors, but based on my
observations at the club meetings, the vast majority were Caucasian, with only a
few African, Hispanic, or Asian Americans. Among the experienced subjects 70%
identiﬁed themselves as Asian American in their Xlab registration records.
24

25
In accordance with Xlab policies, each subject was paid a $10 participation fee for
the 30-minute experiment in addition to the randomly chosen decision for one subject
that was paid in real money.
26
Again, there were very few (6) subjects whose choices violated WARP.

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

moving a higher share of their gifts into charities that were less
valuable. Like the experienced donors, the experienced subjects'
substitution patterns led them to forfeit large sums of matching rates,
equal to roughly 30% of the value of un-matched gifts.
A slightly higher share of the experienced subjects who did not
perfectly substitute showed evidence of risk aversion based on
decisions 4 and 5. As with the experienced donors, this test was
uninformative for many experienced subjects, and several additional
subjects were identiﬁed as risk averse based on their decision to
purchase a delivery guarantee. Moreover, there is only weak evidence
that delivery guarantees promoted more efﬁcient allocations. Ultimately, combining results from all decision rounds involving risk over
matching rates in Table 4, around a third of the experienced subjects
who did not perfectly substitute are explained by warm glow, with
the remainder showing evidence of risk aversion.
Finally, the lower right panel of Fig. 4 shows that the experienced
subjects were no more willing to pay for information than their
experienced donor counterparts. Only half of the experienced subjects
who could have increased the social beneﬁt of their gifts chose to
purchase the information that would have allowed them to do so.
Furthermore, although a surprisingly high fraction (32%) of the
experienced subjects were not able to correctly assess the value of the
information even when they stood to personally proﬁt, half of
the experienced subjects who were capable of assessing the value of
the information nevertheless chose not to purchase information about
charities' matching rates, consistent with the prevalence of warm
glow.
In summary, experienced donors and experienced subjects made
remarkably similar choices throughout the experiment, mediating
concerns that the experienced donors might not have understood the
experimental protocol. At the same time, part of the explanation for
the consistency of the results between the two subject pools likely lies
in the fact that 75% of the experienced subjects said they had given
either time or money to at least one charity in the past year; in this
regard the difference between the two subject pools is not so much
that experienced subjects were less likely to also be experienced
donors, but that the experienced subjects' gifts were more likely to be
in terms of time rather than money.

5. Discussion
The results presented above are, of course, predicated on a number
of assumptions regarding the theoretical model and how it relates to
the experimental design. Likewise, certain aspects of subjects' choices
in the experiments and other logistical considerations challenge the
validity of the empirical results. In this section, I address the most
signiﬁcant of these concerns.

Table 4
Classifying preference types, experienced subjects.
No evidence of risk aversion
Pure altruist
Both altruist and
warm glow
Pure warm glow

Risk averse

Perfectly substitutes
n = 22 [9–21% of sample]
Does not perfectly substitute,
Does not perfectly substitute,
responds to risk
does not respond to risk
n = 84 [45–62% of sample]
n = 49 [25–39% of sample]
Maintains constant allocations throughout n = 14

Notes: “Perfectly substitutes” means that the subject gave all of her gift to the one of her
preferred charities with the highest matching rate. “Responds to risk” refers to subjects
who spread their gifts more equally among their preferred charities when exogenous
risk over matching funds was introduced or purchased a delivery guarantee if the initial
test was uninformative. One subject was missing data and 21 either kept their entire
gift or gave it to a single one of the charities. Bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence intervals for
the proportion of subjects of a given type are shown in brackets, excluding subjects who
gave constant allocations throughout.

463

5.1. Assumptions
5.1.1. Is the marginal utility of warm glow decreasing in the size of the
gift?
This is the fundamental assumption that drives the prediction that
donors motivated by warm glow will want to make smaller gifts to
more charities. When considering the validity of this assumption, it is
important to remember that warm glow is the utility derived from the
act of making the gift, not from what the gift produces. As a very crude
example, think of warm glow as being equivalent to the number of
thank-you letters a donor receives from the charities she supports – a
larger gift to any given charity does nothing to increase her utility,
whereas dividing her gift between two charities doubles it. A priori, I
am not aware of any evidence to indicate whether or not we would
expect larger gifts to be more satisfying independent of what they
produce (including reputational effects as a “product” of a gift).
However, given the preponderance of donors who make many yet
small gifts both in survey data and the experiment, the assumption
that this behavior is motivated at least in part from charity-speciﬁc
warm glow seems plausible, since it would lead to precisely such
behavior. Admittedly, the experimental results in this paper do not
prove that warm glow is the source of inefﬁcient allocations, but it
does provide a useful framework for understanding why donors
might make such choices. Regardless of the speciﬁc nature of donors'
preferences, this experiment has at least documented the extent of
the resulting inefﬁciencies and documented that access to information is not sufﬁcient to improve efﬁciency.
5.1.2. Are matching rates in the experiment a valid proxy for
productivity?
No explicit connection was made to suggest that subjects should
consider the matching rates to be a proxy for charities' productivities,
so it is possible that these results are a lower-bound, worst-case
estimate of the extent of inefﬁcient substitution. Perhaps if the
decisions had been framed as a choice between charities with
different productivities, rather than matching rates, subjects would
not have made such inefﬁcient choices. That said, the way in which
matching rates would increase their contributions to the charities was
clearly explained, and this is the relevant quantity in terms of donors'
allocation decisions. Fundamentally, it does not matter how subjects
interpreted the matching rates — the point is that they could have sent
more money to the charities by exploiting the matching rates and yet
they did not in many cases.
5.1.3. Is weak substitution inefﬁcient?
The analysis is based on a very speciﬁc deﬁnition of inefﬁciency,
namely that subjects did not maximize the total sums received by the
charities, taking each individual's preferences as given. While I
maintain that perfect substitution is the only socially optimal solution
under these conditions, there could certainly be cases in the real
world in which it would not be, for example if there is stochastic
variation in any element of the charity's production function and the
charity faces adjustment costs. Such situations could not plausibly
justify imperfect substitution in the experimental set-up, however.
5.2. Empirical results
5.2.1. Weak incentives
Did subjects in the experiment take their decisions seriously,
recognizing that they might have real monetary consequences? One
cause for concern is that not all chosen experienced donors actually
claimed the manila envelope with the donation checks that were
issued based on their decisions. In addition, the inclination to divide
gifts only in $10 increments could indicate lack of effort; this also
compromises the power of the test as there is much less variation in
the data. Finally, over 80% of the experienced donors who gave to

464

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

more than one charity divided their gift equally between whichever
1
charities they supported, consistent with use of the heuristic that
n
has been observed in other contexts, such as retirement fund portfolio
choice (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001).
The fact that such a large share of the experienced donors
maintained constant allocations throughout the experiment is likely
an indication that the incentives were, indeed, too weak. From an
experimental point of view, the most important difference between
the two subject pools is the fact that this behavior was much less
common among the experienced subjects (see the bottom row of
Tables 3 and 4), perhaps because they were more convinced that their
decisions could have real monetary consequences, even though the
odds of that happening were lower since the experiments with
experienced subjects were conducted in larger groups. This ﬁnding
suggests that some of the experienced donors who adopted this
behavior might have done so because of confusion or laziness,
strengthening the argument for excluding such subjects from the
analysis, although it introduces an important source of selection bias.
The fact that when those who maintained constant allocations are
excluded, choices were so consistent between the two subject pools
bolsters the credibility of the data from the experienced donors, since
the experienced subjects did appear to be better incentivized to take
the decisions seriously. Nonetheless, whether or not those subjects
who changed their allocations were truly optimizing is another
question. This is another way in which the experimental results might
overestimate the inefﬁciencies in real-world charitable giving.
5.2.2. Conﬁdentiality
Despite emphasizing provisions to protect subjects' conﬁdentiality
at the beginning of the experiment and immediately prior to
announcing which decisions would be paid, experienced donors
whose decisions were chosen for payout frequently identiﬁed
themselves at the conclusion of the experiment. This logistical
aberration could not have affected the results, however, since at the
time that subjects were making their choices, no one had yet
identiﬁed themselves nor did they realize there would be the
opportunity to do so, such that the experimental choices can be
considered anonymous (the experiment was not a repeated game).
5.2.3. Challenges with identifying risk aversion
As has already been noted, there was a very narrow margin for
detecting risk aversion since so many subjects had already divided
their gifts as equally as possible. In addition, there were a number of
cases in which choices were surprising (high numbers of subjects who
appeared to be risk loving), internally inconsistent (subjects who
exhibited evidence of both risk loving and risk aversion in decisions 4
and 5), or contradicted the theory (purchased delivery guarantees but
then actually divided their gifts less efﬁciently than in the initial
decisions without risk or subjects who did not purchase delivery
guarantees but still changed their allocations in decisions 6 and 7
relative to 4 and 5, despite the fact that without the guarantee those
two sets of decisions were identical). Some of these choices, which are
problematic for the analysis, likely resulted from presenting subjects
with too many different scenarios given the time constraints of the
experimental set-up. Finally, there is an interesting discrepancy
between the demand for delivery guarantees, which was quite high at
a purchase rate of 65%, versus the low willingness to pay for
information that could have allowed subjects to lock in a higher
matching rate. Loss aversion and simple marketing (use of the word
“guarantee”) could help to explain this seeming inconsistency, but the
issue warrants further research. Experiments that investigate risk
preferences over charitable giving, similar to Chakravarty et al.'s
(forthcoming) tests of risk preferences over gifts to other people,
could be a fruitful area for research given the importance of risk
aversion identiﬁed by the experiment described in this paper. In the
absence of more powerful tests, and better evidence that subjects

really understood the parameters of the decisions they were making,
the results on risk aversion in this paper must be viewed in the
context of the experiment's limitations.
6. Conclusions
In summary, warm glow and risk aversion both seem to be
important determinants of the inefﬁciencies that arise from donors'
choices about which charities to support. In the framed ﬁeld
experiment described in this paper, very few subjects perfectly
substituted to whichever of their preferred charities had the highest
social beneﬁt, as proxied by matching rates applied to gifts.
Speciﬁcally, when one of the charities they already supported became
exogenously more productive in the experiment, subjects continued
to give to lesser-valued charities, forfeiting social surplus (matching
funds) equal to 25% of the value of their gifts. If these choices are
indicative of how donors would respond to changes in the social
beneﬁt of their gifts in the real world, the results bode ill for efﬁciency
of resource allocation across charities.
The experiment also sheds light on one potential reason why there
are so few evaluations of aid projects in the real world. Just as half of
the subjects in the experiment were unwilling to pay for information
that could have increased the social beneﬁt of their gifts, evaluations
might be rare in part because they are costly to charities and largely
ignored by donors. Moreover, the fact that those who made larger
gifts were no more likely to purchase information suggests that
subjects focused on the ﬁxed cost of acquiring information rather than
the beneﬁts of knowing which programs are most effective.
Having established that warm glow and risk aversion inﬂuence
donors' decisions about their charitable giving, we can begin to design
and test policies that could help mitigate the inefﬁciencies that result
from these aspects of donors' preferences. Unfortunately, it will be
difﬁcult to create policies that can mitigate warm glow inefﬁciencies
across charities without also having unintended consequences for the
level of giving, since warm glow can affect both the size of the pie as
well as how it is divided. There is more hope for addressing
inefﬁciencies from risk aversion, however, since many subjects in
the experiment were willing to pay for an intervention that
eliminated experimental risk over matching rates. Although such
extreme guarantees are infeasible in the real world, information from
charity evaluators such as CharityNavigator.org, the Better Business
Bureau's Wise Giving Alliance, and the revised IRS form 990 (ﬁled by
tax-exempt organizations) could all be viewed as forms of “insurance”, even if there is no way to entirely avoid the uncertainty
surrounding the social beneﬁt of charitable donations.
This paper has taken the ﬁrst step of highlighting several ways in
which the classical model of a purely altruistic donor who contributes
to a single public good fails to predict donors' behavior in the real
world, when faced with multiple charities to support and uncertainty
over the social value of one's gift. Incorporating warm glow and risk
aversion into our understanding of how donors choose which
charities to support will make it possible to identify policies and
institutions that can promote efﬁcient resource allocation in this
sector of the economy.
Acknowledgments
I thank the Kiwanis, Lions, and Rotary clubs who hosted me as a
guest speaker and whose members participated in the experiment,
and the participants of the workshop on The Current State of
Philanthropy hosted by Middlebury College, the Berkeley Development Lunch, and the ARE Development workshop for their very
helpful comments. Brenda Naputi of the Xlab provided technical
assistance. This project would not have been possible without the
encouragement and constructive criticism of Shachar Kariv, Ethan Ligon,
Jill Luoto, Edward Miguel, Shanthi Nataraj, and Elisabeth Sadoulet.

C. Null / Journal of Public Economics 95 (2011) 455–465

This research is based upon work supported by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. Any opinions, ﬁndings,
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
National Science Foundation. I also gratefully acknowledge funding
from the Institute for Business & Economic Research (Dissertation
Research Award) and the Xlab (Graduate Student Mini-Grant) at the
University of California, Berkeley.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.06.018.
References
Andreoni, J., 1989. Giving with impure altruism: applications to charity and Ricardian
equivalence. Journal of Political Economy 97 (6), 1447–1458.
Andreoni, J., 1990. Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warmglow giving. The Economic Journal 100 (401), 464–477.
Andreoni, J., 1993. An experimental test of the public-goods crowding-out hypothesis.
The American Economic Review 83 (5), 1317–1327.
Andreoni, J., Miller, J., 2002. Giving according to garp: an experimental test of the
consistency of preferences for altruism. Econometrica 70 (2), 737–753.
Andreoni, J., Payne, A., 2008. Crowding out both sides of the philanthropy market:
Evidence from a panel of charities. Working Paper.
Benartzi, S., Thaler, R., 2001. Naive diversiﬁcation strategies in deﬁned contribution
saving plans. The American Economic Review 91 (1), 79–98.
Camerer, C., 2003. Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction.
Princeton University Press.
Chakravarty, S., Harrison, G., Haruvy, E., Rutström, E., forthcoming. Are you risk averse
over other people's money? Southern Economic Journal.
Charness, G., Rabin, M., 2002. Understanding social preferences with simple tests. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3), 817–869.
Crumpler, H., Grossman, P., 2008. An experimental test of warm glow giving. Journal of
Public Economics 92, 1011–1021.
Darby, M., Karni, E., 1973. Free competition and the optimal amount of fraud. Journal of
Law and Economics 16 (1), 67–88.
Duﬂo, E., 2004. Scaling up and evaluation. Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics 2004: Accelerating Development 1(30228).

465

Duncan, B., 2004. A theory of impact philanthropy. Journal of Public Economics 88,
2159–2180.
Eckel, C., Grossman, P., 2003. Rebate versus matching: does how we subsidize
charitable contributions matter? Journal of Public Economics 87, 681–701.
Fisman, R., Kariv, S., Markovits, D., 2007. Individual preferences for giving. The
American Economic Review 97 (5), 1858–1876.
Fong, C., 2007. Evidence from an experiment on charity to welfare recipients:
Reciprocity, altruism and the empathic responsiveness hypothesis. The Economic
Journal 117, 1008–1024 July.
Giving USA Foundation, 2009. Giving USA 2009: The annual report on philanthropy for
the year 2008. researched and written by the Center on Philanthropy at Indiana
University. Indianapolis, IN.
Harrison, G., List, J., 2004. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature 42 (4),
1009–1055.
Jacobsson, F., Johannesson, M., Borgquist, L., 2007. Is altruism paternalistic? The
Economic Journal 117, 761–781 April.
Karlan, D., List, J., 2007. Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a largescale natural ﬁeld experiment. The American Economic Review 97 (5), 1774–1793.
Landry, C., Lange, A., List, J., Price, M., Rupp, N., 2006. Toward an understanding of the
economics of charity: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121 (2), 747–782.
List, J., Lucking-Reiley, D., 2002. The effects of seed money and refunds on charitable
giving: experimental evidence from a university capital campaign. Journal of
Political Economy 110, 215–233.
Meier, S., 2007. Do subsidies increase charitable giving in the long-run? matching
donations in a ﬁeld experiment. Boston Federal Reserve Board Working Paper.
National Center for Charitable Statisics at The Urban Institute, 2009. Registered nonproﬁt
organizations by level of total revenue. URL http://nccsdataweb.urban.org.
Reinstein, D., 2006. Does one contribution come at the expense of another? empirical
evidence on substitution between charitable donations. University of Essex
Economics Discussion Papers 618.
Reinstein, D., 2007. Substitution between (and motivations for) charitable contributions: An experimental study. University of Essex Economics Discussion Papers
648.
Ribar, D., Wilhelm, M., 2002. Altruistic and joy-of-giving motivations in charitable
behavior. Journal of Political Economy 110 (2), 425–457.
Rondeau, D., List, J., 2008. Matching and challenge gifts to charity: evidence from
laboratory and natural ﬁeld experiments. Experimental Economics 11, 253–267.
Savedoff, W., Levine, R., 2006. Learning from development: the case for an international
council to catalyze independent impact evaluations of social sector interventions.
Center for Global Development Brief May.
The Center on Philanthropy at Indiana University, November 2007. American express
charitable gift survey, available at http://home3.americanexpress.com/corp/pc/
2007/pdf/aecgs.pdf.

