Journal of Product & Brand Management
A typology of the perceived risks in the context of consumer brand resistance
Marine Cambefort, Elyette Roux,

Article information:
To cite this document:
Marine Cambefort, Elyette Roux, (2019) "A typology of the perceived risks in the context of consumer brand resistance", Journal
of Product & Brand Management, https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-03-2018-1792
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-03-2018-1792

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Downloaded on: 07 March 2019, At: 09:49 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 59 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:161304 []

For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.

About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

A typology of the perceived risks in the context
of consumer brand resistance
Marine Cambefort
EM Strasbourg Business School, Humanis, University of Strasbourg, France, and

Elyette Roux

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Aix-Marseille Graduate School of Management, CERGAM, Aix-Marseille University, France
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to provide a typology of perceived risk in the context of consumer brand resistance and thus answers the following
question: how do consumers perceive the risk they take when resisting brands?
Design/methodology/approach – Two qualitative methods were used. In-depth interviews were carried out with 15 consumers who resist brands.
An ethnography was carried out for ten months in an international pro-environmental NGO.
Findings – This multiple qualitative method design led to the identiﬁcation of four types of risks taken by consumers. The four categories of
perceived risks identiﬁed are performance (lack of suitable alternatives for the brand), social issues (stigma and exclusion), legal reasons (legal
proceedings) or physical considerations (violation of physical integrity). These risks are located along a continuum of resistance intensity. Resistance
intensity levels are avoidance, ofﬂine word-of-mouth, online word-of-mouth, boycott, activism and ﬁnally extreme acts.
Originality/value – This study provides a framework that integrates perceived risks within the context of brand resistance. The paper highlights
extreme acts of resistance and questions the limits of such behaviors.
Keywords Perceived risk, Qualitative research, Ethnography, Consumer behaviour, Consumer resistance, Cause related marketing, Anti-branding
Paper type Research paper

Introduction
“The day we stop posting our discontent on the Internet and really decide to
act (not demonstrations or silent marches but burning buildings or sinking
whalers, and removing unscrupulous ﬁnanciers from power), we will have
ﬁnally understood how to change things. It’s time to begin a new revolution
and carry out real punitive actions.” [Comment of a web user on a NonGovernmental Organization blog]

The construction of strong relationships between consumers
and brands is one of the most commonly discussed subjects in
brand-related literature (Fournier, 1998a). A great amount of
research has been devoted to the study of “virtuous”
consumer-brand relationships such as loyalty (Fournier and
Yao, 1997; Oliver, 1999), attachment (Park et al., 2010),
commitment (Chaudhuri and Holbrook, 2002; Garbarino
and Johnson, 1999) or trust (Chaudhuri and Holbrook,
2001; Morgan and Hunt, 1994). However, consumers can
also behave antagonistically toward brands (Aaker et al.,
2004; Holt, 2002; Kozinets and Handelman, 2004;
Thompson and Arsel, 2004), and publications describing
these consumer behaviors of resistance and anti-consumption
started appearing at the beginning of the 1990s (Fournier,
1998b; Peñaloza and Price, 1993; Roux, 2007). Recent
examples illustrate this trend include Starbucks, who were
boycotted when they opened a coffee shop that was
prohibited to women in Saudi Arabia. Otherwise, PETA
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/1061-0421.htm

Journal of Product & Brand Management
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/JPBM-03-2018-1792]

(People for the Ethical Treatments of Animals) launched a
campaign named McCruelty, and encouraged consumers to
demonstrate in front of McDonalds restaurants. This
phenomenon is still a hot topic for marketers. As illustrated in
the above comment taken from a French Non-Governmental
Organization (NGO) website, consumers can spread negative
word-of-mouth (NWOM) through messages posted on the
internet. However, some consumers want to go further and
adopt a very confrontational approach that could have serious
legal or physical repercussions.
The literature concerning this trend investigates three
main issues, namely, why consumers struggle, how they
resist brands and whom or what they are ﬁghting. However,
very few publications to date have considered the risks that
these consumers take. Varman and Belk (2009) mention the
difﬁculty of ﬁnding an alternative to Coca-Cola for Indian
farmers wishing to boycott this global brand. Other
publications describe how resistance may lead to ﬁnancial
and emotional issues for some of the consumers who avoid
the traditional marketplace by adopting a voluntary
simplicity lifestyle (Cherrier and Murray, 2007; Cherrier,
2008).
Although some authors do identify several types of risks in a
consumption context (Bettman, 1973; Hoover et al., 1978;
This article is dedicated to Elyette Roux, supervisor for the dissertation this
research is derived from. The authors are grateful to Dominique Roux,
who kindly reviewed a former version of the paper.
Received 19 March 2018
Revised 29 July 2018
25 September 2018
Accepted 26 September 2018

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Roselius, 1971), the existing body of literature purely addresses
perceived risks in the context of consumption behaviors and
decision-making for consumption. In comparison, the present
study focuses on perceived risks in the context of resistance
behavior and the decisions made against market entities,
namely, brands. It aims to answer the following question: How
do consumers perceive the risk they take when resisting brands?
This question is addressed through the use of a multi-method
qualitative approach composed of in-depth interviews and an
ethnography of a pro-environmental activist group for ten
months. The paper provides three main contributions above
and beyond existing research:
1 It conceptualizes anti-brand behaviors as a continuum of
intensity, from avoidance to extreme acts of resistance.
2 It displays a typology of the perceived risks faced by
consumers who resist brands.
3 It provides NGOs (or any cause-related associations) with
a better understanding of how consumers perceive the
risks involved in their resistance behavior.
This paper is structured as follows: The ﬁrst section provides a
conceptual overview through presentation of the literature used
to study consumer resistance, the consumer–brand relationship
and perceived risks. The methodology used in this study is then
detailed. A third section presents the ﬁndings and ﬁnally, the
contributions, limitations and possible new research avenues of
this study are discussed.

Conceptual overview
Consumer resistance
Consumer resistance is a complex and multifaceted
phenomenon (Mikkonen and Bajde, 2013). Peñaloza and Price
(1993) conceive consumer resistance as the way consumers set
up appropriation strategies to counteract structures of
domination. Roux (2007, p. 69) deﬁnes it as “a motivational
state leading to variable manifestations of opposition and which
is triggered by certain factors linked to corporate behaviors and
marketplace practices”. The consumer adopts resistant behavior
when he or she perceives a dissonance between his/her values
and beliefs and the practices, discourses and logic of businesses
and markets (Roux, 2007) and feel oppression or hegemony
(Fournier, 1998b; Peñaloza and Price, 1993). Resistance also
involves opposition to an entity, known as a resistance target
(Roux, 2007; Fournier, 1998b). The resistance target could be
the marketplace in general (Dobscha, 1998; Kozinets, 2002) or a
speciﬁc entity such as a company, brand or organization (Holt,
2002; Kozinets and Handelman, 1998, 2004).
Consumers have a wide range of “tools” for resistance.
Consumers may adopt alternative ways of life and avoid
interaction with the marketplace by self-involvement in
reducing their number of possessions, voluntary simplicity, or
reducing their consumption levels (Cherrier and Murray, 2007;
Cherrier, 2008; Dobscha, 1998; Moraes et al., 2010; Pentina
and Amos, 2011). To resist a speciﬁc entity – a brand, ﬁrm or
organization – consumers adopt speciﬁc behaviors such as
brand avoidance (Lee et al., 2009), NWOM (Richins, 1983),
boycott (Garrett, 1987; Klein et al., 2004; Sen et al., 2001) or
activism (Kozinets and Handelman, 2004). These resistance
behaviors may be a response to company misconduct (Davies
and Olmedo-Cifuentes, 2016) and could be driven by negative

emotions such as anger, discontent or sadness (Antonetti,
2016; Romani et al., 2012).
Furthermore, some authors (Hollenbeck and Zinkhan,
2010; Pentina and Amos, 2011) distinguish passive/nonviolent actions (e.g. voluntary simplicity, avoidance, frugality)
from active/violent actions (e.g. boycotts, protests, shoplifting),
whereas Fournier (1998b) describes resistance as a continuum
that varies in intensity from passive to more active rejection
behaviors. She identiﬁes three stages of consumer resistance.
The ﬁrst step is avoidance. The next level includes
minimization behaviors such as coping strategies and
downsizing. The last step is active consumer rebellion. This
active rebellion includes complaining and boycotting as well as
dropping-out behaviors. This contestation may be individual or
collective (Peñaloza and Price, 1993; Roux, 2007).
Consumer–brand relationship: for better or for worse
This paper is focused on a speciﬁc resistance target, namely,
brands. Consumer–brand relationships are complex. A wide
range of literature emphasizes the positive impacts of the
consumer-brand relationship on behaviors toward the brand
(Chaudhuri and Holbrook, 2002; Garbarino and Johnson,
1999; Morgan and Hunt, 1994; Park et al., 2010). Brand
trust and the brand affect both have a positive inﬂuence on
brand loyalty (Chaudhuri and Holbrook, 2001). Park et al.
(2010) demonstrated that brand attachment has a positive
impact on behaviors in favor of the brand, such as waiting to
buy the brand rather than buying from a competitor, or
defending the brand when someone spreads negative
information about it. Consumers may also develop positive
feelings towards brands (such as brand love), which also lead
to pro-brand behaviors. Brand love not only leads consumers
to spread positive word-of-mouth (Batra et al., 2012; Wallace
et al., 2014) but also makes them loyal to brands and more
resistant to negative brand information (Batra et al., 2012).
Indeed, a preferred brand becomes part of the consumer’s
identity and people naturally tend to resist negative
information about themselves (Ahearne et al., 2005). Brand
love also increases brand acceptance (Wallace et al., 2014),
meaning that consumers are more likely to forgive any
wrongdoing by a preferred brand. This literature shows that a
positive consumer–brand relationship may help brands to
avoid resistance behaviors.
However, another line of marketing research addresses
antagonistic consumer relations with brands. Most anti-brand
behaviors are driven by negative emotions such as brand hate
(Hegner et al., 2017; Romani et al., 2015; Zarantonello et al.,
2016), anger, sadness, worry or dislike (Romani et al., 2012).
These behaviors are diverse and appear to vary in their level of
violence: switching brands (Romani et al., 2012), avoidance
(Lee et al., 2009; Hegner et al., 2017), complaining to third
parties (Hegner et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2011; Romani et al.,
2012; Zarantonello et al., 2016), NWOM (Johnson et al., 2011;
Kähr et al., 2016; Romani et al., 2012; Zarantonello et al.,
2016), retaliation (Hegner et al., 2017; Kähr et al., 2016),
protest (Zarantonello et al., 2016), activism (Romani et al.,
2015) or even illegal activities such as theft, threats and
vandalism (Johnson et al., 2011). However, marketing
literature does not mention other forms of consumer resistance
such as “burning buildings”, “sinking whalers” or carrying out

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

“real punitive actions”, which are beyond the type of resistance
that is traditionally studied in consumer research. These
behaviors are investigated in sociology by authors such as
Shepherd (2002), who studied the viewpoint of members of a
radical environmental group. Johnson et al. (2011) describe
illegal actions as anti-brand behaviors. It is therefore important
to integrate such extreme behaviors in our study.
Consumers pursue diverse objectives through these
antagonistic actions. Indeed, Kähr et al. (2016) make a
distinction between forms of instrumental aggression (such as
retaliation, boycott or NWOM), which aim to restore equity
and vent negative emotions, and forms of hostile aggression
(brand sabotage), which aim to harm the brand. Brand
resistance is driven by various motivations that could be
classiﬁed in three main categories. First, consumers may not
identify with the brand. This occurs when the brand image is
incompatible with the individual’s identity (“identity
avoidance”, Lee et al., 2009). Here, the individual can have a
negative perception of the brand image and does not identify
with consumers of the brand (this is called the “taste system”,
see Zarantonello et al., 2016). In the second category,
consumers resist a brand because it does not meet
their consumption experience expectations (“experience
avoidance”, Lee et al., 2009; “violation of expectations”,
Zarantonello et al., 2016). Finally, a brand could be rejected
because of its perceived immorality. Here, consumers resist the
brand because of its values and associations (“moral
avoidance”, Lee et al., 2009) as well as the behaviours, actions
and policies of its parent company (“company misconduct”,
Zarantonello et al., 2016). In this case, the consumer is
concerned about the negative impact of a brand on the whole
society. According to Zarantonello et al. (2016), this moral
motivation is the main reason for anti-brand behaviour. Brands
showing immoral behaviour are targeted by antagonistic
consumer responses such as boycotts for environmental
concerns (Garrett, 1987).
The present research focuses on a continuum of action
against brands for moral reasons, and the associated risks for
consumers. The following section reviews the typologies of
perceived risks in consumer behavior.
Typologies of perceived risks in consumer behavior
“Consumers behavior involves risk in the sense that any action
of a consumer will produce consequences which he cannot
anticipate”. This deﬁnition (Bauer, 1968, p. 187) underlines
the fact that consumers sometimes have to face unpleasant and
unintended consequences, for instance when he/she has to face
a purchase situation (Hoover et al., 1978).
Authors have proposed different typologies of perceived risk.
Bettman (1973) makes a distinction between inherent and
handled risk. Inherent risk is the latent risk of a product class for
a consumer, whereas handled risk is the “amount of conﬂict a
product class is able to arouse when the consumer chooses a
brand from a product class in his usual buying situation”
(p. 184). According to Hoover et al. (1978), risk has two
components: the “amount that would be lost” if consequences
are unfavorable and the “degree of certainty” that these
consequences will occur. For Taylor (1974), risk is composed
of outcome and consequences. Each of Taylor’s components –
outcome and consequences – may lead to Psycho/Social loss

and Functional/Economic loss. Roselius (1971) focuses on the
losses which can occur in a product buying situation. He
identiﬁes four types of “losses”: time, hazard, ego and money.
Time loss means that consumers have to spend time to adjust,
repair or replace a disappointing product. Hazard loss arises
when products are “dangerous to [consumer] health or safety
when they fail” (p. 58). Ego loss is the risk that a consumer
“feels foolish when he/she buys a product that turns out to be
defective” (p. 58). Ego loss is also related to a social dimension,
because other people can also make the consumer feel foolish.
Finally, money loss is the ﬁnancial expense necessary to repair
the product or replace it by a satisfying alternative. Another
typology includes ﬁve types of risks: performance, ﬁnancial,
social, psychological and physical (Jacoby and Kaplan, 1972;
Kaplan et al., 1974). Brooker (1984) retains these ﬁve elements
and adds time as a further risk component. Financial risk refers
to money loss, physical risk refers to safety as hazard loss, while
social (social image) and psychological (self-esteem) risks
correspond to ego loss (Table I).
All types of perceived risk contribute to an overall risk. The
inﬂuence of each perceived risk on the overall risk varies
according to the product category. For instance, life insurance
mainly involves a ﬁnancial risk, a pair of dress shoes is a social
risk, toothpaste is a performance risk and vitamins are a
physical risk (Jacoby and Kaplan, 1972). In a consumption
context, companies manage perceived risks to avoid their
negative impact. Indeed, performance and ﬁnancial risks
decrease the perceived value for money for consumers
(Sweeney et al., 1999).
This paper focuses on resistance to brands and examines a
variety of resistance actions ranging from non-activist to activist
resistance behavior. A multi-method qualitative design is used
to explore risk perception in this context.

Methodology: a multi-method qualitative
approach
A wide range of brand resistance behaviors is investigated to
obtain a risk typology in a brand resistance context. The use of
two complementary qualitative methods provided a
comprehensive understanding of the phenomena of brand
resistance in addressing all its facets. Multiple methods and
multiple data sources strengthen the validity of ﬁndings
(Hollenbeck and Zinkhan, 2010). This type of multi-method
approach also improves the reliability of data interpretation
(Arnould and Wallendorf, 1994; Jonsen and Jenh, 2009). Indepth interviews and an ethnography were carried out to
understand how consumers perceive the risks they take when
they resist brands. Data were collected by the ﬁrst author
during 2014.
In-depth interviews
In-depth interviews were used to investigate the perception of
the risks involved in non-activist resistance behaviors. They
were conducted with ﬁfteen French respondents, of which ten
were female and ﬁve were male (Table II). Respondents were
aged between 20 and 71 years old and had different educational
and professional backgrounds.
An interview guide for brand resistance experience was used
to conduct the interviews. This guide deals with brand

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Table I Typologies of perceived risk in consumer behavior
Type of risk authors

Time loss

Safety

Self-image

Social image

Roselius (1971)
Brooker (1984)
Jacoby and Kaplan (1972);
Kaplan et al. (1974)
Taylor (1974)

Time loss
Time loss risk

Hazard loss
Physical risk
Physical risk

Ego loss
Psychological risk
Social risk
Psychological risk
Social risk
Psycho/social loss

Money loss

Product failure

Money loss
Financial risk
Financial risk

Performance risk
Performance risk

Functional/economic loss

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Table II In-depth interviews: respondent proﬁles
Motivation

Name

Gender

Age

Occupation

Interview location and duration

Environmental concern
Environmental concern
Environmental concern
Environmental concern
Environmental concern
Animal mistreatment
Animal mistreatment
Animal mistreatment
Animal mistreatment
Geopolitical issues
Geopolitical issues
Geopolitical issues
Discrimination
Discrimination
Commercial misconduct

François
Claudia
Alicia
Anna
Sophie
Ambre
Léa
Marjorie
Nicolas
Geneviève
Georges
Régine
Marc
Myriam
Geoffrey

Man
Woman
Woman
Woman
Woman
Woman
Woman
Woman
Man
Woman
Man
Woman
Man
Woman
Man

57
21
27
25
51
24
20
23
30
64
71
60
46
31
24

Climatologist
Student
Unemployed
Unemployed
Personal carer
Student
Student
Unemployed
HR manager
Magistrate
Retired
Biology teacher
Asset manager
Social worker
Student

Workplace, 52 mins
Coffee shop, 30 mins
Coffee shop, 45 mins
Public park, 60 mins
Public park, 47 mins
Coffee shop, 50 mins
Coffee shop, 31 mins
Home, 48 mins
Coffee shop, 41 mins
Home, 31 mins
Workplace, 53 mins
Coffee shop, 80 mins
Workplace, 39 mins
Home, 35 mins
Workplace, 68 mins

resistance (targets, actions and motivations) as well as brand
relationships (such as brand consumption before resistance or
feelings towards brands before and after resistance).
Respondents were free to express themselves on these topics,
and the interviewer asked for more details when the
respondents mentioned risk perception. The number of
interviews was determined by the data saturation criterion:
authors decided to stop interviews when they no longer
provided new information to answer the research question. The
15 interviews were recorded and transcribed. Interviews mainly
took place in the respondent’s workplace or home, or in public
places such as public parks or coffee shops. Their duration
varied from 30 to 120 min (average duration: 47 min).
Respondents were selected on one main criterion: they resist
at least one brand. They were mainly recruited through the
authors’ personal networks and the “snowball” method. They
carry out non-activist resistance to brands, such as brand
avoidance and negative word-of-mouth. Five of the
respondents who were interviewed for their non-activist
resistance to brands were also met during the ethnography.
Motivations to act against brands vary across
respondents. Five main motivations for resistance are
identiﬁed: geopolitical issues, environmental concerns,
discrimination, animal mistreatment and commercial
misconduct. Respondents differed in terms of resistance
action type and intensity, providing a broad range of
resistance experiences. For instance, Ambre boycotts and
spreads negative word-of-mouth against cosmetic brands
that use animal testing. Geoffrey avoids the Apple brand
because of a perceived commercial misconduct.

Ethnography
An ethnographic approach was also used (Arnould and
Wallendorf, 1994). As the present study seeks to identify the
risk involved in activist brand resistance, participant
observation was carried out in an activist group. The observed
group is part of an international non-governmental
organization (NGO) whose members are concerned by
environmental issues. The aim of the group is to ﬁght against
entities such as brands, companies or organizations that are
generally considered to have bad practices for the environment.
This NGO leads four campaigns. Each is related to a speciﬁc
theme: “agriculture”, “climate”, “forest” and “ocean”. Some
people in this group are highly confrontational with the brands
targeted by the group’s activities.
Activists were observed during their meetings, activities and
training session for ten months, from January to October 2014.
A total of twelve speciﬁc events were observed. Six meetings
were attended (meeting no. 1 to meeting no. 6) in which the
past campaigns of the group were reviewed and future actions
were prepared. The ﬁrst author then took part in ﬁve group
activities. Each activity corresponded to one of the NGO’s
campaigns. Activities no. 1 to no. 4 concerned the “agriculture”
campaign. This campaign consists of opposing the use of
Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms (GMO) and bee-harming
pesticides. For instance, activists stuck stickers on a
supermarket ﬂoor during activity no. 1. They also handed out
leaﬂets promoting Organic Agriculture to consumers. Activity
no. 5 supported the “ocean” campaign against the use of ﬁshaggregating devices for intensive ﬁshing. During this activity,
activists asked people to sign a petition and handed out leaﬂets.

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

They also stuck adhesive labels to canned tuna in a
supermarket. Observed activities mainly took place in
supermarkets. Prior to these activities, a half-day training
session was organized by the NGO to train new members. An
experienced group member explained how the participants
should behave on the ﬁeld during a campaign.
A ﬁeld book was used to report observations and comments
during the ethnography, and photos were taken. As a multimethod approach is recommended to improve ethnographic
interpretations (Arnould and Wallendorf, 1994), the NGO’s
blog was also consulted.
Ethnography is complementary to the in-depth interviews.
First, it is a means to access activism and extreme acts of
resistance. Indeed, although our interviewees were resisting
against brands, they were not all involved in extreme acts.
Second, observation makes it possible to identify the risks that
consumers actually take in a real context, providing more
information than verbal declarations. More detailed
conversations with core members indicated how dangerous the
extreme acts were. The core members are people who are
strongly involved in the group organization and actively resist
the brands that are targeted by the NGO. All the group
members’ names have been changed to ensure their anonymity.
Data analysis
Data analysis in qualitative research usually consists of
preparing and organizing data, reducing them into themes
through a process of coding and ﬁnally representing the data in
ﬁgures, tables or a discussion (Creswell, 2007). This general
procedure was followed to identify regular occurrences that
offer insights into the nature of perceived risks in a brand
resistance context.
Data were gathered (interview transcripts, ﬁeld notes) and
were analyzed following a constant comparative approach
(Strauss and Corbin, 1990). In a ﬁrst step, authors
implemented an open-coding process, reading and segmenting
the data into categories of information to general themes.
Then, a more focused coding of the data within the previously
identiﬁed themes was carried out. This axial coding provides
insight into speciﬁc coding categories that relate consumer
perceived risk in a brand resistance context. These themes were

confronted to the relevant literature. Finally, information from
this coding phase is organized into a ﬁgure. Following
Wolcott’s (1994) advice, cases were compared (experiences of
brand resistance), results were compared with a standard
(typologies of perceived risks in consumer behavior), and
results were presented in a ﬁgure (see ﬁndings below).

Findings
Brand resistance intensity continuum (BRIC)
As mentioned in the literature review, consumer resistance
varies in intensity (Fournier, 1998b). This study provides a new
approach to the classiﬁcation of resistance behaviors by
constructing a framework to understand which types of risk are
linked to the different anti-brand behaviors. This cannot be
evaluated using Fournier’s continuum, which is based on
consumer resistance in general and not on brand resistance.
The ﬁndings of this study show that perceived risks in a context
of brand resistance arises along a Brand Resistance Intensity
Continuum (hereafter referred to as BRIC, Figure 1).
The ﬁrst step identiﬁed is identical to that of Fournier’s
continuum (1998b). Avoidance is the ﬁrst anti-brand behavior
identiﬁed: consumers avoid consuming the brand in question
(Lee et al., 2009). This is an individual and silent behavior.
An individual and audible anti-brand behavior then appears,
namely, negative word-of-mouth (Richins, 1983). Consumers
give their opinion of the brand to their other consumers or
encourage them to not to buy it. A distinction is made between
ofﬂine and online word-of-mouth. Ofﬂine word-of-mouth
consists of face-to-face communications with family, friends,
relatives, colleagues or acquaintances. Online word-of-mouth
refers to messages posted on the internet, for instance on social
networks or in personal blogs.
At the end of the continuum, three forms of collective and
audible resistance were identiﬁed. Boycott is probably the most
studied form of collective opposition (Klein et al., 2004;
Kozinets and Handelman, 1998; Sen et al., 2001). It is deﬁned
as the collective rejection of trade with a speciﬁc entity to gain
concessions or to express discontent with certain acts or
practices of the target (Garrett, 1987). Finally, the explanations
of core members of the activist group met during the

Figure 1 Perceived risks of consumers across the brand resistance intensity continuum (BRIC)

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

ethnography led us to make a distinction between activism
(Kozinets and Handelman, 2004) and extreme acts.
In the light of our observation and discussion, activism was
deﬁned as situations of low confrontation (such as peaceful
demonstrations to inform other consumers or obtain signatures
for petitions). Extreme acts are highly confrontational
interactions with the targets (such as emptying supermarket
shelves, sticking campaign messages on products or shop ﬂoors,
sawing through the roof and abseiling into a ﬁrm’s general
meeting or climbing up a crane). Examples of extreme acts are
provided by the following article extract from the NGO’s blog:

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

“Meanwhile, inside the room, two activists entered the general meeting by
abseiling down through a hole in the ceiling, and installed two big banners
with a similar message.” [“Forest” campaign against Nestlé brand; article
published in April 2010].

Other examples are provided by the ethnography. For instance,
activists involved in activity no. 5 stuck adhesive stickers (‘the
good taste of carnage’) on canned tuna in a supermarket
without authorization to alert consumers about ﬁshaggregating devices. This is shown in photographs taken by the
observer during this activity (Figures 2 and 3).
The BRIC concept can be deﬁned as follows: involvement in an
activity further along the continuum implies that the activist can
also carry out the less violent activities of the range. For instance,
someone who spreads negative word-of-mouth online can also
talk negatively about the brand to close relatives, friends or
colleagues. Following the same reasoning, a consumer who carries
out extreme acts could also be involved in boycott and avoidance.
Figure 2 Example of extreme act: canned tuna with stickers glued
onto them by activists (activity no. 5)

The risks perceived by resistant consumers
Consumers can perceive performance, social, legal and physical
risks. These risks appear along the brand resistance intensity
continuum described above. Each resistance behavior can
involve several risks. Our ﬁndings on perceived risk by resistant
consumers partially ﬁt with the typology of Brooker (1984) and
Kaplan et al. (1974), as illustrated below.
Performance risks: lack of suitable alternatives
Resisting a brand means at least avoiding the consumption of
its products. This means that consumers have to ﬁnd a suitable
alternative for the rejected brand. According to Varman and
Belk (2009), activists involved in the Coca-Cola boycott in
India encourage consumers to look for alternatives to
carbonated soft drinks. In a pamphlet, they point out the higher
quality of local brands (such as Thandai, Lassi, Rooh-Afza),
mentioning the “cheaper, tastier, and healthier alternatives”
(Varman and Belk, 2009, p. 696) to the global brand. However,
consumers may sometimes face a lack of suitable alternatives;
this is referred to as a “performance risk”. Generally speaking,
consumers exposed to performance risks have to face a lack of
satisfaction with the performance of the product or the brand
(Brooker, 1984; Jacoby and Kaplan, 1972; Kaplan et al., 1974).
In the context of brand resistance, performance risk consists of
a lack of suitable alternatives to the branded product.
Performance risks appear at the very beginning of the BRIC.
Consumers who limit their action to avoiding brands are
therefore only exposed to performance risks. In other words,
people who decide to stop buying a brand may not ﬁnd another
brand that meets their expectations as well as the rejected one.
In-depth interviews provide evidence of these risks, as
illustrated by the following quotes:
I boycott Revlon, all Revlon products, except [. . .] You know, I permed my
hair, about every two years. The only one that works and doesn’t damage
hair is made by Revlon. After two years, when I decided to do my perm and
took an appointment, I felt sad because I was saying to myself [. . .] “if you
use L’Oréal and so on, your hair will fall out [. . .] And I say it, honestly, I’m
reluctant to do it, but Revlon’s not the most responsible of the brands
causing trouble for Palestinians.” [Régine, 60, biology teacher.]
My boycott of Coca-Cola lasted for six months [. . .]. After, I went back to
my Coca zero addiction. Other brands taste bad! I gave in [. . .] [Myriam, 31,
social worker.]
Yeah, I buy Nike shoes, because they are good for running, so unfortunately
there is just this brand. [Anna, 25, unemployed]

Figure 3 Example of extreme act (close up)

These three women are disappointed with the alternative
brands for certain categories of products. Régine boycotts
brands involved in the ﬁnancing of the Israeli army, such
as Revlon. But she is disappointed by other brands, such as
L’Oréal. Myriam does not ﬁnd alternative brands as tasty as
Coca-Cola. Anna boycotts Nike for environmental reasons, yet
she runs in shoes made by this brand. These examples illustrate
the lack of suitable alternatives. Consumers who are not ready
to face performance risks continue consuming the brand
despite their initial resistance intentions.
Consumers also highlight the lack of suitable alternatives
when the brand has some kind of monopoly over the market. In
this case, performance risks refer to the lack of alternatives, or
the difﬁculty to get an equivalent brand:
Honestly, buying one product rather than another doesn’t bother anybody.
When you have several brands, you can. It is harder when brands practically
have a monopoly. [Geneviève, 64, magistrate.]

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Performance risks are present in a large part of the BRIC, from
avoidance to activism. The more the consumer is involved in
the resistance continuum, the less they are affected by
perceived risks of performance. In other words, performance
risks decrease as the brand resistance intensiﬁes. This
phenomenon could be explained by the fact that the
convictions of highly-involved people are stronger than their
need to consume the brand.

collective. The consumers involved in the actions at the end of
the BRIC are the most exposed to legal risks. The stronger the
confrontation between activists and brands, the higher the
danger of legal risks will be for participants.
Ethnography also provides insights into legal risks. Before
each action, activists are given instructions to follow if they are
arrested, such as how to behave with policemen or what to say
when they are put in police custody.

Social risks: exclusion and stigma
In a consumption context, social risks are identiﬁed by several
authors (Brooker, 1984; Kaplan et al., 1974; Taylor, 1974). In
a brand resistance context, social risks appear as soon as the
resistance becomes audible. Those who spread negative wordof-mouth, whether on or ofﬂine, may therefore be exposed to
social risks of exclusion and stigma. For instance, Geoffrey,
who avoids Apple, does not spread negative word-of-mouth
because he does not want to be perceived as a “lesson-giver” by
people around him:

“They mention that they know when they will leave, but they don’t know
when they will return, because of the risk of arrest and custody.” [Field book
extract, meeting no. 2].

I often ask people, “You’ve got an iPhone, how much did you pay for
it?”[. . .] It’s true that I try to be careful because I don’t want be the “lessongiver”, but it’s also true that I try to understand why they bought it”
[Geoffrey, 24, student].

Alicia, who is committed to an environmentally friendly way of
life and boycotts McDonald, described the difﬁculty she
experiences when talking to others about it:
It’s not easy to convey ideas and explain why we’ll consume this or this when
you are mocked, denigrated or excluded. [. . .] I don’t dare to discuss it, I
speak about it gradually because I’ve got the impression that I will be judged
negatively [. . .] You know? I would be classiﬁed as [. . .] I don’t know [. . .] an
odd creature, someone strange.” [Alicia, 27, unemployed].

These quotes emphasize the risk of being stigmatized when
spreading NWOM. Moreover, consumers are afraid of being
excluded by their relatives, friends or family, as illustrated below:

During the ethnographic immersion, more detailed
conversations were conducted with two group members:
Doreen and Danny. They play a central role in the activist
group. For instance, they welcome and train new group
members. Danny managed media relations, while Doreen was
responsible for actions against GMO (Genetically Modiﬁed
Organism). Danny went to jail for three days in Sweden. He is
currently under legal prosecution on several charges. Doreen
was also taken to court and was condemned to a six-month
suspended prison sentence. They participate in the more
confrontational actions described as “extreme acts” in our
BRIC. They could be called “hardcore activists”. Furthermore,
the authors observed legal risks perceived by activists during the
ethnography period:
Before starting the action, Danny brought us outside to give us some legal
information in case “things turned bad”. We learned the rules for an identity
check and custody. [. . .] He gave us instructions for custody. [Field book
extract, activity no. 1].
In the car, everyone was afraid about the legal risks involved by the action.
Claudia told us that she had done “worse” by participating in a project in
Tricastin [French nuclear power station] where the police were obstructing
the access to the power station. [Field book extract, activity no. 1].

I showed her [her best friend] documentaries, it was important, and she said
that I had become resentful [. . .] Her judgment hurt me and from that day
on, I have avoided speaking to people around me [Anna, 25, unemployed].

Group members left the store quickly, but the manager of the supermarket
refused to let Stephan go outside [. . .]. Later, the police were called. [Field
book extract, activity no. 4].

Social risks increase with the number of people perceiving the
word-of-mouth. The number varies according to the means of
communication used (face-to-face or internet), and this is why
the present study distinguishes between ofﬂine and online
word-of-mouth. For example, the messages posted on social
media, as Ambre does, are visible by a wider audience:

These extracts illustrate the perception of legal risk by activists.
The role of core members is to warn other activists about it and
inform them about how to face legal risks. Moreover, activists are
afraid about the legal proceedings involved in their resistance.

I blog, I post [. . .] I post documentaries or articles on Facebook about the
subject, and particularly for some brands [. . .] I try to inform, but
unfortunately not everybody likes it because when you tell someone that
what they’ve been doing for a long time is potentially dangerous for them,
their kids and their health, it’s something they don’t want to hear. But I do it
anyway.” [Ambre, 24, student].

Reactions to social risks are diverse. Geoffrey avoids social risks
and remains silent. Alicia is cautious when she talks about her
rejection of eco-unfriendly brands. The fear of rejection by
others prevents Anna to speak freely of her resistance behaviors.
People who spread word-of-mouth on line are less affected by
the opinions of others. Amber is a good example because she
“does it anyway”.
Legal risks: legal proceedings
The literature describing consumer perceived risk does not
describe legal risks. This study deﬁnes legal risks as the possible
prosecution of consumers as a result of their resistance
behavior. Legal risks appear as soon as resistance becomes

Physical risks: violation of physical integrity
Generally speaking, physical risks involve a lack of safety
(Brooker, 1984; Kaplan et al., 1974; Roselius, 1971). In a
brand resistance context, physical risks are the last step in the
risk that consumers have to face. Violation of physical integrity
is associated with activism and extreme acts. During the
ethnography, a supermarket employee threw shopping carts at
activists. The core members told us stories about their past
activities. Doreen climbed to the top of a crane and stayed there
for several days:
In the car, Doreen told me that she had climbed to the top of a crane with
two other activists during an action targeting a nuclear power station. [Field
book extract, activity no. 1].

Danny stayed 13 h in the cold water of the Seine river in Paris
(France). He was also punched in the face by a security guard
during action in a supermarket. Some visitors on the NGO blog
refer to physical risk; one web user refers to this danger in a
comment, whereas other web-users talk about the “courage” of
activists.

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux
Don’t forget that [NGO] need our donations and support to help them
reveal all this: they are activists who take risks and often risk their life
[comment from Bruno, on the NGO website concerning the “Forest”
campaign against Nestlé brand].
“Congratulations to activists for their courage” [comment from Desruelle
on the NGO website concerning the “Forest” campaign against Nestlé
brand].
“Thanks for your courage” [comment from Bienraison on the NGO website
concerning the “Forest” campaign against Nestlé brand].

The more the consumer is committed to active campaigns, the
less he/she is afraid of risk. They perceived it, and are not only
ready to face it but are proud to be involved in such extreme
behaviors. Danny feels like a “superstar” and tells to his
relatives that “they are lucky to know [him] because [he is]
famous” [Field book extract, activity no. 3]. This desire to be
over-exposed to risks is illustrated by the following ﬁeld book
extract:

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

During the previous campaign, Danny, who was worried about the risk
involved for participants, did not stop repeating: “If someone has to get it in
the neck, it should be me”. [Field book extract, training session].

This quote also indicates that “hardcode activists” are aware of
the physical risk for all group members.

Discussion and conclusion
Implications for theory and practice
This study aimed to provide a typology of perceived risks in the
context of brand resistance. Using a qualitative multi-method
approach, four types of risk were identiﬁed: performance,
social, legal and physical. These risks arise along a BRIC
composed of avoidance, ofﬂine word-of-mouth, online wordof-mouth, boycott, activism and extreme acts. This brand
resistance continuum suggests that each resistance behavior
can involve several types of risks. Avoidance, the only “silent”
act of resistance behavior identiﬁed, corresponds to
performance risk. Social risks appear as soon as the resistance
becomes audible. People who spread word-of-mouth ofﬂine
and online are exposed to performance and social risks.
Consumers involved in boycott – the ﬁrst collective form of
resistance of the BRIC – are exposed to the aforementioned
risks, plus legal risks. Taking part to activism therefore puts
consumers at risks of exclusion and stigma, legal proceedings
and violation of physical integrity. Finally, the people involved

in extreme acts are those who are the most exposed to legal and
physical risks.
Conceptually, this paper provides a typology of perceived
risks when consumers are resisting brands. There are some
similarities and differences with existing typologies of risk used
in the context of buying decision. As described in previous
studies (Brooker, 1984; Jacoby and Kaplan, 1972; Kaplan
et al., 1974), performance, social and physical risks appeared.
However, some discrepancies should be noted (Table III).
First, the word “performance” is not related to a product
failure in this study, but rather to the lack of suitable alternative
for the brand when it is rejected by consumers. Second,
physical risk differs according to the consumer’s degree of
intent. Activists who are committed to extreme acts deliberately
expose themselves to physical risks, whereas consumers seek to
avoid this risk in the context of a product purchase. We can
assume that consumers who are ready to face the risks involved
in resistance behavior are capable of actions that are further
along the BRIC continuum. This includes people who are not
afraid of performance and social risks and are ready to spread
NWOM. Moreover, this study describes types of consumer
resistance such as extreme acts, which have rarely been studied
in consumer research (Kozinets and Handelman, 2004;
Johnson et al., 2011).
In practical terms, this paper provides NGOs (or any other
association ﬁghting for a cause, such as animal welfare) a better
understanding of consumer perception of the risks involved in
their resistance behavior. In a consumption context, high risk
perception may worsen consumer perception of a company’s
offer (Sweeney et al., 1999). Following the same reasoning,
perceived risk management appears as a crucial issue for any
NGOs and associations taking anti-brand action. This paper
provides NGOs and associations with a risk perception
management tool to reduce perceived risks to encourage brand
resistance. These ﬁndings reveal that people who decide to stop
buying a brand may not ﬁnd a satisfactory brand to replace the
one they rejected. To reduce this performance risk, NGOs
could recommend other brands as suitable alternative and thus
help people to handle performance risk.
Furthermore, NGOs aim to mobilize consumers to act
against entities such as brands, company or political
organizations. This study can enable them to convince
consumers to participate in the campaigns carried out by
activist groups, such as signing petitions against brands,

Table III Typologies of perceived risk in a consumption vs a resistance context
Existing typologies

Proposed typology

Context
Consumption context
Product category

Resistance context
Anti-brand behaviour

Types of perceived risks
Performance: lack of satisfaction with the performance of the product
or the brand
Social: social image degradation because of product consumption
Physical: safety issues involved by the product consumption
Psychological: self-image degradation because of product consumption
Financial: money loss
Time: time loss

Performance: lack of suitable alternatives for the branded product
Social: exclusion and stigma because of audible brand resistance
Physical: violation of physical integrity involved by activist resistance
Legal: legal prosecution involved by activist resistance

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

avoiding and/or boycotting them, etc. Convincing others to join
resistance movements was indeed observed in our
investigation. Other clients, who could be called
“sympathizers”, supported activists during the actions. They
were even encouraged to take part in the action by being
photographed as they stuck the campaign message sticker on
the brand product inside a supermarket or signed petitions
against the brand. Here, we see that resistance may be
contagious despite the risks involved.
Research perspectives
This research raises issues that consumer research could
address in further studies. A new study of consumer perceived
risk would make it possible to generalize these results to other
activist groups. The replication of this method in other activist
groups would show whether the same typology of perceived risk
appears, such as animal mistreatment or gender discrimination.
Theory postulates that choice situations, such as buying
decision, involve uncertainty. In turn, uncertainty creates
anxiety. As anxiety is uncomfortable, consumers try to develop
strategies to reduce the risk in the decision context to reduce
the inherent anxiety (Taylor, 1974). Some authors focused on
risk reduction methods (Roselius, 1971; Hales and Shams,
1991) and identiﬁed several “risk relievers” such as brand
loyalty, major brand image, free samples and money-back
guarantees (Roselius, 1971). A further study could be
conducted to identify “risk relievers” in the context of brand
resistance. In the present study, Régine tries to convince herself
that Revlon was not the worst culprit to manage her cognitive
dissonance (Festinger, 1957). In doing so, she reduces the
distance between her beliefs (the brand must be boycotted) and
her acts (consumption of this brand). Minimizing the guilt of
the brand can therefore be assumed to help consumers manage
performance risks by continuing to consume the rejected
brand.
In addition, some forms of brand resistance were not
evaluated. This study ignored online anti-brand communities,
which are addressed in the literature (Hollenbeck and Zinkhan,
2010). Indeed, the NGO blog bears no similarity to an antibrand community for a number of reasons. The website is not
against a brand in particular but is opposed to a number of
brands accused of harmful practices for environment. The
interactions between web users are also limited, with not
possibility to respond directly to a comment. Further studies
could therefore address these unexplored issues.
The extreme acts described in this study remain
understudied in marketing (Kozinets and Handelman, 2004;
Johnson et al., 2011). This type of resistant consumers is
particular because these activists are the most exposed to risk,
yet they are the least afraid. The identiﬁcation of resistant
consumers has already been investigated for people involved in
the reduction of consumption (Cherrier and Murray, 2007;
Cherrier, 2008). The identity of these resistant consumers
should be investigated, as Ruiz-Junco (2001) did for activists in
the Spanish Environmental Movement.
Finally, this investigation sheds new light on resistance
boundaries. The reasoning is based on the following
assumption: consumers who are ready to face the risks involved
in an act of resistance are able to go further in the BRIC. In this
study, the BRIC could be likened to a staircase in which each

step corresponds to a resistance behavior. A consumer who is
involved in a higher step behavior will probably also use the
lower step behaviors. In addition, the results suggest that each
step involves one or more types of risk. Consumers who are
ready to face the risks involved by anti-brand behavior are able
to go further in the BRIC, i.e. move to the next step of intensity.
For instance, boycotting a brand suggests that the consumer is
also able to avoid it and to spread NWOM (ofﬂine and online)
against it. A boycott involves performance and social risks. If
the consumer is ready to face them, he is ready for the next step:
activism. However, some activists involved in extreme acts
seems do not be afraid of risks. So, what could be the limits of
such resistance? And what are the limits for “hardcore” activists
if they don’t feel afraid? As illustrated on the ﬁeld or on the
NGO blog, some people are ready to illegally enter private
property, to commit acts of vandalism or directly attack people
they consider to be guilty. Further investigations are required to
understand such behaviors involving risks for others.

References
Aaker, J., Fournier, S. and Brasel, S.A. (2004), “When good
brands do bad”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 31 No. 1,
pp. 1-16.
Ahearne, M., Bhattacharya, C.B. and Gruen, T. (2005),
“Antecedents and consequences of customer-company
identiﬁcation: expanding the role of relationship
marketing”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 90 No. 3,
pp. 574-585.
Antonetti, P. (2016), “Consumer anger: label in search of
meaning”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 50 Nos 9/10,
pp. 1602-1628.
Arnould, E.J. and Wallendorf, M. (1994), “Market-oriented
ethnography: interpretation building and marketing strategy
formulation”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 31 No. 4,
pp. 69-84.
Batra, R., Ahuvia, A. and Bagozzi, R.P. (2012), “Brand love”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 76 No. 2, pp. 1-16.
Bauer, R.A. (1968), “Consumer behaviors as risk taking”, in
Kassarjian, H.H. and Robertson, T.S. (Eds), Perspectives in
Consumer Behavior, Scott Foresman and Company,
Glenview, IL.
Bettman, J.R. (1973), “Perceived risk and its components: a
model and empirical test”, Journal of Marketing Research,
Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 184-190.
Brooker, G. (1984), “An assessment of an expanded measure
of perceived risk”, Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 11
No. 1, pp. 439-441.
Chaudhuri, A. and Holbrook, M.B. (2001), “The chain of
effects from brand trust and brand affect to brand
performance: the role of brand loyalty”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 65 No. 2, pp. 81-93.
Chaudhuri, A. and Holbrook, M.B. (2002), “Product-class
effects on brand commitment and brand outcomes: the role
of brand trust and brand affect”, Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 33-58.
Cherrier, H. and Murray, J.B. (2007), “Reﬂexive
dispossession and the self: constructing a processual
theory of identity”, Consumption Markets & Culture,
Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 1-29.

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Cherrier, H. (2008), “Anti-consumption discourses and
consumer-resistant identity”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 181-190.
Creswell, J.W. (2007), Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design:
Choosing among Five Approaches, Sage, CA.
Davies, G. and Olmedo-Cifuentes, I. (2016), “Corporate
misconduct and the loss of trust”, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 50 Nos 7/8, pp. 1426-1447.
Dobscha, S. (1998), “The lived experience of consumer
rebellion against marketing”, Advances in Consumer Research,
Vol. 25No No. 1, pp. 91-97.
Festinger, L. (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford
University Press, Palo Alto, CA.
Fournier, S. (1998a), “Consumers and their brands:
developing relationship theory in consumer research”,
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 343-353.
Fournier, S. (1998b), “Consumer resistance: societal
motivations, Consumer manifestations, and implication in
the marketing domain”, Advances in Consumer Research,
Special Session Summary, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 88-90.
Fournier, S. and Yao, J.L. (1997), “Reviving brand loyalty: a
reconceptualization within the framework of consumerbrand relationships”, International Journal of Research in
Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 5, pp. 451-472.
Garbarino, E. and Johnson, M.S. (1999), “The different roles of
satisfaction, trust, and commitment in customer relationships”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 63 No. 2, pp. 70-87.
Garrett, D.E. (1987), “The effectiveness of marketing policy
boycotts: environmental opposition to marketing”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 51 No. 2, pp. 46-57.
Hales, C. and Shams, H. (1991), “Cautious incremental
consumption: a neglected consumer risk reduction strategy”,
European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 7, pp. 7-21.
Hegner, S.M., Fetscherin, M. and van Delzen, M. (2017),
“Determinants and outcomes of brand hate”, Journal of
Product & Brand Management, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 13-25.
Hollenbeck, C.R. and Zinkhan, G.M. (2010), “Anti-brand
communities, negotiation of brand meaning, and the
learning process: the case of Wal-Mart”, Consumption
Markets & Culture, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 325-345.
Holt, D.B. (2002), “Why do brands cause trouble? A
dialectical theory of consumer culture and branding”,
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 70-90.
Hoover, R.J., Green, R.T. and Saegert, J. (1978), “A CrossNational study of perceived risk”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 42 No. 3, pp. 102-108.
Jacoby, J. and Kaplan, L.B. (1972), “The components of
perceived risk”, Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 3 No. 3,
pp. 382-383.
Johnson, A.R., Matear, M. and Thomson, M. (2011), “A coal
in the heart: self-relevance as a post-exit predictor of
consumer anti-brand actions”, Journal of Consumer Research,
Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 108-125.
Jonsen, K. and Jenh, K.A. (2009), “Using triangulation to
validate themes in qualitative studies”, Qualitative Research in
Organizations and Management: An International Journal,
Vol. 4 No. 2, pp. 123-150.
Kähr, A., Nyffenegger, B., Krohmer, H. and Hoyer, W.D.
(2016), “When hostile consumers wreak havoc on your

brand: the phenomenon of consumer brand sabotage”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 80 No. 3, pp. 25-41.
Kaplan, L.B., Szybillo, G.J. and Jacoby, J. (1974),
“Components of perceived risk in product purchase: a crossvalidation”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 59 No. 3,
pp. 287-291.
Klein, J.G., Smith, N.C. and John, A. (2004), “Why We
boycott: consumer motivations for boycott participation”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 68 No. 3, pp. 92-109.
Kozinets, R.V. (2002), “Can consumers escape the market?
Emancipatory illuminations from burning man”, Journal of
Consumer Research, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 20-38.
Kozinets, R.V. and Handelman, J.M. (1998), “Ensouling
consumption: a netnographic exploration of the meaning of
boycotting behavior”, Advances in Consumer Research,
Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 475-479.
Kozinets, R.V. and Handelman, J.M. (2004), “Adversaries
of consumption: consumer movements, activism and
ideology”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 31 No. 3,
pp. 691-704.
Lee, M.S.W., Motion, J. and Conroy, D. (2009), “Anticonsumption and Brand avoidance”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 62 No. 2, pp. 169-180.
Mikkonen, I. and Bajde, D. (2013), “Happy festivus! Parody as
playful consumer resistance”, Consumption Markets &
Culture, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 311-337.
Moraes, C., Szmigin, I. and Carrigan, M. (2010), “Living
production-engaged alternatives: an examination of new
consumption communities”, Consumption Markets &
Culture, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 273-298.
Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994), “The CommitmentTrust theory of relationship marketing”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 58 No. 3, pp. 20-38.
Oliver, R.L. (1999), “Whence consumer loyalty?”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 63 No. S4, pp. 33-44.
Park, C.W., MacInnis, D.J., Priester, J., Eisingerich, A.B. and
Iacobucci, D. (2010), “Brand attachment and brand attitude
strength: conceptual and empirical differentiation of two
critical Brand equity drivers”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 74
No. 6, pp. 1-17.
Peñaloza, L. and Price, L.L. (1993), “Consumer resistance: a
conceptual overview”, Advances in Consumer Research,
Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 123-128.
Pentina, I. and Amos, C. (2011), “The freegan phenomenon:
anti-consumption or consumer resistance?”, European
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 45 Nos 11/12, pp. 1768-1778.
Richins, M.L. (1983), “Negative word-of-mouth by
dissatisﬁed consumers: a pilot study”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 47 No. 1, pp. 68-78.
Romani, S., Grappi, S. and Dalli, D. (2012), “Emotions that drive
consumers away from brands: measuring negative emotions
toward brands and their behavioral effects”, International Journal
of Research in Marketing, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 55-67.
Romani, S., Grappi, S., Zarantonello, L. and Bagozzi, R.P.
(2015), “The revenge of the consumer! How brand moral
violations lead to consumer anti-brand activism”, Journal of
Brand Management, Vol. 22 No. 8, pp. 658-672.
Roselius, T. (1971), “Consumer rankings of risk reduction
methods”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 56-61.

Consumer brand resistance

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Downloaded by ECU Libraries At 09:49 07 March 2019 (PT)

Marine Cambefort and Elyette Roux

Roux, D. (2007), “Consumer resistance: proposal for an
integrative framework”, Recherche et Applications en
Marketing (English Edition), Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 59-79.
Ruiz-Junco, N. (2001), “Losing neutrality in your everyday
life”: framing experience and activist identity
construction in the spanish environmental movement”,
Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, Vol. 40 No. 6,
pp. 713-733.
Sen, S., Gurhan-Canli, Z. and Morwitz, V. (2001),
“Withholding consumption: a social dilemma perspective on
consumer boycott”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 28
No. 3, pp. 399-417.
Shepherd, N. (2002), “Anarcho-Environmentalists: aesthetic
of late modernity”, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography,
Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 135-157.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990), Basics of Qualitative Research,
Sage, CA.
Sweeney, L.C., Soutar, G.N. and Johnson, L.W. (1999), “The
role of perceived risk in the quality-value relationship: a study
in a retail environment”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 75 No. 1,
pp. 77-105.

Taylor, J.W. (1974), “The role of risk in consumer behavior”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 54-60.
Thompson, C.J. and Arsel, Z. (2004), “The starbucks brandscape
and consumers (Anticorporate) Experiences of glocalization”,
Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 631-642.
Varman, R. and Belk, R.W. (2009), “Nationalism and ideology
in an anticonsumption movement”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 686-700.
Wallace, E., Buil, I. and de Chernatony, L. (2014), “Consumer
engagement with self-expressive brands: brand love and
WOM outcomes”, Journal of Product & Brand Management,
Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 33-42.
Wolcott, H.F. (1994), Transforming Qualitative Data:
Description, Analysis, and Interpretation, Sage.
Zarantonello, L., Romani, S., Grappi, S. and Bagozzi, R.P.
(2016), “Brand hate”, Journal of Product & Brand
Management, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 11-25.

Corresponding author
Marine Cambefort can be contacted at: cambefort@
unistra.fr

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

