The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/2055-6225.htm

Habitus as a value lens to link
customer engagement and
value cocreation
Benjamin Piers William Ellway

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
57

School of Management, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia, and

Alison Dean
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia

Received 15 April 2019
Revised 19 August 2019
3 October 2019
5 November 2019
Accepted 5 November 2019

Abstract
Purpose – This paper uses practice theory to strengthen the theoretical relationship between customer
engagement (CE) and value cocreation (VCC), thereby demonstrating how customers may become engaged and
remain engaged through VCC practices.
Design/methodology/approach – The study adopts a problematization approach to identify shared
assumptions evident in service-dominant logic (SDL) and CE research. Practice theory, as a higher-order
perspective, is used to integrate the iterative and cyclical processes of VCC and CE, specifically through the
theoretical mechanism of habitus.
Findings – Habitus acts as a customer value lens and provides a bridging concept to demonstrate how VCC
and CE are joined via sensemaking processes. These processes determine how customers perceive, assess, and
evaluate value, how they become engaged through VCC, and how their experience of engagement may lead to
further VCC practice. The temporally bound experiences, states, and episodes are accumulated and aggregated
through an enduring customer value lens comprised of habituated dispositions, interests, and attitudes.
Research limitations/implications – This work responds to calls for research to strengthen the theoretical
link between VCC and CE and to take account of customers’ lived realities and their contextualized experiences.
A key suggestion for future research is the use of a rope metaphor to stimulate thinking about the complex,
temporally unfolding, and interrelated processes of VCC and CE.
Practical implications – The customer value lens and CE rope are introduced to simplify the complex,
abstract, theoretical research on VCC and CE for a nonacademic audience. To understand how customers’ value
lenses are formed and change, and how a CE rope is strengthened, firms, service designers, and practitioners
need to understand sensemaking processes through customer narratives and to use platforms and feedback to
support and trigger sensemaking.
Originality/value – This paper provides a theoretical mechanism to explain the iterative and cyclical nature
of VCC and CE processes and how accumulation and aggregation occur in these processes. In doing so, it
demonstrates that CE occurs by virtue of, and is typified by, sensemaking processes that reproduce and shape
a customer’s habituated value lens, which perceives, assesses, and determines VCC and thus provides a basis
for further customer engagement.
Keywords Customer engagement, Value cocreation, Practice, Experience, Habitus, Customer value lens
Paper type Conceptual paper

1. Introduction
Scholars agree that value cocreation (VCC) and customer engagement (CE) are inextricably
linked. Lusch and Vargo (2010) suggest that interactive cocreative customer experiences may
be interpreted as the act of engaging, while Brodie et al. (2011) note that early
service-dominant logic (SDL) research on VCC frequently mentioned the terms
“engagement” and “engaged.” Recent recognition of the broader term actor engagement
(AE) in both SDL and CE literature also confirms that these concepts are connected (Brodie
et al., 2019a, b; Seo et al., 2017). However, the precise theoretical relationship between VCC and
CE still remains unclear and warrants further elucidation (Hollebeek et al., 2019; Jaakola and
Alexander, 2014; Vargo and Lusch, 2016a).
Establishing the precise nature of the theoretical relationship between VCC and CE is
important because Storbacka et al. (2016) have shown how the microfoundation of CE can be

Journal of Service Theory and
Practice
Vol. 30 No. 1, 2020
pp. 57-77
© Emerald Publishing Limited
2055-6225
DOI 10.1108/JSTP-04-2019-0093

JSTP
30,1

58

used to advance understanding of the more macro-level foundation theory of SDL. This
reflects the need to continually oscillate between micro and macro perspectives and to
investigate the complexity of phenomena at the micro-level of analysis to understand macrolevel phenomena (Leroy et al., 2013; Vargo, 2011). As Conduit and Chen (2017) note, VCC is a
transcending perspective of marketing, an umbrella term, but it “requires bridging concepts
such as engagement to bring relevance to inform marketing/market practices” (p. 714).
Bridging concepts enhance understanding and reflect business practice, thereby being
conducive to empirical evaluation, which ultimately enables a meta-theoretic perspective to
move forward (Vargo and Lusch, 2016b). This emphasis on bridging the micro and macro is
reflected in the fact that engagement emerges and VCC occurs in the broader context of
consumers’ social interactions (Edvardsson et al., 2011) and practices (Seo et al., 2017).
Chandler and Lusch (2015) note the urgent need to account more fully for the influence of
context, experience, and meaning making also echoed in the more recent call for “customer
centric research with a focus on interactive experiences and experience of practices” (Conduit
and Chen, 2017, p. 717).
This study responds to these important calls for further research on CE and VCC, and
especially the need to clarify the theoretical relationship between them, by adopting a
problematization approach to theorizing. We reveal three shared assumptions evident in
extant CE and SDL theorizing (Alvesson and Sandberg, 2011) and demonstrate that existing
perspectives are inadequate for explaining these assumptions theoretically, therefore
necessitating the introduction of an alternative perspective (Locke and Golden-Biddle, 1997).
The first two assumptions are (1) that CE and SDL processes are cyclical and iterative in
nature, and (2) that these processes are comprised of individual temporally bound episodes,
experiences, and states, while simultaneously being brought together in a process of
accumulation or aggregation (Brodie et al., 2011; Vargo and Lusch, 2016a). Currently, there is
no theoretical mechanism to explain how accumulation and aggregation occur (Chandler and
Lusch, 2015). The third assumption is that CE occurs “by virtue of” or is “typified by” value
cocreative experiences (Brodie et al., 2011; Jaakola and Alexander, 2014; Storbacka et al.,
2016). Again, there is no theoretical mechanism to explain precisely how this occurs
(Hollebeek et al., 2019).
To explain these three assumptions we use practice theory – a higher-order perspective
and recognized meta-theoretical lens of SDL (Vargo and Lusch, 2016b) – and more specifically
Bourdieu’s theory of practice and his concept of habitus (Bourdieu, 1977, 1990). Prior CE and
SDL research has noted the potential usefulness of habitus for seeing past dispositions as a
property of engagement (Chandler and Lusch, 2015), and recent research has recommended
Bourdieu as an alternative perspective for investigating engagement (Brodie et al., 2019a, b),
but there are apparently no studies that have responded to this challenge. In contrast,
consumer researchers have long employed habitus and Bourdieu’s theoretical ideas to
investigate how socially and culturally situated customers develop tastes and preferences for
product/service offerings and brands and how they incorporate and use these in their
everyday practices (see e.g. Arsel and Bean, 2013; Arsel and Thompson, 2011; Holt, 1998;
McAlexander et al., 2014; Thompson and Ustuner, 2015). Bourdieu’s theoretical ideas and
concepts are therefore a recognized but underutilized theoretical perspective in VCC and CE.
Habitus provides a theoretical mechanism to explain how VCC practices and CE are
influenced by highly personalized and subjective individual experiences (the micro) and
broader institutional and cultural norms and structures within markets (the macro) (Brodie
et al., 2019a, b; Chandler and Vargo, 2011). We argue that habitus can therefore be thought of
as a customer value lens, which guides VCC practice, the perception, assessment, and
evaluation of value cocreative experiences and which provides a trigger for potential CE.
Briefly, this shows firms, brand managers, and service designers and practitioners that every
service encounter or value cocreative episode involves an experience that is perceived and

reconciled through a customer’s existing value lens, which may potentially trigger an
engagement state.
By integrating and extending prior conceptualizations of VCC and CE, this study makes
two contributions to service thought (MacInnis, 2011). First, we demonstrate how habitus as a
customer value lens provides a theoretical mechanism to explain the iterative and cyclical
processes of VCC and CE, the experientially accumulating process of creating, perceiving,
assessing, and determining value (Ellway and Dean, 2016; Gr€onroos and Gummerus, 2014;
Vargo and Lusch, 2016a), and the aggregation of engagement states into a broader
engagement process (Brodie et al., 2011; Hollebeek et al., 2019). The habituated customer value
lens demonstrates that CE occurs “by virtue of” and “is typified by” (Brodie et al., 2011)
sensemaking processes associated with VCC practice and experience. Second, we introduce
the metaphor of the engagement rope as mental imagery to simplify the incredibly complex
aggregation of engagement states, dimensions, and value cocreative episodes and
experiences, so that aggregation can be conceived as a process of intertwinement. This
metaphor fills a gap in extant literature because it shows how individual engagement states
are aggregated into a broader engagement process that is underpinned by a customer’s
habituated value lens, which both informs and is informed by value cocreative experiences.
The customer value lens and CE rope enable us to accommodate the theoretical complexities
of VCC and CE but simplify these ideas so that they are more accessible to nonacademic
audiences – service professionals and practitioners, firms, and brand managers.
The paper is structured as follows. First, the problematization approach that guides the
study is outlined. A critical review of relevant literature is then used to identify key
assumptions and limitations of VCC and CE research. Next, we introduce practice theory and
the concept of habitus as a customer value lens. We then explain how the customer value lens
helps us to explain the nature of VCC and CE processes and the relationship between them. A
visual framework encompassing value cocreative experiences and engagement states is
introduced, along with the notion of the CE rope, and an illustrative example is provided to
illuminate the theoretical mechanisms at play. The paper concludes with theoretical
contributions, future research, and practical implications.
2. A problematization approach
A problematization approach to theorizing attempts to think differently about what is
already known (Foucault, 1985). For Alvesson and Sandberg (2011), problematization is a
process of identifying and challenging assumptions that underpin existing literature – “the
necessary presuppositions researchers make about a subject matter in order to develop the
specific theory about it” (Alvesson and Sandberg, 2011, p. 253) – and then replacing them with
an alternative set of assumptions. Alvesson and Sandberg (2011) identify five types of
assumptions that can be problematized – in-house, root metaphor, paradigm, ideology, and
field assumptions. Their perspective on problematization is highly critical as it involves an
explicit claim that past research is “wrong” in some way. In contrast, Locke and
Golden-Biddle (1997) see problematization as a process of identifying a body of literature
to call into question the research that already exists by complaining that it is either
incomplete, or inadequate, or incommensurate. This form of problematizing is less critical as
only the incommensurability problematization involves the argument that past research is
“wrong” in some way.
Our problematization approach was firstly guided by Alvesson and Sandberg (2011)
because we identified in-house assumptions that underpinned extant literature. In-house
assumptions “exist within a particular school of thought in the sense that they are shared and
accepted as unproblematic by its advocates” (p. 254) and refer to a set of ideas held by a
theoretical school about a specific subject matter or phenomenon of interest. As stated
previously, the particular in-house assumptions that we identified are first, that VCC and CE

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
59

JSTP
30,1

60

are iterative and cyclical processes; second, that those processes involve an accumulation or
aggregation of individual episodes, experiences, or states; and third, that CE “occurs by virtue
of” and “is typified by” the cocreation of value and corresponding cocreative experiences. To
surface the three assumptions stated earlier, we followed Alvesson and Sandberg’s (2011)
process of analyzing “exemplars” or path-defining studies (Abbott, 2001; Kuhn, 1970) in CE
and SDL to interrogate the assumptions that underpin them and to show how these are
reproduced more broadly in other studies.
After identifying these assumptions, our problematization then departed from Alvesson
and Sandberg’s (2011) approach because there are compelling arguments in the literature to
indicate that the three assumptions are not open to challenge. Thus, we proceeded from the
identification and acceptance of these assumptions to develop an inadequacy
problematization. An inadequacy problematization “claims that work in the extant field
has overlooked perspectives relevant and important to better understanding and explaining
the phenomena” (Locke and Golden-Biddle, 1997, p. 1047). The relevant perspective that we
contend has been overlooked is Bourdieu’s practice theory and especially his concept of
habitus. The potential of practice theory has been recognized in SDL as a meta-theoretical
lens that underpins this school of thought (Vargo and Lusch, 2016a) but, to date, practice
theory has been underutilized by CE research relative to SDL scholarship (Storbacka et al.,
2016). There is, however, growing recognition of the theoretical potential of Bourdieu’s ideas
in SDL literature, but his work is often cited as a general reference to practice theory (e.g.
Echeverri and Sk
alen, 2011; Gummerus, 2013; Helkkula and Kelleher, 2010; Helkkula et al.,
2012), with a few exceptions (Ellway, 2014b; Ellway and Dean, 2016; McColl-Kennedy et al.,
2012, 2015). In the following sections we review existing SDL and CE research to surface the
three common assumptions – the key ideas held by these two schools of marketing thought –
and then we introduce Bourdieu’s theory of practice as an alternative perspective to provide a
stronger theoretical grounding for the ideas and to address their conceptual inadequacy
(Locke and Golden-Biddle, 1997).
3. A practice–theoretical approach to SDL
VCC practices are defined as “what customers ‘think and do’ to extract or co-create value from
resources in their everyday lives” (developed from Ellway and Dean, 2016, p. 4). Warde (2005)
highlighted that while practice is routine “doing,” practice also involves mental processes and
builds on the past, and Arsel and Bean (2013, p. 901) contend that practice represents the
“ongoing routines, engagements, and performances that constitute social life.” Thus, VCC
practice defined as what customers “think and do,” has a behavioral emphasis, is situated in
the customer’s life world, and includes personal resources and mental processes, which
provide meaning and the basis for change over time (Ellway and Dean, 2016). Scholars have
argued that VCC practice and VCC experience are intertwined (Ellway and Dean, 2016;
Helkkula et al., 2012), and VCC has even been described as “a lived or joint reality of use and
experience” (Ranjan and Read, 2016, p. 315, emphasis added). In the current study, experience
refers to experience of practice, defined as “the individual’s unique and context-bound,
phenomenological interpretation of value co-creation activity” (Ellway and Dean, 2016, p. 5).
Practice is fundamental to value creation (Echeverri and Sk
alen, 2011; McColl-Kennedy et al.,
2012, 2015; Seo et al., 2017) and experience of practice necessarily occurs with reference to
preceding experiences within individual circumstances and reflects the individual’s resultant
cognitive and affective processes.
3.1 The iterative, cyclical, and experientially accumulating process of value cocreation
The iterative and cyclical nature of VCC is a key assumption of SDL theorizing. VCC consists
of the value-generating interaction and collaboration processes within networks of actors

(Vargo and Lusch, 2008a), where value is uniquely and phenomenologically determined by
those actors in a dynamic and unfolding process over time (Gr€onroos and Gummerus, 2014;
Vargo and Lusch, 2016a). Other scholars confirm this view. For example, Helkkula et al. (2012,
p. 61) proposed that value “is constructed based on previous, current, and imaginary future
experiences and is temporal in nature.” More recently, in their review of 149 papers on VCC,
Ranjan and Read (2016, p. 294) found that “joint, reciprocal, and iterative processes are the
basis of the relationship between the customer and the object. . . [and] customer relational
capabilities create value because they increase the possibilities to sense-and-respond and selfreinforce value cycles of dynamic exchange instead of [a] linear chain of interaction. . .
resulting in connected sets of practices that are a source of value in themselves”. In their
extension and update of theory, Vargo and Lusch (2016a) describe S-D logic as a cycle in
which “value cocreation” is developing into one of resource-integrating, reciprocal-serviceproviding actors cocreating value through holistic, meaning-laden experiences in nested and
overlapping service ecosystems, governed and evaluated through their institutional
arrangements (p. 7). Therefore, it is apparent that as consumers incorporate service and
product offerings into their daily practices to create value, which they judge through
experiences of those practices, the process builds temporally in an ongoing cycle. That is, how
we cocreate value with product/service offerings and our experience of it depends partly on
the past, and what we do now may influence or determine how we experience and create value
in the future.
The cyclical process outlined earlier leads to the second key assumption in VCC
theorizing, that is, for each customer, the iterative and cyclical process is an accumulation of
past experience of VCC practice. Owing to the complexity of the two phenomena – VCC
practices and the related experiences – much research has tended to focus on one rather than
on both of them (Helkkula et al., 2012). Experience is internal and subjective (Helkkula, 2011;
Akaka et al., 2015) and customers actively contribute to and interpret their experiences
(Gummerus, 2013). Previous research highlights customer experience as individual, dynamic,
cumulative, and context-bound (e.g. Chandler and Vargo, 2011) and argues that it is built on
one’s prior state of mind and previous interactions, which provide a foundation for the future
(Helkkula and Kelleher, 2010; Vargo and Lusch, 2008a, b). In terms of practice, scholars have
emphasized the importance of contextualizing VCC practice (Chandler and Vargo, 2011;
McColl-Kennedy et al., 2015), especially in relation to the social and cultural contexts in which
customers perform the various activities of their daily lives (Akaka et al., 2013; Edvardsson
et al., 2011; Ellway, 2014b) and where they enact different practices to cocreate value (McCollKennedy et al., 2012, 2017). Thus, cocreation practice requires a focus on understanding both
customers’ individual cocreation practices and how these daily practices are situated in
various social and cultural contexts.
3.2 Bourdieu’s practice theory and the concept of habitus
Bourdieu’s theory of practice has been used extensively in consumer research. Due to the
complexity and depth of his theoretical ideas, consumer researchers have typically prioritized
one or two concepts over others, for example, field and capital (Arsel and Thompson, 2011;
McAlexander et al., 2014), habitus and cultural capital (Holt, 1998; Thompson and Ustuner,
2015), or habitus (Arsel and Bean, 2013; Holt, 1998). We adopt a similar approach as we
prioritize habitus due to its centrality to the purpose of this study but, in using habitus, we
also need to discuss field.
Bourdieu (1984) argues that our taste emerges through culturalization and socialization
processes in early life and continuing through adulthood, which form dispositions, attitudes,
and interests (the multilayered concept of habitus) in cultural and material products, objects,
and activities. Habitus is developed through the various fields in which our daily practices
occur, the social spaces comprised of rules, resources, and structures that guide our practice.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
61

JSTP
30,1

62

Fields can be smaller social spaces, such as the education field of an individual university, or
much broader social spaces, such as the global field of MBA education or the academic field in
any given country. Fields influence our habitus because during the time we spend in them, we
are exposed to cultural norms, rules, and regulations, which structure our thinking and conduct.
Through this process, the structures of fields become incorporated into our habitus –under as
corresponding structures in the form of our attitudes, dispositions, and interests – which shape
practice. In this respect, fields are akin to habitats – and the habitats we spend our time in
contribute to the formation of our habitus. However, because as social agents – or actors in SDL
terminology – we all have agency, we can always choose to do otherwise in the sense that we
can reject or ignore the field and enact different structures through our practice.
Habitus provides a theoretical mechanism to demonstrate how the macro – the objective
structure of social fields (or habitats) – influences the micro – our practice and highly
individual and subjective experience of it (through our habitus), and vice versa. Habitus
therefore shows how the active presence of past experiences influences our current practice.
Crucially, Bourdieu (1977, 1984, 1990) argues that much practice is unconscious and habitual
in nature, meaning that the incorporation of macro, institutional, and field-specific structures
into our way of perceiving and evaluating the world is often implicit. However, at the same
time, habitus accounts for the agency of actors and the capacity for structured improvisation
because we may become aware of our habitual practice and as a consequence reflect upon and
change it. Habitus therefore accounts for sensemaking in temporally unfolding processes
across time and space, and agents’ individual trajectories, always contextualized in the social
fields in which their practice occurs. The interests, attitudes, and dispositions of habitus are
both durable (they endure over time but can change) and transposable (they can be formed in
one field but influence our practice in another field). In the following section we will explain
how habitus can greatly assist us in understanding VCC by acting as a customer value lens,
through which we perceive and evaluate market offerings, products, services, and brands,
choose which of them to incorporate into our VCC practice, and consequently assess and
determine the value we derive from doing so.
3.3 Habitus as customer value lens and sensemaking processes
In the context of markets and consumers, habitus represents a customer value lens because it
is implicated in how we perceive and evaluate market offerings (products, services, and
brands), how we incorporate these into the various aspects of our lives, and how we
subsequently assess and determine their value. Habitus as a customer value lens provides a
theoretical mechanism for explaining the first two assumptions in VCC and CE literature: the
cyclical and iterative nature of VCC practice and experience and the accumulation of value
cocreative experiences. These explanations are discussed further but first we introduce
sensemaking associated with habitus.
The theoretical mechanism of habitus involves two types of sensemaking processes
(Figure 1). First, as consumers, we perceive and experience VCC practice through our habitus –
our customer value lens. How we experience VCC practice does not happen in a vacuum. Our
perception, assessment, and determination of value are based upon our customer value lens
because we experience practice through our existing dispositions, interests, and attitudes,
which comprise our habitus. We refer to this first sensemaking process, where habitus is
implicated in how we experience VCC practice, as habitus-perceiving (SP1 – sensemaking
process one). The emphasis here is upon habitus always actively influencing, through past
experience, our current and future VCC practice and our related experience of it. But our
perception, assessment, experience, and determination of VCC practice are not only influenced
by our habituated customer value lens – our experience of practice is also implicated in a
process of habitus-shaping (SP1 – sensemaking process two). Through this second
sensemaking process, our habituated customer value lens is either reproduced or changed.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
63

Figure 1.
Habitus as customer
value lens for value
cocreation practice and
experience

This second sensemaking process (SP2) shows us that the value cocreative experiences of
incorporating product/service offerings into our VCC practice may force us to reflect upon,
question, reconsider, and subsequently modify our customer value lens. Our attitudes,
interests, or dispositions toward practice and the use of different brands or product/service
offerings may thus change in relation to our VCC practice and experience of it.
As indicated earlier, the customer value lens provides a theoretical explanation of the first
two assumptions: the iterative and cyclical nature of VCC processes and experiential
accumulation. Our habituated customer value lens “predisposes” us to certain objects and
activities, to be interested in them, and to interpret them in certain ways, including perceiving
and assessing their value – always based upon past experience of value cocreative practice,
which is contextualized in the various fields we inhabit. But at the same time, any individual
episode, scenario, or situation associated with the cocreation of value can prompt us to reflect
upon our experience, how it is different, what is happening in our VCC practice, and why.
Thus, experiential accumulation occurs through the customer value lens, which is at the
center of the iterative and cyclical process of VCC. The habituated customer value lens
therefore provides a theoretical explanation in three ways: (1) how value either emerges (see
Echeverri and Sk
alen, 2011; Gr€onroos, 2011; Korkman, 2006) or is instrumentally created
(Gr€onroos and Voima, 2013), (2) how value is both perceived and determined by individuals
within social contexts (Gr€onroos and Gummerus, 2014), and (3) the notion that VCC practice
and experience involve unconscious and anticipated/foreseen aspects (Helkkula et al., 2010).
The habituated aspect of the customer value lens shows that the experiential accumulation of
value cocreative experiences can be unconscious and implicit, but also that the iterative and
cyclical process can be disturbed or interrupted through conscious practice where experience
becomes explicit, prompting possible changes in the customer value lens and how we
perceive, assess, and determine future VCC. The customer value lens thus acts as a kind of
filter in the sense that it helps us to “see” and “focus” on particular market offerings while
ignoring others, with a change in habituated value lens “refocusing” our attention through
changed interests, attitudes, or dispositions, such that we may “see” the potential value in
other market offerings, or perceive and determine value differently in relation to existing
offerings we already use.
In the following section we demonstrate how the habituated customer value lens also
provides a theoretical mechanism for explaining the aggregation of engagement states and
value cocreative experiences in the iterative and cyclical process of CE.

JSTP
30,1

64

4. A practice–theoretical approach to customer engagement
CE is defined as “a psychological state that occurs by virtue of interactive, co-creative
customer experiences with a focal agent/object”, where “specific CE states occur within
broader, dynamic processes typified by the co-creation of value” (Brodie et al., 2011, p. 257;
emphasis added). That is, CE can be understood as both a customer’s psychological state
(Hollebeek, 2011; Hollebeek et al., 2019; Mollen and Wilson, 2010; Vivek et al., 2012) and a
process (Bowden, 2009; Brodie et al., 2019a, b; Malthouse et al., 2016). CE is more than
participation in service as it reflects interactivity between focal engagement subject(s) and
object(s). The process involves behavioral manifestations toward the brand or firm that may
exceed transactions (Harmeling et al., 2017; Jaakkola and Alexander, 2014; Van Doorn et al.,
2010; Verhoef et al., 2010) and can be further facilitated by engagement platforms and
boundary objects, which may evolve to ecosystems (Breidbach et al., 2014; Storbacka
et al., 2016).
As with VCC processes, CE processes are also assumed to be iterative and cyclical in
nature and involve the aggregation of individual engagement states and experiences (Brodie
et al., 2011; Chandler and Lusch, 2015; Malthouse and Calder, 2011). CE is “a dynamic and
iterative process that reflects actors’ dispositions to invest resources in their interactions with
other connected actors in a service system” (Brodie et al., 2019a, b, p. 2). We note the reference
to dispositions, which is also evident in work that states that engagement entails both actor
disposition to engage and the activity of engaging, where engagement “will be pathdependent in terms of both the history and experience of the actor, and the routines related to
the engagement” (Storbacka et al., 2016, p. 3012). Storbacka et al. (2016) suggest that this view
is conducive to the application of practice theory.
The second assumption concerning aggregation of accumulation is also evident in extant
literature on CE. CE is an ongoing process that may vary in scope, complexity, and intensity
at any point in time, from short-term to long-term, and relatively stable to highly variable
processes, where the “engagement process may be viewed as a series of aggregated
engagement states” (Brodie et al., 2011, p. 259). Moreover, this aggregation is necessarily
linked to antecedents and consequences of engagement. For example, the required relational
CE antecedents include “participation” and “involvement,” which may also extend to
coincide, or occur concurrently, with CE, while CE relational consequences may include, for
example, “commitment,” “trust,” “self-brand connections,” consumers’ “emotional
attachment” to focal brands, and “loyalty” (Brodie et al., 2011). However, the circularity of
service relationships means that such consequences may become antecedents in subsequent
processes and/or cycles (Brodie et al., 2011). Aggregation can be understood as process of
engagement “based on actors’ present-day connections that have emerged from past service
experiences and are oriented toward future service experiences” (Chandler and Lusch, 2015,
p. 5).
There is, however, no theoretical mechanism to explain how isolated temporally bounded
engagement states are aggregated in a process, which forms something more permanent and
enduring. Put another way, there is the assumption of separate entities being joined together
in a broader process, but there is no concept to explain how this happens theoretically. Given
existing recognition of the importance of dispositions in CE research (Brodie et al., 2019a, b;
Chandler and Lusch, 2015; Storbacka et al., 2016), the concept of habitus as a customer value
lens provides a theoretical explanation for how dispositions emerge and change or endure in a
temporally unfolding process. That is, individual, episodic, and temporally bound
engagement states leave a more temporally enduring footprint on habitus, through
dispositions (and interests and attitudes). The customer’s habituated value lens therefore
provides a dynamic, durable, and temporally enduring concept that explains aggregation in
CE. Aggregation of individual engagement states and different dimensions of engagement
occurs through the strengthening or changing of dispositions, interests, and attitudes of the

habituated customer value lens. In their SDL informed framework for CE, Hollebeek et al.
(2019) emphasize the importance of customer learning, which involves the “development of
mental rules and guidelines for processing relevant brand-related information, the
acquisition of new brand knowledge or insight, and ensuing behavioral modification based
on new brand knowledge or insight gained” (p. 167). Habitus again provides the theoretical
mechanism to explain how customer learning occurs in the process of engagement through
the strengthening and shaping of their customer value lens (but not always consciously or
explicitly, as we have noted in relation to our discussion of VCC). Furthermore, since habitus
is always developed in relation to and through fields of practice, it is possible to explain how
institutions (norms, rules) and the contextualized lived experience of actors (Akaka et al.,
2013; Chandler and Vargo, 2011; Ellway and Dean, 2016; Seo et al., 2017; Storbacka et al., 2016)
are implicated in engagement, through the habituated value lens, which has been formed and
shaped through contextualized experiences in the various fields that customers move
through in their daily lives.
5. Linking value cocreation and customer engagement through habitus
Recent studies recognize either the coexistence or interdependence of CE and VCC, with some
studies highlighting value propositions or expectations as a driver of engagement (Chandler
and Lusch, 2015; Jaakola and Alexander, 2014). These studies tend to separate VCC and CE/
AE (actor engagement) (or CE behaviors/activity) and argue that actors providing resources
is a key feature of CE (Brodie et al., 2019a, b; Jaakola and Alexander, 2014; Storbacka et al.,
2016) because resource integration is fundamental to VCC (Chandler and Lusch, 2015). Other
scholars argue that engagement practices and VCC are inseparable. For example, Seo et al.
(2017, p. 328) state “we posit that it is not possible to disentangle brand experiences and
emergent value-in-use from the brand engagement practices from which they emerge”.
Building on Ellway and Dean (2016), Seo et al. (2017) propose a more parsimonious model of
entanglement of the concepts, in which value-in-use serves as the interface between “value
co-creative brand experiences” and “brand engagement practices”. Similarly, Hollebeek et al.
(2019) present an “S-D logic-informed” framework for CE in which they contend that
“customer resource integration, in some form, extends to coincide with CE” (p. 161). Thus,
there is consensus in the literature that CE and VCC are aligned, intertwined, or entangled,
but a means of theoretically explaining this, or the argument that CE “occurs by virtue of” and
“is typified by” the cocreation of value and experience (Brodie et al., 2011), is not yet evident.
We advance Figure 2 to fill this gap.
Figure 2 provides a visual model that links VCC and CE through the habituated customer
value lens and corresponding sensemaking processes introduced in Figure 1. Figure 2 shows
how engagement states and the engagement process, on one hand, emerge from and are
dependent upon the practice and related experience of VCC (from Figure 1), but
simultaneously that engagement can contribute to and influence that same VCC process.
At the center of both of these interdependent processes is the customer value lens, which
perceives, assesses, and interprets VCC and engagement, but is also actively reproduced and
shaped through VCC and CE. Therefore, both VCC and CE are evaluated through cognitive
and affective processes, the “sensing and responding,” which result in connected sets of
practices that are a source of value in themselves (Ranjan and Read, 2016). Figure 2 shows
that CE involves engagement states, which occur by virtue of VCC experiences, within
broader, dynamic processes (Brodie et al., 2011) and importantly, cannot proceed
independently of the underlying experiences (Malthouse and Calder, 2011). The experience
of engagement is interpreted through the customer’s habituated value lens and also serves to
reproduce or shape it, which then influences future sensemaking, engagement, and VCC
practice.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
65

JSTP
30,1

66

Figure 2.
A practice-based
conceptualization of
value cocreation and
customer engagement

The habitus-perceiving and habitus-shaping sensemaking processes involved in the
experience and practice of VCC can therefore help us to better appreciate the practice and
experience of engagement. Actors experience their VCC practice, which is at times conscious
and other times unconscious, and this experience affects CE (link designated by the left
vertical arrow in Figure 2) and may influence subsequent engagement states as they occur
within VCC processes and operate via the habituated value lens (link designated by the right
vertical arrow in Figure 2).
To illuminate the entirety of the model and the complexity of the subprocesses that
comprise it, an illustrative example is provided in section 5.2. However, before using the
illustrative example to illuminate the theoretical mechanisms, we introduce a metaphor – the
rope – as mental imagery to simplify the complexity of the CE process.
5.1 The customer engagement rope
Metaphors have an established history of providing theoretical and practical insights, for
example, the service theater (Grove et al., 1998; Stuart and Tax, 2004) and the customer journey
(Ellway, 2014a; Lemon and Verhoef, 2016). Metaphors provide a way of seeing and not seeing
in the sense that they draw our attention to new or previously hidden aspects or features of a
phenomenon while ignoring others (Morgan, 1998). By the use of metaphor, a complex
phenomenon and the abstract ideas underpinning it (the target domain) can be more easily
appreciated and understood through a simple and more familiar phenomenon (the source
domain). In the aforementioned two examples, service and the customer experience are the
complex target domains, while the theater and journey are the more familiar source domains
that offer metaphors to understand the targets. Metaphors offer a new but partial way of
thinking about a phenomenon rather than providing a complete account of it (Morgan, 1998).
So, for example, the service theater metaphor helps us to appreciate the on-stage and back-

stage elements of service, that front-line service employees play a role during their
interactions with customers, which can be improved through customer scripts. But there is no
claim that all aspects of a theater can be linked to and explain all the aspects of service.
A rope offers a powerful metaphor for thinking about CE. As per Morgan (1998), we are
claiming that the simple everyday object of the rope (the source domain) can help us to see and
understand CE (the target domain). There are four particular features of a rope that can help
us to better appreciate CE and stimulate thinking about it: (1) the composition of the rope in
terms of individual threads; (2) the process of intertwinement of these individual threads to
form the rope; (3) the possibility that the threads differ in terms of size, color, and length; and
(4) the fact the strength and length of a rope are dependent upon the corresponding length,
strength, and number of individual threads that are intertwined to form it.
First, engagement states and dimensions of engagement (emotional, affective, behavioral),
and the value co-creative practices and experiences upon which they are based, essentially
represent individual threads or fibers, which collectively form the process of engagement – or
the rope. Second, the rope can help us to better understand the complexity of aggregation and
accumulation processes in terms of a distinctive feature of a rope – intertwinement – which
involves the tying together of the individual threads. The aggregation and accumulation in
the iterative and cyclical processes of VCC and CE are more than the simple arithmetic
addition of individual elements. The process of intertwinement of threads in a rope succinctly
and clearly captures the more complex nature of the aggregation and accumulation
processes. Thus, the individual threads of isolated and temporally bound engagement states,
value cocreative practices, and experiences associated with sensemaking processes can be
thought of as becoming intertwined in a dynamic and temporally unfolding process – thus
forming an engagement rope. Third, a rope commonly contains threads of different size, color,
and length. The size and color of a thread may change, becoming a different color or becoming
thicker or thinner. Changes in the color of the threads reflect the fact that antecedents can
become consequences, which in turn can become further antecedents. Similarly, individual
threads can differ in thickness, which reflects the fact that a particular engagement state or
dimension may be more important or impactful than another, based upon the corresponding
VCC experience of practice from which it emerges. Individual threads may also differ in
length, which is reflective of the fact that to endure, temporally bound engagement states or
dimensions must be linked to ongoing value cocreative experiences if they are to last beyond
an individual episode or experience. That is, although engagement can reproduce and
strengthen the customer’s value lens, without reoccurring VCC and corresponding
experiences unfolding over time, the temporally bound engagement state ceases to have a
more temporally enduring existence in a longer process of engagement. Finally, the strength
and length of the rope can also be thought of in terms of the intensity and temporal duration of
engagement, which are dependent upon the corresponding number, thickness, and length of
the individual threads, and more importantly how tightly they become intertwined.
The rope metaphor therefore helps us to think about the complex, iterative, cyclical
aggregation process of CE through the mental imagery of a simple everyday object. The
process of intertwinement that is fundamental to every rope also provides a further and
arguably more important insight. Through the process of intertwinement, it becomes
difficult to pull apart or separate the individual threads, to see where one ends and another
begins, or to appreciate precisely how the threads are intertwined. Ten ropes could all
differ dramatically in their size, color, and number of threads, but common to all of them is
that intertwinement forms the rope and is crucial to its corresponding strength. The
implication for CE research is that theoretically it may be difficult to identify and isolate
individual threads of engagement in simple cause and effect relationships based upon
universal laws. Rather, it might be more realistic – and useful – to first acknowledge the
existence of many different types of engagement states, dimensions, and overlapping

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
67

JSTP
30,1

68

antecedents/consequences (the colors, size, and number of threads), and second to
acknowledge that how these become intertwined may differ considerably between
customers and the various value cocreative practices they enact.
5.2 An illustrative example: the overworked and stressed academic
This section provides an illustrative example to highlight the theoretical mechanisms
associated with the customer value lens and engagement rope.
5.2.1 Chris. Chris is an early-career academic. His university’s new strategic plan sets out
an impact agenda, so in addition to his existing academic research practice of maintaining his
publishing pipeline, increasing his citations and H-index, and seeking funding, he now has to
figure out how his research impacts business and society. This change in university policy
(a structure in the academic field) is mirrored in other universities due to changing
government policy for university funding (the national academic field). Chris is struggling to
cope with the added pressure and stress associated with this change, not just because it has
increased his workload but because he sees academic work as theoretical work – his PhD
supervisor and the department were very theoretically focused, so he enjoys conceptual work
and is disinterested in practice (his theoretical academic habitus shaped from prior experience
in a field). Due to the policy change, the past three months have been tough: Chris wakes up
tired, his body is stiff, his sleep is often interrupted as he can’t “switch-off” before bed, his
daily cup of coffee has become three, and he is hardly involved in any physical activity
(changing dispositions and practices). His habitual practice has gradually emerged, being
neither planned nor entirely conscious, and his habitus is struggling to respond to the
changing impact agenda because this modified structure of the academic field of practice is
misaligned with his habituated dispositions toward theoretical academic work.
5.2.2 Goopa. Goopa, Chris’s colleague and friend, arrives back from doing fieldwork on
transformative service initiatives in India. Due to yoga’s ancestral roots in her motherland,
Goopa practiced yoga when she was younger but she stopped as work and other
responsibilities took over (exposure to other fields of practice influences habitus and changes in
practice). Returning home and seeing people practice yoga at sunset and sunrise reminded her
of the warmth and energy it gave her (a habitus-shaping sensemaking episode triggered by a
memory of her prior VCC practice). Goopa began practicing yoga again during the first week
(becoming redisposed through a modified customer value lens) and continued everyday
thereafter, feeling calmer and more able to maintain focus at work for longer periods of time
(an experientially accumulating process of sensemaking perceived through the customer value
lens, which strengthened her disposition to yoga practice based upon her assessment and
determination of value). By the start of the second week, she was doing yoga in the evenings to
relax before bed (further strengthening her customer value lens based upon experience of
cocreative practice). This change stimulated Goopa to get to know the locals, with whom she
discussed the different forms and schools of yoga – gatherings from which she always left
feeling energized (involvement and participation emerge based upon prior experience of value
cocreative practice, prompting further habitus-forming sensemaking processes to strengthen
the habituated dispositions to yoga in her customer value lens).
5.2.3 Chris and Goopa have lunch. On his way to meet Goopa, Chris passes a poster in this
favorite coffee shop – “Breath Better, Feel Better” – advertising yoga classes for “stressed out
executives and busy professionals,” promising “immediate benefits and a more balanced life.”
Mumbo jumbo, he thinks – success in his academic practice is based upon hard thinking and
lots of it (his habituated value lens perceives yoga to be an airy-fairy idea so he dismisses the
value proposition). During their lunch, Goopa talks about her rediscovery of yoga, describing
the benefits she has realized from it, and suggests that Chris should try it – if only to loosen up
his back! (the recent experientially accumulating and explicit experience of her VCC practice of
yoga is still fresh in her mind, and she is clearly engaged, which prompts her attempt to influence

the VCC practice of her friend). Chris is adamant “he has no time for that,” yoga “will probably
make it worse anyway,” and “his back isn’t his major concern, his work is!” (his customer value
lens differs dramatically from Goopa’s, evaluating yoga as holding no potential value for him,
and thus being disinterested in the value proposition).
5.2.4 The deadline and the yoga class. The following day, with a deadline for submission to
a special issue looming, Chris becomes anxious and calls Goopa, who agrees to read his draft
and provide feedback on the condition that he comes to a yoga class. With Goopa’s help, he
submits the paper on time. He is still not really interested in the yoga class, but he does reflect
upon his friend’s success and happiness and how she helped him to meet the deadline (a
habitus-shaping sensemaking process prompted by the value cocreative episode). Chris
reluctantly goes to the yoga class and becomes consciously aware of his breathing practice –
slowing it down during the session – and immediately feeling his body relax as a consequence
(a habitus-shaping sensemaking process arising from the experience of VCC practice). He can’t
actually recall ever being conscious of his breathing patterns in the past. How does he usually
breathe? – unevenly and often with short breaths because he is always thinking and caught
up in the multiple demands of academic life (a habitus sensemaking process where he questions
how the structures of academic field have impacted upon his habitus). He has a drink with
Goopa and other members of the class, where they discuss the benefits of yoga and
importance of seeing yoga as a tool – to strengthen the body and mind and to create a more
balanced approach to a busy and demanding life (engaged actors discussing their VCC with
others). That evening when Chris recalls this conversation, he reflects upon the notion of tools
in academic practice and realizes that his perception of tools has been limited to technological
ones – his laptop, his specialist writing and data analysis software, and of course his brain –
rather than “softer” tools such as yoga (his attitude and disposition to academic tools in his
habituated value lens is changing, having broken his habitual practice and opened up the
possibility of cocreating value differently).
5.2.5 Practicing yoga and becoming a member. Chris signs up for a three-month course of
yoga classes at the same studio and for the following fortnight he attends class twice a week
and is introduced to different aspects of yogic practice, including the philosophy behind it, the
emphasis on the mind–body connection, and on the importance of “flow” (his customer value
lens is now predisposed to considering the potential value of yoga as a cocreative practice). His
instructor suggests that a caffeine-free herbal tea will assist his breathing so he tries one at
the yoga studio and for the rest of the day feels calmer – after the next class he buys a pack of
tea to take home, which will replace his coffee (his modified customer value lens is now
interested in exploring how a related product/service offering can be incorporated into his VCC
practice, with this sensemaking process situated in the social field and contextualized relative to
other market offerings). Two weeks since starting yoga, he feels more flexible, sits up
straighter in his chair, does regular stretching during work at his desk, and goes for short
walks at least twice each day (his changing habitus begins to influence his value cocreative
academic practice outside of the yoga classes). Chris supplements the formal classes with daily
practice at home and notices that he is less stressed, can focus for longer, and has even begun
to see the impact agenda as a conceptual puzzle – how to relate his theoretical ideas to
laypersons, see himself as a service provider and questioning how his ideas, models, and
frameworks may help real-world practitioners (the experientially accumulating process of
value cocreative episodes further strengthens his changing habituated value lens and opens up
the possibility of further VCC). Chris purchases his own yoga mat – he has been using a spare
at the yoga studio – and starts to socialize with members of the yoga class (involvement and
emerging engagement arising from his value cocreative experiences, interpreted and assessed
through his modified customer value lens).
5.2.6 Becoming engaged. Chris subscribes to a YouTube yoga channel and enjoys reading
others’ experiences as they resonate with his own (participation and involvement, further

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
69

JSTP
30,1

70

evidence of emerging engagement). The stories and experiences in the comments section strike
an emotional chord with Chris, reinforce his thinking about the power of yoga, and prompt
him to post his own comments after each session (emotional and cognitive engagement threads
forming the start of his CE rope). The positivity he feels from the YouTube channel and its
members prompts him to introduce two colleagues from work to yoga, while he also agrees to
record an interview for the yoga studio he attends because he feels a connection between the
values of the studio and his own personal values (intertwining of self-brand connections and
loyalty threads in the engagement rope, continuation of participation and involvement,
triggering VCC with other actors). His initial purchase of the noncaffeine tea and its realized
benefits prompt him to purchase an essential oil burner, a salt lamp, and a book “using yoga
for work performance” from two companies – one recommended by the YouTube channel
and another by the instructor at the studio (customer value lens predisposed to incorporating
broader well-being marketplace offerings into his daily academic and life practice, VCC practice
influenced by engagement platforms).
5.2.7 Cocreating value and strengthening engagement. Two months have passed when
Chris and Goopa next meet for lunch at work. This time, both friends bring energy and
enthusiasm to their conversation. Chris has learned to manage his time more effectively,
improve his performance at work and more importantly, his well-being. Goopa comments on
this change and his enthusiasm for practicing yoga and his revised philosophy toward living
and being (changed customer value lens and value cocreative practice). When Chris mentions
his regular involvement and participation in the YouTube channel, the yoga studio, and
introduction of two colleagues to Yoga, Goopa is delighted and jokes –“Wow you really are
engaged, you’ll be a yogic guru soon!” (frequency of VCC practice, value cocreative episodes,
leading to engagement supported by and contributing to online and offline engagement
platforms). Goopa’s comment causes Chris to pause and reflect for a moment because he has
become very engaged and he is not really sure how because while he made some decisions, the
rest just seemed to happen (emergence of VCC practice and interdependence with engagement,
accumulation, and aggregation of value cocreative experiences and engagement states occurs
but is not always an explicit and conscious process). “So how did all this happen, just because I
convinced you to go to that first yoga class?!” Goopa asks. “Er. . .”, Chris begins, and then
pauses again because there are so many individual threads to the emergence of his VCC
practice and engagement, which are difficult to precisely untangle. Seeing that Chris is
struggling with the question, Goopa decides to go to the restroom – “Have a think about it, I’ll
be back in a few minutes!” Chris reflects upon his journey – the first few weeks were crucial
because they involved so many positive experiences, which opened him up to a new way of
thinking, a new way to approach his academic practice, and increased his appreciation of the
connection between his physical and mental well-being. And one thing led to another, one
positive episode led to another, with the different episodes, experiences, and states becoming
intertwined, one morphing into another, which in turn only strengthened his resolve and
interest. He now recognizes how fundamentally his views and beliefs have changed and how
complex the intertwined threads of his value cocreative and engagement journey are. And
that gives him an idea. Goopa returns and asks, “So?!” Chris smiles, “Well, it’s a complicated
story. It is much easier to explain it if we think in terms of a lens and rope. . .”
6. Theoretical contribution
This paper has been guided by a problematization methodology, which firstly sought to
reveal assumptions evident in extant literature – the shared ideas held by a theoretical school
(Alvesson and Sandberg, 2011) – and secondly argued that existing perspectives were
inadequate to explain these assumptions, thus necessitating the introduction of an alternative
perspective (Locke and Golden-Biddle, 1997). We identified three assumptions and shared

ideas – the iterative and cyclical nature of VCC and CE processes; the aggregation or
accumulation of experiences and engagement states in VCC and CE processes; and finally,
that CE is “typified by” and “occurs by virtue of” value cocreative experiences. We argued
that there was no theoretical mechanism to explain these assumptions and consequently
introduced Bourdieu’s practice theory and his habitus concept as an alternative perspective.
Through this problematization, we provide a conceptual contribution to VCC and CE
theorizing (MacInnis, 2011). Conceptual integration is a form of relating that involves seeing
something in a new way by finding a higher-order perspective on how entities are related,
including revealing similarities between or connecting together entities, often by introducing
simplicity to tackle recognized complexity (MacInnis, 2011, emphasis added). This paper has
introduced the higher-order perspective of Bourdieu’s practice theory and habitus as a
theoretical mechanism to explain the three assumptions and to conceptually integrate the
processes of VCC and CE. Habitus as a customer value lens provides a bridging concept for
the iterative and cyclical, experientially accumulating, process of VCC practice and
experience, and for the interdependent process of CE, involving the aggregation of individual
engagement states. The habituated customer value lens provides a temporally enduring
theoretical mechanism to explain how temporally bounded value cocreative episodes,
experiences, and engagement states are aggregated and accumulated. Thus, CE occurs “by
virtue of” sensemaking processes associated with the customer value lens, which interpret
and assess experiences and determine the VCC practice more broadly, which in turn triggers
CE, again interpreted and experienced through the customer value lens, and being “typified
by” the ongoing cocreation of value and value cocreative experiences (Brodie et al., 2011).
Habitus as a customer value lens has significant potential as a theoretical mechanism
because it acts upon VCC and CE processes – by influencing what customers are interested in,
what they are disposed to do, and their attitude toward objects and doings, and how they
perceive their related experiences and assess and determine the value of them and their
practice – but is also acted upon by VCC and CE processes, because VCC practice, experience
of it, and potential engagement similarly reproduce or modify the customer’s value lens. The
habituated customer value lens therefore accounts for the joining of the micro-level individual
experience of value cocreative practice and engagement, with broader macro-level social and
cultural rules and arrangement (Brodie et al., 2019a, b; Storbacka et al., 2016). The habituated
customer value lens can be modified by those value cocreative experiences, which shows
theoretically how a revised perceptive evaluative lens is provided for further practice and
experience, thereby creating a recursive cycle (Chandler and Lusch, 2015; Ellway and Dean,
2016; Seo et al., 2017). The habituated customer value lens also shows how individual
cocreative experiences and engagement states become accumulated into the customer’s value
lens for perceiving, assessing, and determining their VCC practice (Gr€onroos and Gummerus,
2014; Vargo and Lusch, 2016a, b). We have therefore demonstrated how habitus-perceiving
and habitus-forming sensemaking processes can explain triggers for engagement and
subsequently lead to further customer-initiated VCC for the central actor and/or other
customers. Our conceptualization explains the circularity of engagement and cocreation
processes and their interrelationships with practice and experience, which, as iterative
processes built on mental models, show that the consequences of one process become the
antecedents of another (Helkkula et al., 2012; Ranjan and Read, 2016).
We used the mental imagery of the customer value lens and the CE rope in an attempt to
simplify VCC and CE for a nonacademic audience. This reflects the nature of
conceptualization as a “process of abstract thinking involving the mental representation of
an idea. . .“seeing or ‘understanding’ something abstract, in one’s mind” (MacInnis, 2011, p.
140). As academic research on VCC and CE progresses, the more we realize the inherent
complexity in the phenomena and the necessary sophistication in the theoretical ideas
required to explain them. Take, for example, the complexity inherent within CE. Brodie et al.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
71

JSTP
30,1

72

(2011) distinguish between emotional, affective, and behavioral dimensions of engagement;
identify CE levels/valence; and show that engagement has both antecedents and
consequences, and that over time, antecedents can become consequences in future
processes. Fehrer et al. (2013) uncovered over 50 antecedents and consequences associated
with CE and note that some were overlapping. Moreover, Fehrer et al. (2018) distinguished
between engagement disposition, engagement behavior, and engagement connectedness,
while Hollebeek et al. (2019) introduce three CE foundational processes and the concepts of
“CE-enablers,” “CE-facilitators,” and “CE benefits/detriments.” Capturing this complexity
and explaining it in a way that makes it accessible to a nonacademic audience represents a
significant challenge. In the final section, we discuss how the customer value lens and the
engagement rope might simplify complex and sophisticated theoretical ideas for our
nonacademic audience and subsequently provide some guidance about how they might use
them. Before doing so, we consider potential avenues for future research.
7. Future research
An agenda for future research conventionally discusses a number of research themes and
identifies corresponding questions for each. The theoretical endeavor of this article, however,
was to provide conceptual integration (MacInnis, 2011) by providing a theoretical mechanism
to link VCC and CE processes through the bridging concept of habitus. Therefore, having
identified the shared assumptions of VCC and CE processes and then linked these through the
sensemaking processes associated with the customer’s value lens, it would appear odd that a
simpler higher-order theoretical perspective should be followed by an agenda that
differentiates areas and then further divides these into targeted questions. Therefore,
having attempted to provide a modest contribution to SDL and CE research through
conceptual integration, we believe that future research might also benefit from exploring a
higher-order perspective. Specifically, rather than articulating divergent lines of
investigation for researchers, we instead suggest that exploring the potential of metaphor
may stimulate researchers to conceive of interesting ideas for thinking about the theory and
practice of VCC and CE.
The features of the engagement rope metaphor trigger interesting questions that might
assist conceptual thinking about CE and VCC. Is the engagement rope strongest when the
cognitive, affective, and behavioral dimensions or threads of engagement coexist? Will the
threads of the engagement rope “thin” and potentially break if the duration or gaps between
the individual engagement states and corresponding value cocreative practices and
experiences are too long? Does the intensity or length of the engagement state create a
stronger engagement rope at that point in time, or does it have a more temporally enduring
impact? Does the intertwining of more individual engagement threads result in a stronger
engagement rope? It also seems reasonable to assume that each time a customer enacts a
cocreation practice, is exposed to a new/modified service offering, or encounters a particular
situation or VCC episode, the individual threads of the rope might be strengthened or
weakened.
A further insight prompted by the rope metaphor is that the individual threads of CE and
VCC may be difficult to empirically separate or disentangle within any precision. As the
illustrative example of the overworked academic demonstrates, multiple overlapping events
and episodes comprise the temporally unfolding process of VCC practice and CE. It is difficult
to isolate the individual sensemaking processes, implicit and explicit experiences, conscious
or unconscious practices, and engagement states that comprise the complex world of human
practice in cause and effect relationships. This resonates with prior conceptual work on the
antecedents and consequences of engagement (such as involvement and participation, and
commitment, loyalty, emotional attachment, trust, and self-brand connections), which may

coincide or involve consequences becoming future antecedents (Brodie et al., 2011), thus
showing the complexity and multiplicity of engagement processes. Following their
identification of antecedents and consequences associated with CE (as noted earlier)
(Fehrer et al., 2013), Fehrer et al. (2014) found inconsistency in the cause–effect relationships,
which they suggested could be due to variations in the underlying conceptualizations. But it
is also possible that the reason for this inconsistency and the broader problem with
attempting to separate the multitude of different antecedents, and then link them together, is
that the real-world phenomenon of CE might be too difficult to model as a hypodeductive
model of cause and effect relationships based upon constructs and variables. Perhaps the
efforts of researchers to produce variance theory by isolating and measuring these individual
entities in the hope of explaining their specific impact upon each other may prove
unproductive. Instead, focusing on process theory by investigating the richness of
experiences, the critical incidents in VCC practice, the manifestation of sensemaking
processes, and the corresponding changes in or reproduction of the value lenses of customer
will prove to be more interesting in advancing our understanding of these complex real-world
processes.
8. Practical implications
This study has four main practical implications.
First, firms must adopt a customer perspective to recognize the importance of
sensemaking episodes and processes. Service processes and systems must be explicitly
designed to incorporate opportunities for sensemaking episodes that confirm or strengthen a
customer’s value lens or change it in relation to firm-provided and customer-interpreted value
propositions. The customer perspective recognizes the multiplicity of contexts within which
VCC takes place – the social spaces and domains of practice where customers utilize and
incorporate service/product offerings into their daily lives. This perspective is important
because many of these sensemaking processes are highly personal, individualistic, and
context-specific, despite being situated within and influenced by broader fields of service.
How might they do this? We believe that it is important to challenge assumptions about
customer-perceived value and explore what has led to engagement, under what
circumstances, rather than focusing totally on the types and outcomes of engagement.
The second implication concerns customer processes. Sensemaking is an internal
customer process so the question becomes how to penetrate and influence the customer
experience so that it leads to positive emotions and cognitions, which reinforce the perceived
value proposition and strengthen engagement in the service relationship. We suggest that
customer narratives – which describe the complex, not always explicit, and highly personal
nature of VCC, are a particularly useful source of understanding how and why customers
become and remain engaged. Customer narratives provide rich data into how the complex,
multifaceted nature of VCC and engagement plays out in practice. What constitutes the
individual threads of the engagement rope for a customer and how do they become
intertwined in an engagement process?
Third, platforms need to be used to support sensemaking processes. Wider customer
engagement within the customer’s ecosphere, when public, provides a listening device with
which managers can supplement customer narratives. Scholars have recognized the
importance of engagement platforms (e.g. Breidbach et al., 2014; Chandler and Lusch, 2015)
and we add that these can be usefully seen as sensemaking platforms to trigger and maintain
engagement. Such engagement platforms need to be accessible and easy to use, or they will
serve to diminish the further experience and likely affect the customer value lens in a negative
way, by exposing negative outcomes of VCC practices, instead of being a potential vehicle to
drive wider engagement and benefits for the firm.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
73

JSTP
30,1

74

Finally, firms should aim to use positive and negative feedback. One of the most important
roles of service managers is to get customers to complain so that managers can take
appropriate actions on the part of a firm. The engaged customer is more likely to give
feedback to the company, thereby contributing their views with respect to the service offering
(what Jaakkola and Alexander (2014) refer to as “codeveloping behavior”) (Hollebeek et al.,
2019). Hence, managers need to encourage both positive and negative customer engagement;
positive actions provide outreach into new networks and communities (including the firm
itself), and negative engagement, or complete disengagement, should stimulate action by the
firm. While it is well recognized that companies need to develop specific skills and
competencies, it is important that managers also consider their own mind-sets. Technology
empowers customers to engage and cocreate beyond firm borders; the issue is the extent to
which managers are prepared to empower them and enable them to engage and cocreate
further within firm borders. This question concerns traditions embedded in social structures
and associated roles (Edvardsson et al., 2011) and who is in control of resources (Vargo and
Lusch, 2008b). We suggest that managers seeking to gain from extended CE opportunities
need to identify potential operational barriers. That is, our conceptualization reinforces the
shift from a firm-dominant view of processes and suggests an alternative approach that is
built on the customer’s worldview, experience, and sensemaking.
References
Abbott, A. (2001), Time Matters: On Theory and Method, The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, UA.
Akaka, M.A., Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2013), “The complexity of context: a service ecosystems
approach for international marketing”, Journal of International Marketing, Vol. 21
No. 4, pp. 1-20.
Akaka, M.A., Vargo, S.L. and Schau, H.J. (2015), “The context of experience”, Journal of Service
Management, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 206-223.
Alvesson, M. and Sandberg, J. (2011), “Generating research questions through problematization”,
Academy of Management Review, Vol. 36 No. 2, Published Online:1 Apr 2011, doi: 10.5465/amr.
2009.0188.
Arsel, Z. and Bean, J. (2013), “Taste regimes and market-mediated practice”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 40 February, pp. 899-917.
Arsel, Z. and Thompson, C. (2011), “Demythologizing consumption practices: how consumers protect
their field- dependent capital from devaluing marketplace myths”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 37 February, pp. 791-806.
Bourdieu, P. (1977), Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bourdieu, P. (1984), Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, Routledge Classics.
Bourdieu, P. (1990), The Logic of Practice, Polity Press, Cambridge.
Bowden, J.L. (2009), “The process of customer engagement: a conceptual framework”, Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 63-74.
Breidbach, C.F., Brodie, R.J. and Hollebeek, L. (2014), “Beyond virtuality: from engagement platforms
to engagement ecosystems”, Managing Service Quality, Vol. 24 No. 6, pp. 592-611.
Brodie, R.J., Fehrer, J.A., Jaakola, E. and Conduit, J. (2019a), “Actor engagement in networks: defining
the conceptual domain”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 1-16.
Brodie, R.J., Fehrer, J.A., Jaakola, E. and Conduit, J. (2019b), “Actor engagement in networks: defining
the conceptual domain”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 173-188.
Brodie, R.J., Hollebeck, L.D., Juric, B. and Ilic, A. (2011), “Customer engagement: conceptual domain,
fundamental propositions, and implications for research”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 14
No. 3, pp. 252-271.

Chandler, J.D. and Lusch, R.F. (2015), “Service systems a broadened framework and research agenda
on value propositions, engagement, and service experience”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 18
No. 1, pp. 6-22.
Chandler, J.D. and Vargo, S.L. (2011), “Contextualization and value-in-context: how context frames
exchange”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 35-49.
Conduit, J. and Chen, T. (2017), “Transcending and bridging co-creation and engagement: conceptual
and empirical insights”, Journal of Service Theory and Practice, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 714-720.
Echeverri, P. and Sk
alen, P. (2011), “Co-creation and Co-destruction: a practice-theory based study of
interactive value formation”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 351-373.
Edvardsson, B., Tronvoll, B. and Gruber, T. (2011), “Expanding understanding of service exchange
and value co-creation: a social construction approach”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, Vol. 39 No. 2, pp. 327-339.
Ellway, B.P.W. (2014a), “The voice-to-technology (V2T) encounter and the call centre servicescape:
navigation, spatiality and movement”, Journal of Service Management, Vol. 25 No. 3,
pp. 349-368.
Ellway, B.P.W. (2014b), “Using practice theory to analyse value propositions and value facilitation in
self-reliance training”, International Journal of Services, Economics and Management, Vol. 6
No. 2, pp. 181-192.
Ellway, B.P.W. and Dean, A.M. (2016), “The reciprocal intertwining of practice and experience in value
creation processes”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 299-324.
Fehrer, J.A., Woratschek, H. and Germelmann, C.C. (2013), “Antecedents and consequences of
customer engagement – a literature review”, Australian & New Zealand Marketing Academy
Conference (ANZMAC), Auckland, December 1-3.
Fehrer, J.A., Woratschek, H., Germelmann, C.C. and Brodie, R.J. (2018), “Dynamics and drivers of
customer engagement: within the dyad and beyond”, Journal of Service Management, Vol. 29
No. 3, pp. 443-467.
Fehrer, J.A., Woratschek, H., Germelmann, C.C. and Brodie, R.J. (2014), “Conceptualizing the dynamic
and iterative nature of customer engagement”, 43th European Marketing Academy Conference
(EMAC), Valencia, June 3-6.
Foucault, M. (1985), The Use of Pleasure: History of Sexuality, Vol. 2, Vintage Books, New York.
Gr€onroos, C. (2011), “Value co-creation in service logic: a critical analysis”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 11
No. 3, pp. 279-301.
Gr€onroos, C. and Gummerus, J. (2014), “The service revolution and its marketing implications: service
logic vs. service-dominant logic”, Managing Service Quality, Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. 206-229.
Gr€onroos, C. and Voima, P. (2013), “Critical service logic: making sense of value creation and cocreation”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 133-150.
Grove, S.J., Fisk, R.P. and Dorsch, M.J. (1998), “Assessing the theatrical components of the service
encounter: a cluster analysis examination”, Service Industries Journal, Vol. 18 No. 3,
pp. 116-134.
Gummerus, J. (2013), “Value creation processes and value outcomes in marketing theory: strangers or
siblings?”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 19-46.
Harmeling, C.M., Moffett, J.W., Arnold, M.J. and Carlson, B.D. (2017), “Toward a theory of
customer engagement marketing”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 45,
pp. 312-335.
Helkkula, A. and Kelleher, C. (2010), “The circularity of customer service experience and customer
perceived value”, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 37-53.
Helkkula, A., Kelleher, C. and Pihlstr€om, M. (2012), “Practices and experiences: challenges and
opportunities for value research”, Journal of Service Management, Vol. 23 No. 4,
pp. 554-570.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation
75

JSTP
30,1

Hollebeek, L.D., Srivastava, R.K. and Chen, T. (2019), “S-D logic-informed customer engagement:
integrative framework, revised fundamental propositions, and application to CRM”, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 47 No. 1, pp. 161-185.
Holt, D.B. (1998), “Does cultural capital structure American consumption?”, Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 1-25.

76

Jaakkola, E. and Alexander, M. (2014), “The role of customer engagement behavior in value cocreation a service system perspective”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 17 No. 3,
pp. 247-261.
Korkman, O. (2006), Customer Value Formation in Practice: A Practice–Theoretical Approach,
[Dissertation], Hanken School of Economics, Helsinki.
Kuhn, T.S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago University Press, Chicago.
Lemon, K.N. and Verhoef, P.C. (2016), “Understanding customer experience throughout the customer
journey”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 80 No. 6, pp. 69-96.
Leroy, J., Cova, B. and Salle, R. (2013), “Zooming in vs zooming out on value co-creation:
consequences for BtoB research”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 42 No. 7,
pp. 1102-1111.
Locke, K. and Golden-Biddle, K. (1997), “Constructing opportunities for contribution: structuring
intertextual coherence and “problematizing” in organizational studies”, Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 40 No. 5, pp. 1023-1062.
Lusch, R.F. and Vargo, S.L. (2010), “S-D logic: accommodating, integrating, transdisciplinary”, Grand
Service Challenge, University of Cambridge, September 23.
McColl-Kennedy, J.R., Cheung, L. and Ferrier, E. (2015), “Co-creating service experience practices”,
Journal of Service Management, Vol. 26 No. 2, 2015, pp. 249-275.
McColl-Kennedy, J.R., Hogan, S.J., Witell, L. and Snyder, H. (2017), “Cocreative customer practices:
effects of health care customer value cocreation practices on well-being”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 70 No. 1, pp. 55-66.
McColl-Kennedy, J.R., Vargo, S.L., Dagger, T.S., Sweeney, J.C. and van Kasteren, Y. (2012), “Health care
customer value cocreation practice styles”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 15 No. 4,
pp. 370-389.
MacInnis, D.J. (2011), “A framework for conceptual contributions in marketing”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 75 No. 4, pp. 136-154.
Malthouse, E.C. and Calder, B.J. (2011), “Engagement and experiences: comment on Brodie, Hollebeek,
Juric and Ilic (2011)”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 277-279.
Malthouse, E.C., Calder, B.J., Kim, S.J. and Vandenbosch, M. (2016), “Evidence that user-generated
content that produces engagement increases purchase behaviors”, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 32 Nos 5/63, pp. 427-444.
McAlexander, J.H., Dufault, B.L., Martin, D.M. and Schouten, J.W. (2014), “The marketization of
religion: field, capital, and consumer identity”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 41 No. 3,
pp. 858-875.
Mollen, A. and Wilson, H. (2010), “Engagement, telepresence, and interactivity in online consumer
experience: reconciling scholastic and managerial perspectives”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 63 Nos 9/10, pp. 919-925.
Morgan, G. (1998), Images of Organization: The Executive Edition, 2nd ed., Better-Koehler Publishers
and SAGE Publications, 1998.
Ranjan, K.R. and Read, S. (2016), “Value co-creation: concept and measurement”, Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 44, pp. 290-315.
Seo, Y., Kelleher, C. and Brodie, R.J. (2017), “Broadening brand engagement within the service-centric
perspective: an intersubjective hermeneutic framework”, Journal of Service Theory and Practice,
Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 317-335.

Storbacka, K., Brodie, R.J., Bohmann, T., Maglio, P.P. and Nenonen, S. (2016), “Actor engagement as a
microfoundation for value co-creation”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 69 No. 8,
pp. 3008-3017.
Stuart, F.I. and Tax, S. (2004), “Toward an integrative approach to designing service experiences:
lessons learned from the theatre”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 22 No. 6, pp. 609-627.

Customer
engagement
and value
cocreation

Van Doorn, J., Lemon, K.E., Mittal, V., Nab, S., Pick, D., Pirner, P. and Verhoef, P.C. (2010), “Customer
engagement behavior: theoretical foundations and research directions”, Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 253-266.

77

Vargo, S.L. (2011), “From micro to macro: stakeholders and institutions”, Journal of Macromarketing,
Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 125-128.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2008a), “Customer integration and value creation: paradigmatic traps and
perspectives”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 211-215.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2008b), “From goods to service(s): divergences and convergences of
logics”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 254-259.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2016a), “Institutions and axioms: an extension and update of servicedominant logic”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 44 No. 1, pp. 5-23.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2016b), “Service-dominant logic 2025”, International Journal of Research
in Marketing, Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 46-67.
Verhoef, P.C., Reinartz, W. and Krafft, M. (2010), “Customer engagement as a new perspective in
customer management”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 247-252.
Vivek, S.D., Beatty, S.E. and Morgan, R.M. (2012), “Consumer engagement: exploring customer
relationships beyond purchase”, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 20 No. 2,
pp. 122-146.
Warde, A. (2005), “Consumption and theories of practice”, Journal of Consumer Culture, Vol. 5 No. 2,
pp. 131-153.
Further reading
Brodie, R.J., Ilic, A., Juric, B. and Hollebeek, L. (2013), “Consumer engagement in a virtual brand
community: an exploratory analysis”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 66 No. 1, pp. 105-114.
Sk
alen, P., Aal, K.A. and Edvardsson, B. (2015), “Cocreating the arab spring understanding
transformation of service systems in contention”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 18 No. 3,
pp. 250-264.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2014), “Inversions of service-dominant logic”, Marketing Theory, Vol. 14
No. 3, pp. 239-248.
Corresponding author
Benjamin Piers William Ellway can be contacted at: ben.ellway@canberra.edu.au

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

