Voluntas
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-018-00046-8

ORIGINAL PAPER

Explaining Trust in Canadian Charities: The Influence of Public
Perceptions of Accountability, Transparency, Familiarity
and Institutional Trust
Megan M. Farwell1 • Micheal L. Shier2 • Femida Handy1

 International Society for Third-Sector Research and The Johns Hopkins University 2018

Abstract Public trust of nonprofits can augment social
benefits of the nonprofit sector by enhancing engagement
of the general population in the sector. This study analyzed
cross sectional data collected from a random sample of
Canadians (n = 3853) to test the effects of respondents’
perceptions of financial accountability, transparency, and
familiarity of charitable nonprofits, along with the effects
of trust in key institutions on their general trust in charitable nonprofits. Results show that each factor (except for
trust in government institutions) has a significant effect on
the level of trust respondents had in charitable nonprofits.
The study helps advance our understanding of what contributes to trust in charitable nonprofits among Canadians
and offers suggestions on how nonprofits can garner greater
trust with the population.

Introduction

Megan M. Farwell
farwell@sp2.upenn.edu

Nonprofits1 undertaking charitable activities rely on philanthropic support to achieve their missions, and this support is grounded on beliefs in an organization’s legitimacy
and trustworthiness (Berman and Davidson 2003; Furneaux
and Wymer 2015; Handy 2000; O’Neill 2009; Shier and
Handy 2013). Hence, trust is critical to the charitable sector. While individual charities might not influence the
perceptions of trust in the sector at large (Sargeant and Lee
2002), the potential is there. For example, recent scandals
involving large, globally known charities (e.g., Oxfam’s
sex scandal in Haiti) may have the potential to harm support for and perceptions of the sector overall (Carolei 2018;
Brindle 2018; Rimington 2018). However, public’s trust in
nonprofits is restorable (Bryce 2007), as seen in the case of
the American Red Cross scandal involving funds raised for
9/11 (Sisco et al. 2010)
The notion that charities are a trusted set of organizations has traditionally been well-established. Hansmann
(1980) first argued that the non-distribution constraint,
which precludes distributing profits to stakeholders, makes
nonprofits more likely to be trusted. Others have argued
that the non-distribution constraint in and of itself does not
guarantee that charities are trustworthy: surpluses could be
used for higher salaries and privileges, or result in shirking
of efficiencies (Handy 2000). However, over the years,

Micheal L. Shier
m.shier@utoronto.ca

1

Keywords Trust  Nonprofit  Charity  Accountability 
Transparency  Familiarity

& Femida Handy
fhandy@upenn.edu

1

School of Social Policy and Practice, University of
Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust Walk, Philadelphia,
PA 19104-6214, USA

2

Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of
Toronto, 246 Bloor Street West, Toronto, ON M5S 1V4,
Canada

These are nonprofits that are tax-exempt [(501(c)(3) designation in
the US] and whose primary activities are charitable, religious,
educational, scientific, and literary. They test for public safety, foster
amateur sports competition, prevent cruelty to children, or prevent cruelty to animals. In this paper, we refer to such nonprofits as
‘charities’ both to distinguish them from the many other nonprofits
and to be consistent with the term used in the Canadian context where
this research is based.

123

Voluntas

many polls have found that people trust charities (Charities
Aid Foundation 2018; Independent Sector 2016; Lasby and
Barr 2013; Rutley and Stephens 2017), although the overall
level of trust varies both across countries and over time.
Importantly, the public is also likely to trust nonprofits
more than other institutions such as for-profits or government organizations (O’Neill 2009) and this is recognized as
a competitive advantage that nonprofits have over other
sectors (Handy 1997). Indeed this trend is likely to continue given a recent global survey particularly in the US
and UK (Ries et al. 2018). Finally, the empirical evidence
of the increasing philanthropic resources that charities
garner year after year from private sources suggests that, at
the very least, the donating public do trust the charities to
which they freely give their money and/or time (Turcotte
2015; Giving USA 2017). In the face of this evidence, a
fundamental question arises: what factors influence the
perception of trust in charities?
As questions regarding nonprofit spending, oversight,
and effectiveness arise periodically, it is important to
understand what factors constitute the perception of trust.
For example, is being honest in financial transactions a
sufficient condition to establish trust? What about giving
donors full information about how their donations are
spent? Or, perhaps, is it the judicious use of resources or
experience with charities that contributes to trust?
In this research, we examine trust and the factors that
constitute trust in Canadian charities. Canada provides an
interesting case to explore the topic of trust in its nonprofit
sector for two reasons. First, the sector is a substantial
component of the Canadian economy. This sector constitutes an estimated 185,000 charities and nonprofits—
equally divided between registered charities and nonprofits—and employs 13% of the total Canadian labor force
while adding more than 8% to Canada’s GDP (Emmett and
Emmett 2015). It is also the second-largest (behind the
Netherlands) per capita nonprofit sector in the world when
expressed in terms of the economically active population
(Hall et al. 2005).
Second, although the Canadian charitable sector derives
a substantial amount of its revenue from government
transfers, the trend data suggests declining governmental
support since the 1990s due to policies that aim to reduce
government debt (Emmett and Emmett 2015). In effect,
many charities had to adjust to funding reductions (Hall
et al. 2005), which were further exacerbated by the economic downturn in 2008. Charities made up for the lost
funding by generating revenues in multiple ways, relying
on volunteer staff, and increasing fundraising efforts (Cave
2016). A successful shift from public to private resources
implies that there existed some level of trust, a precondition for attracting private resources—of both time and
money—on a voluntary basis. It must also be said that

123

government transfers to the nonprofit sector are also
predicated in public trust, as democratic governments
would not easily transfer large sums of money to charities
that the public did not trust. Hence, trust in Canadian
charities is an important factor influencing the charitable sector’s existence and persistence. It is relevant and
would be helpful to explore the determinants of trust in the
Canadian charitable sector considering its non-trivial size
and its changing funding dynamics.
The trustworthiness of Canadian charitable sector has
also been the subject of public debate and increasing
scrutiny, resulting in demands for ceilings on nonprofit
executive salaries (Imagine Canada 2010), removing the
charitable tax deduction (Coyne 2017), and developing
charity watchdogs to separate ‘‘good’’ charities from ‘‘bad’’
(Donovan 2007). This makes ‘trust’ a salient issue for
Canadian charities and the Canadian public.
We examine what influences Canadians’ trust in their
charities. In particular, we ask if attributes like ‘‘accountability’’ and ‘‘transparency,’’ which were previously identified in the literature, associate with trust. We also
examine if knowledge of the sector through experiences,
i.e., ‘‘familiarity’’ is associated with trust. In addition, we
examine if trust in the nonprofit sector is influenced by
broader issues of trust such as trust in public institutions or
trust in other people (Grønbjerg 2009; Light 2008).
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: We discuss
the extant literature on trust and its theoretical underpinnings for charities followed by a discussion of the attributes
of trust based on findings by other scholars. We offer
hypotheses for testing the association of these attributes
with Canadians’ trust in their charities. The next section
outlines our methods and the use of a nationally representative sample to explore the importance of several
factors—institutional trust, perceptions of sector transparency and accountability, and familiarity with charities—in influencing trust of the Canadian nonprofit sector.
This is followed by a discussion of our findings and
implications. The last section presents our concluding
thoughts.

Literature Review
Trust
Much of the literature exploring trust within the nonprofit
sector is theoretically rooted in the principal-agent
dilemma, a situation where one party (the principal)
engages another party (the agent) to ‘‘perform some service
on their behalf which involves delegating some decisionmaking authority to the agent’’ (Jensen and Meckling 1976,
p. 308). Because information available to each party is not

Voluntas

the same, trust issues can emerge as the principal often
relies on the agent to make decisions that further the goals
of the principal. However, in most cases, the goals of the
principal and the agent are not aligned, giving rise to the
principal-agent problem. For example, the nonprofit, which
is the agent of the donor (the principal), must undertake
efforts often unobserved by the donor in disbursing the
donated funds, and since the agent’s efforts are not easily
visible to the donor, the nonprofit can misuse the funds
toward other goals including perquisites to the benefit of
the agent (McDougle and Handy 2014; Sloan 2009). There
are also asymmetrical information problems between
charities and their clients since the quality of goods and
services provided by charities may be hard for clients to
judge (e.g., evaluating daycare services without direct
parental monitoring).
Hansmann (1980) highlights the sector’s non-distribution constraint as key to maintaining trust of the sector in
the face of the principal-agent problem and information
asymmetries. In contrast to institutions like businesses,
charities (agents) are legally precluded from distributing
profits to stakeholders, greatly reducing the motivation to
cut corners or deceive principals (i.e., donors, clients,
government). Although this non-distribution constraint
may mitigate some of the problems outlined, it cannot
completely erase the problems. Thus, principals must rely
on the charity’s goodwill and trustworthiness to deliver
promised societal benefits (Coleman 1990; Salamon 2012).
This reliance between the nonprofit sector and its various principals have been conceptualized both as trust
(Handy et al. 2010; Salamon 2012) and confidence (Bekkers and Bowman 2009; Bowman 2004; McDougle 2014;
O’Neill 2009), although some scholars draw strong distinctions between the two. Gaskin (1999), for example,
argues that trust encompasses deeper personal engagement
and increased vulnerability than confidence. Sargeant and
Lee (2002) also distinguish ‘confidence’ from ‘trust,’
writing that the ‘confidence’ stems from knowledge (or,
familiarity, in this study) and predictability, while ‘trust’
exists without confidence. Using this definition, knowledge
(familiarity) is a critical factor in differentiating between
trust and confidence. While this distinction is a useful
frame for considering whether trust and confidence are
truly separate concepts or exist on a spectrum, the vast
number of studies using the terms interchangeably suggests
that a relatively broad definition of trust is necessary for
our purposes. To this end, we utilize Bourassa and Stang’s
(2016) definition of trust: ‘‘the belief that an organization/sector and its people will never take advantage of
stakeholder vulnerabilities by being fair, reliable, competent, and ethical’’ (p. 15).
Of course, trust in nonprofits does not exist within a
vacuum; it must be contextualized within broader social

and institutional trust. General social trust (Putnam 2000) is
often understood as trust in strangers or a broadly trusting
attitude toward other people. Institutional trust—trust in
community organizations (Hager and Hedberg 2016) as
well as businesses—is also part of general social trust and
can encompass confidence. Although the nonprofit sector is
not solely able to address issues that weaken general social
and institutional trust, trust in the sector is undoubtedly
influenced by both of these broader forms of trust (Bekkers
2003).
Opinion polls and various studies suggest diminishing
levels of overall institutional trust both in America (Newport 2017; Nye et al. 1997; O’Neill 2009; Ries et al. 2018)
and the U.K. (Hyndman and McConville 2016; Sargeant
and Lee 2004), which have been accompanied by concerns
of a similar ‘‘crisis of confidence’’ with charitable institutions (Brindle 2018; Herzlinger 1996; Hillier 2018; Light
2008; Rimington 2018; Salamon 2012). Despite these
claims of a crisis, there is conflicting evidence regarding
how changes in broader institutional and social trust affect
the public trust in charities. For example, Grønbjerg (2009)
found that among five different types of institutions
(charities, businesses, local government, state government,
and the federal government) charities demonstrated both
the highest levels of trust and lowest levels of distrust.
However, Grønbjerg (2009) found that individuals with
high levels of trust in one institution rarely demonstrated
low levels of trust in any of the other four, suggesting that
individuals who are trusting of any institution are more
trusting of institutions overall.
One argument suggests that the sector’s unique characteristics (e.g., voluntary nature of support and the inability
to distribute profits to shareholders) lead people to identify
these organizations as inherently more trustworthy than
their governmental and for-profit counterparts (Frumkin
2002; Hansmann 1996). These claims are supported, in
part, by research demonstrating that general trust in institutions does not influence charitable giving (Hager and
Hedberg 2016) and that the level of nonprofit trust is
stable over time when compared to other forms of institutions (O’Neill 2009).
Lastly, beyond institutional trust, extant literature has
identified several demographic characteristics that influence trust of nonprofits. Grønbjerg (2009) found that
individuals in higher social status categories related to race,
education, and household income are more likely to trust
charities than their counterparts with lower social status
categories. Similar findings have been reiterated in other
studies among racial minorities (Keirouz 1998; Wilson and
Hegarty 1997) and with regards to both income (McDougle
2014; Schlesinger et al. 2004) and educational attainment
(Keirouz 1998; Schlesinger et al. 2004). There are, however, no consistent findings regarding the influence of

123

Voluntas

gender, age, political party, or religious affiliation on trust
(Grønbjerg 2009; Light 2008).
Accountability and Transparency
Several studies have demonstrated the importance of
accountability on influencing trust, although its effect is
often mitigated by transparency. For example, Sloan
(2009) found that unknown accountability ratings—whether positive or negative—did not influence donor support
(arguably a signal of trust), suggesting that watchdog
organizations must increase both general usability (Cnaan
et al. 2011) as well as visibility (transparency) of ratings in
order to influence accountability and trust. Similarly,
Bekkers (2003), who examined the Dutch formal accreditation system, found that: ‘‘knowing that an accreditation
seal exists does not automatically make people’s opinions
with regard to charitable causes more positive’’ (p. 605).
However, Bekkers (2003) does not dismiss the importance
of accountability systems in meaningfully enhancing trust,
although he argues that additional transparency in the form
of ‘‘more media efforts, higher standards and more legal
instruments’’ (p. 612) would be necessary to enhance trust.
Accountability is broadly understood to be a necessary
component in promoting trust of the nonprofit sector for
two reasons. First, the sector has low barriers to entry,
making it easy for unethical entrepreneurs to enter the
market. Second, donors (and other external stakeholders)
often have no easy or costless mechanism by which to
distinguish between trustworthy and untrustworthy organizations (Prakash and Gugerty 2010). Thus, charities that
have good systems in place to be accountable to the public
signal their trustworthiness to the broader public.
Despite the importance of ‘‘accountability’’ for the
sector, there exists no simple definition of the term with
respect to charities. Accountability is often conceptualized
as responsibility to an outside entity; for example, Edwards
and Hulme (1996) define accountability as ‘‘the means by
which individuals and organizations report to a recognized
authority (or authorities) and are held responsible for their
actions’’ (p. 967). This emphasis on external authority and
responsibility often focuses primarily on an organization’s
finances, fundraising practices, and governance (Sloan
2009). In contrast, Cornwall et al. (2000) argue that
accountability should not be wholly focused on external
bodies: Taking responsibility for oneself is equally as
important as being held responsible by another party. Both
Kearns (1994) and Schmitz et al. (2011) offer a more
inclusive definition, arguing that accountability is a multidimensional concept that encompasses not only the
reporting of financial information but also the facets of
performance evaluation, stakeholder engagement, and
internal commitment to the organization’s mission.

123

Furthermore, accountability requires an understanding
of the parties to whom the organization is primarily
accountable (Dumont 2013). Charities interact with multiple stakeholders—funders (donors as well as government
grantors and corporate sponsors), service recipients, staff
and volunteers, including board members—all of whom
have unique expectations of the organization. To this end,
Ebrahim (2005) articulates three types of nonprofit
accountability: ‘‘upward’’ accountability toward donors,
‘‘downward’’ accountability to service recipients, and
‘‘internal’’ accountability to the organization’s mission. In
response to the challenges of balancing the needs and
expectations of so many stakeholders, Williams and Taylor
(2013) advocate the use of a Holistic Accountability
Framework, which attempts to ‘‘[specify] the complex
combination of accountability requirements to each stakeholder,’’ requiring organization leadership to ‘‘understand
the system relationships’’ (p. 575). While such an approach
would certainly be ideal, it is unlikely to be feasible for
anyone but the largest charities, and even they may not
successfully incorporate all stakeholders.
The competing demands of multiple stakeholders shape
how organizations approach accountability, with most
charities prioritizing upward accountability, a focus that
makes sense given that many organizations’ survival is
dependent on resources from external funders (Cooley and
Ron 2002). Charities demonstrate accountability (in the
form of annual reports and financial statements) to alleviate
information asymmetry that threatens trust between external stakeholders—namely funders—and the organization
(Ebrahim 2003). Despite these actions, donors may still
question the charitable sector’s trustworthiness; as Tremblay-Boire and Prakash (2014) point out:
The proliferation of nonprofit accountability mechanisms such as charity rating organizations, voluntary
programs, and website disclosures suggests that
nonprofits and their stakeholders recognize that
claims about trusting nonprofits do not sufficiently
persuade stakeholders of the quality of nonprofits’
products, governance, policies, and procedures. (p.
699)
While accountability might be broadly defined as fulfillment of requirements (Bourassa and Stang 2016),
transparency can be understood as the voluntary disclosure
of information, including program performance (Schatteman 2013), financial data (Keating and Frumkin 2003), and
governance (Hale 2013). Transparency’s role in influencing trust of the nonprofit sector is rarely discussed without
including accountability, a consequence of the two concepts being so closely related. In fact, both Koppell (2005)
and Ebrahim and Weisband (2007) discuss transparency as
a component of accountability rather than its own

Voluntas

individual concept. In particular, Koppell (2005) conceptualizes transparency as ‘‘the literal value of accountability,’’ underscoring transparency’s role in assessing
organizational performance as foundational to all other
forms of accountability (p. 96). Implicit in the concept of
transparency is the relative ease of accessing various forms
of information, including fundraising costs, donation use,
and regulation compliance (Hyndman and McConville
2016).
Familiarity
Extant research has identified familiarity with charitable organizations as a critical factor of trust in the sector.
Familiarity can range from general awareness of charities
in the community to more involved experiences such as
volunteering and donating. Familiarity in the form of
general awareness is usually operationalized as the ability
to identify charities within a given community. This
awareness of the local charitable sector has a demonstrated
influence on trusting charities. Kissane’s (2003, 2010)
qualitative work found that individuals in communities
with fewer charities were more likely to hold negative
attitudes toward the charitable sector, while McDougle and
Lam (2014) identified strong and positive connections
between density, awareness, and trust. Saxton (2004)
argues for a more nuanced approach to understanding
familiarity, arguing that trust may be influenced more by
the general public’s (lack of) understanding of charities’
operations rather than simply the ability to identify charitable organizations. Existing literature supports this argument, with several studies finding that trust is strongly and
positively influenced by knowledge and understanding of
nonprofit roles, activities, and operations (Bekkers 2003;
Bourassa and Stang 2016; Schlesinger et al. 2004). Sargeant and Lee (2002), however, found no evidence that
familiarity impacted trust of the nonprofit sector.
The relationship between familiarity and trust in charities becomes even more complicated when considering
individuals’ relative inability to distinguish between nonprofit, for-profit, and public entities (Handy et al. 2010;
McDougle 2014; Schlesinger et al. 2004). This issue is
driven by several factors: ‘‘mission vagueness’’ of charities
that results from delivering similar services as public and
for-profit firms (Weisbrod 1998, p. 289); adoption of
methods needed to compete with for-profit firms (Clarke
and Carroll 2016; Gaskin 1999; Kramer 2000); and
increased contracting of charities with government
(DiMaggio and Anheier 1990; Smith and Lipsky 1993), all
of which may undermine public trust of charitable organizations (Schlesinger et al. 2004). McDougle and Lam
(2014) found that the ability to distinguish charities from

other types of organizations was a driving factor in more
favorable attitudes toward the nonprofit sector.
Beyond general familiarity, several studies have
explored whether and how the level of familiarity in the
form of direct involvement with the charitable sector (as a
donor or a volunteer) is related to trust, but findings have
not been consistent about the presence, strength, or direction of the relationship. For example, Bowman (2004)
initially found that volunteers were more likely to express
confidence in charitable organizations, but later studies
found no relationship after controlling for generalized
social trust (Bekkers and Bowman 2009). Similarly, Handy
et al. (2010) found no relationship between direct
involvement with charities (either in the form of donating
or volunteering) and trust in charities. In contrast, Grønbjerg et al. (2016) did identify a relationship between
familiarity and trust of charities, although their study drew
from a sample of local government officials rather than a
more general population. Finally, several other studies
(Burnett 1992; Sargeant 1999; Saxton 1995) that explore
the relationship between trust and familiarity argue that
trust is a prerequisite for individuals to become more
involved and familiar with the sector rather than ‘‘direct’’
familiarity enriching trust.
Due to the mixed findings in the literature we examine
volunteering and donating as separate items. Although both
activities are philanthrophic in nature, they differ in the
nature of the individual’s involvement, and hence may
associate differently with trust.
Based on the literature reviewed, we developed the
following three sets of hypotheses. The first set of
hypotheses tests the relationship between overall institutional trust and trust of the charitable sector; here we posit
that general trust in charities will be higher than other
institutions due to their non-distribution constraint on the
surplus. Furthermore, we hypothesize that greater trust in
for-profits or the government will be associated with higher
levels of trust in the charitable sector. Additionally, greater
trust in community leaders, which may include charities
and other civil society organizations, will be associated
with higher levels of trust in charities.
The next set of hypotheses first relates the perceived
need for accountability in charities with the level of trust in
charities. Here, we suggest that a higher need for
accountability is more likely to be associated with lower
trust in charities, as charities may be deemed less
accountable than desired. Next, with respect to the perceptions on existing transparency levels in charities, we
hypothesize that there is a positive association between
higher levels of transparency and higher levels of trust in
charities if charities are judged to be as transparent as
desired.

123

Voluntas

The final group of hypotheses explore the role of
familiarity in influencing trust. General familiarity will be
associated with increased trust in charities, as discussed
above. However, donating and volunteering are different
behaviors with differing requirements of trust. In the first
case, we posit that since most donations are undertaken atarms length, donating requires donors to believe the
specific charity is trustworthy, and this trust may diffuse to
charities in general. On the other hand, volunteering, the
donation of time, does not require the same level of trust as
monetary donations as it is frequently undertaken in person. Volunteers are well-positioned to directly see the
outcome of their volunteering, thus removing the perquisite
of trust. Hence, volunteering for charities, while making
the volunteer more familiar with charities, may also be
associated with perceptions of trustworthiness in all
charities.
The hypotheses are as follows:
Institutional Trust
H1a Charities will be perceived to be more trustworthy
than for-profits or government organizations.
H1b Higher levels of trust in for-profits or government
will be associated with increased trust in charitable sector.
H1c Higher levels of trust in community leaders will be
associated with increased trust in the charitable sector.
Accountability and Transparency
H2a Higher demands for accountability will be associated
with lower the levels of trust in charities.
H2b Higher perceptions of transparency will be associated with higher levels of trust in charities.
Familiarity
H3a Higher levels of general familiarity of charities will
be associated with higher levels of trust in charities.
H3b Donating to charities will be associated with higher
levels of trust in charities.
H3c Volunteering at charities will be associated with
higher levels of trust in charities.
Literature suggests that perceived accountability and
direct familiarity (through efforts of volunteering time and
donating money) do not influence whether people find the
charitable sector trustworthy. However, we maintain them
in our model given that little research exists specifically
about trust in charities in the Canadian context. As a result,
this research highlights similarities or differences between

123

the Canadian context and other sites of the current scholarly literature (such as in the United Kingdom, the United
States, Netherlands, and Australia, where much of the
extant literature is based, and all of which share a similar
liberal welfare state history as Canada). It also contributes
to the literature by investigating transparency and
accountability as two separate constructs in understanding
perceptions of the charitable sector.

Methods
This research analyzed secondary data collected by the
Muttart Foundation among a simple random sample of
Canadians (Lasby and Barr 2015).2 A large survey questionnaire was developed, which focused on trust in charities and other institutions, accountability, familiarity,
transparency, the role of charities, along with respondents’
direct involvement with charities and demographic
characteristics.
Using Random Digit Dialing, Canadians residing in
each of the ten provinces were interviewed by telephone
for a total of 3853 respondents. The sample was designed
to include English and French speaking Canadians 18 years
of age or older. The sample across provinces was disproportionate; however, to arrive at a distribution that would
represent a simple random sample of Canadian households,
the sample used was corrected using weights based on the
population estimates of each province. Those provinces
that were over-represented were weighted less and those
that were under-represented were weighted more.
Variables
Based on the various survey questions included in the
Muttart Foundation’s comprehensive survey, we constructed several latent constructs assessing trust in charities, trust in other institutions (such as government,
business, and community leaders), and perceptions of
accountability, transparency, and familiarity with charities.
The dependent variable assessed in this study was the
degree of self-reported trust in charities among study
respondents. The latent construct was created from 12
items rated on a four-point Likert-type scale with response
categories of not at all, a little, some, and a lot. Questions
asked respondents about their general trust in charities (i.e.,
Thinking about charities in general, would you say you
trust them…), along with trust in charities that participate
in the following eleven types: environment, animals, health
2

A copy of this survey is publicly available at: https://www.muttart.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/3.-Talking-About-Charities-FullReport-2013.pdf.

Voluntas

prevention and health research, social services, international development, children and children’s activities,
education, the arts, hospitals, churches and places of worship and other religious organizations).
The internal consistency of the items was assessed to
determine the reliability of this measure. The Cronbach’s
alpha coefficient was 0.86. A confirmatory factor analysis
(CFA) was undertaken to assess the construct validity of
this variable utilizing the MPlus statistical software package (Muthén and Muthén 1998–2012). The model fit
indices were as follows: v2 = 472.630, df = 49,
p = 0.0000; TLI = 0.959; CFI = 0.969; RMSEA = 0.047.
The results of the CFA show sufficient construct validity of
this 12-item measure of extent of trust in charities (Kline
2011).
The independent variables in this analysis included
respondents’ trust in the government, business, and community leaders, and their perceptions of accountability,
familiarity, and transparency of charities and demographic
characteristics of the study sample.
For trust in the government, business, and community
leaders, three variables were constructed from general
statements about how trust related to each of the institutional classifications. Items were measured on a four-point
Likert-type scale with response categories of not at all, a
little, some, and a lot. Following the same method utilized
in constructing the dependent variable from existing survey
items, trust in government was operationalized through the
creation of a latent construct comprised of three items
[How much trust do you have in… (a) The federal government; (b) The provincial government; and (c) The local
government]. Trust in business was operationalized
through the creation of a latent construct comprised of
three items [How much trust do you have in… (a) Major
corporations; (b) Small businesses; and (c) People who are
business leaders]. Trust in community leaders was operationalized through the creation of a latent construct comprised of seven items [How much trust do you have in…
(a) People who are medical doctors; (b) People who are
lawyers; (c) People who are religious leaders; (d) People
who are nurses; (e) People who are journalists and reporters; (f) People who are leaders of charities; and (g) People
who are union leaders].
The internal consistency of the items was assessed for
each variable to determine the reliability of the measures.
The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for Trust in Government
was 0.78, Trust in Business was 0.59 (which is low, but
kept in the model to maintain the differentiation in institutional types), and Trust in Community Leaders was 0.72.
A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was undertaken to
assess the construct validity of each of these variables
utilizing the MPlus statistical software package (Muthén
and Muthén 1998–2012). The model fit indices for Trust in

Business and Trust in Government are just identified
models (where there are no degrees of freedom left over),
so we are unable to report indices of model fit. For Trust in
Community Leaders the model results were: v2 = 145.303,
df = 18,
p = 0.0000;
TLI = 0.956;
CFI = 0.972;
RMSEA = 0.043. The results of the CFA show sufficient
construct validity of this 7-item measure of extent of trust
in Community Leaders (Kline 2011).
The independent variable ‘accountability’ was assessed
similarly through the construction of a latent variable
composed of five items measured on a four-point Likerttype scale with response categories of strongly disagree,
somewhat disagree, somewhat agree, and strongly agree.
Items were composed primarily of statements that reflect
general perceptions regarding the need for financial
accountability of charities. For instance, items included:
‘‘More attention should be paid to the way charities spend
their money,’’ ‘‘More attention should be paid to the
amount of money that charities spend on program activities,’’ ‘‘More attention should be paid to the way charities
should raise money,’’ More attention should be paid to the
amount of money charities spend on hiring professionals to
do their fundraising,’’ and ‘‘Charities should be required to
disclose how donors’ contributions are spent.’’
The internal consistency of the items was assessed to
determine the reliability of this measure. The Cronbach’s
alpha coefficient was 0.73. A CFA was undertaken to
assess the construct validity of this variable utilizing the
MPlus statistical software package (Muthén and Muthén
1998–2012). The model fit indices were as follows:
v2 = 21.591, df = 5, p = 0.0006; TLI = 0.991; CFI =
0.996; RMSEA = 0.029. The results of the CFA show
sufficient construct validity of this 5-item measure of perceptions of the level of accountability by charities.
For the independent variable assessing public perceptions of the level of ‘transparency’ of charities, a latent
variable was constructed based on four items measured on
a Likert-type scale with four response categories: poor,
fair, good, or excellent. Respondents were asked to rate the
transparency of charities. Items included how well charities
provided information about (1) the programs and services
they deliver, (2) how they use donations, (3) their
fundraising costs, and (4) the impact of their work on
Canadians. Reliability and validity were assessed the same
as other variables previously described in this analysis. The
Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for this four-item measure of
perceived transparency of charities was 0.77. The results of
the CFA demonstrated sufficient construct validity of this
4-item measure: v2 = 11.750, df = 1, p = 0.0006; TLI =
0.984; CFI = 0.997; RMSEA = 0.053.
The independent variable, ‘general familiarity of the
work of charities,’ was operationalized through the creation
of a latent construct comprised of 5 items measured on a

123

Voluntas

a necessary condition for the use of the various latent
variables constructed for this analysis.

four-point Likert-type scale. One item was a general
statement relating to the respondents’ degree of familiarity
with the work of charities (i.e., ‘‘Thinking about what you
know about charities in general, the work that they do, and
the role they play, would you say you are very familiar,
somewhat familiar, not very familiar, or not at all familiar?’’), and four items reflected specific actions demonstrating their degree of familiarity. These four items were
assessed with response categories of strongly disagree,
somewhat disagree, somewhat agree, and strongly agree,
and included the following items: (1) ‘‘I usually pay a lot of
attention to media stories about charities’’; (2) ‘‘I know less
about charities than do my friends and family members’’;
(3) ‘‘Over the years, I have had many dealings with charities’’; and (4) ‘‘If a friend or family member asked me how
to choose a charity to support, I would be able to give them
useful advice.’’ Reliability and validity were assessed the
same as other variables previously described in this analysis. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for this five-item
measure of degree of familiarity with charities was 0.70.
The results of the CFA demonstrated sufficient construct
validity of this 5-item measure: v2 = 22.437, df = 5,
p = 0.0004; TLI = 0.989; CFI = 0.994; RMSEA = 0.030.
‘Direct familiarity’ was assessed through two items:
volunteering and donating behaviors. Each was measured
by a single item measure of whether or not respondents had
volunteered time or donated money to charities in the
12 months preceding the survey. Response categories for
each were a ‘0’ if they had not done either donating or
volunteering, and a ‘1’ if they had.
Respondent demographics utilized in the analysis
included their gender (a two category variable representing
male or female), age (a six category variable representing
age cohorts between 18 and over 65 years old), relationship
status (a two category variable representing either single or
having an intimate partner), highest level of education
attained (a three category variable including less than high
school, high school, and post-secondary), employment
status (a three category variable including unemployed,
part-time employed, and full-time employed), and household income category (a six category variable comprising
income ranges from less than $20,000 to more than
$150,000).

Variable

Data Analysis

Household income

Data were analyzed by way of multiple regression, utilizing
maximum likelihood estimation techniques, and were
supported by the MPlus statistical software package
(Muthén and Muthén 1998–2012). This statistical software
package was utilized because it allows for the simultaneous
measurement and structural analysis (Kline 2011), which is

123

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 provides the frequencies and proportions of
respondent demographic characteristics. The majority of
respondents in this random sample were female (61.38%).
The majority of respondents were over the age of 55.
However, more than 42% of respondents were between the
ages of 25 and 64, demonstrating good variability across
different age cohorts. The majority of respondents indicated having an intimate partner—which could include
being married or living common law. For the most part,
respondents had completed post-secondary education,
however a large proportion of the sample was unemployed.
This—along with the general age of respondents—is
characteristic of a generally older and retired sample of
Table 1 Descriptive statistics of study sample (n = 3853)
Number (%)

Gender
Male (1)

1486 (38.62)

Female (0)

2362 (61.38)

Age
18–24

166 (4.31)

25–34

322 (8.36)

35–44

514 (13.34)

45–54

772 (20.04)

55–64
5 and older

977 (25.36)
1012 (28.60)

Relationship status
Single (0)

1327 (34.81)

Has intimate partner (1)

2485 (65.19)

Highest education achieved
Less than High School (0)

264 (6.91)

High School (1)

989 (25.90)

Post-Secondary (2)

2566 (67.19)

Employment status
Unemployed (0)

1767 (46.06)

Part-time employed (1)

438 (11.42)

Full-time employed (2)

1631 (42.52)

Less than $20,000 (0)

278 (8.86)

$20,000 to $49,999 (1)
$50,000 to $74,999 (2)

813 (25.91)
713 (22.72)

$75,000 to $99,999 (3)

529 (16.86)

$100,000 to $149,999 (4)

504 (16.06)

More than $150,000 (5)

301 (9.59)

Voluntas

fundraising costs, and the impact of their work on
Canadians.
Finally, with regard to familiarity, the descriptive results
show that respondents were moderately familiar with the
work of charities based on our general assessment of
familiarity. Direct familiarity was high among study participants through levels of donating, however the majority
of respondents had not volunteered time with charities in
the preceding 12 months. These results are in line with
national surveys of volunteering and donating in Canada
(Turcotte 2015).

respondents (a point discussed further in the limitations of
the study). There was broad variability in income categories among participants.
Table 2 provides the descriptive statistics for the perceptions of trust in charities and other institutions, along
with the perceptions of accountability, transparency, and
familiarity.
General trust in charities was relatively high. In a
response range from 0 to 3, the average level of trust
reported by respondents was 1.88. In comparison to trust in
business, government, and community leaders generally,
the level of perceived trust in charities was higher on
average. This provides support for our first hypotheses that
charities will be rated as more trustworthy than other forms
of institutions.
With regard to perceptions of accountability, transparency, and familiarity, the descriptive results in Table 2
suggest that respondents had a high regard for the need to
be accountable and low regard for how well they perceived
charities as transparent, and that they were moderately
familiar with the work that charities do. For instance, the
items used in our assessment of accountability reflected
general statements about charities needing to be more
financially accountable, and respondents indicated a high
need for accountability. Likewise, with the assessment of
public perceptions of transparency among charities, on
average respondents had a low level of perceived transparency. Based on the items assessing this construct, this
indicates that respondents perceived that charities did not
do enough to be transparent about the programs and services they deliver, how they use donations, their

Table 2 Descriptive statistics
for trust in other institutions and
perceptions of charities

Variable

Multiple Regression Analysis
Table 3 provides the results of the multiple regression
analysis assessing the influence of the institutional trust,
accountability and transparency of charities, and familiarity with charities as well as demographic variables on
general perceptions of trust toward charities. The results
show that a number of important variables contribute to an
individual’s assessment of the level of trust they have in
charities.
For instance, with regard to our second hypothesis, the
results of the regression analysis show that trust in forprofits is associated with a statistically significant increase
in the level of trust in charities. Similarly, trust in community leaders generally (a proxy of civil society actors,
which is inclusive of more than just charities) has a significant positive effect on trust in charities.
Interestingly, and possibly counter to our original
hypothesis, trust in government was not statistically significantly related to trust in charities. However, we note
Mean

Standard deviation

Response range

Number (%)

–

Trust in government, business, and community leaders
Trust in government

1.37

0.74

0–3

Trust in business

1.67

0.61

0–3

–

Trust in community leaders

1.84

0.45

0–3

–

Perceptions of charities
Accountability

3.28

0.69

0–4

–

Transparency

1.52

0.45

0–4

–

General familiarity

2.62

0.82

0–4

–

–
–

–
–

0–1
0–1

512 (13.29)
3341 (86.71)

Direct familiarity
Donated in the last 12 months
No (0)
Yes (1)
Volunteered in the last 12 months
No (0)

–

–

0–1

3341 (86.71)

Yes (1)

–

–

0–1

1490 (38.67)

1.88

0.54

0–3

–

Trust in charities
Trust

123

Voluntas
Table 3 Multiple regression
analysis for predicting trust in
charities (n = 3853)

Trust in charities
b

B

Predictors entered
Trust in government, business, and community leaders
Trust in government

- 0.087

- 0.066

Trust in business

0.428**

0.420**

Trust in community leaders

0.240***

0.267***
- 0.053***

Perceptions of charities
(need for) Accountability

- 0.067***

(level of) Transparency

0.260***

0.166***

General familiarity

0.074***

0.065***

0.036*
0.025

0.053*
0.025

Direct familiarity
Donated
Volunteered
Participant demographics
Gender

0.009

0.009

Age

- 0.095***

- 0.026***

Relationship status

- 0.058**

- 0.060**

Education attained

0.066***

Employment status
Household income level
R2

0.054***

- 0.019

- 0.010

0.006

0.002

0.579

b, standardized coefficients; B, unstandardized coefficients
*p \ 0.05; **p \ 0.01; ***p \ 0.001

that based on the descriptive results from Table 2, participants in this study had very low levels of trust in government, on average. The results from the multiple
regression analysis provides partial support for our first set
of hypotheses.
Perceptions of the need for accountability, transparency,
and familiarity of charities all had statistically significant
effects on individual levels of trust in charities. For
accountability, among this study sample, respondents who
perceived the need for more financial accountability from
charities had statistically significant lower levels of trust in
charities, supporting our proposition. However, those who
perceived that charities were transparent about their programs, how money was spent, and their overall impact on
Canadians, had statistically significant higher levels of trust
in charities. Thus, the results from the multiple regression
analysis provides partial support for our second set of
hypotheses.
The results for general familiarity of charities were also
positively associated with trust in charities. That is, those
that were more familiar with the work of charities generally
had statistically significant higher levels of trust in charities. Further support for the role of familiarity in charities
on trust is evidenced by the statistically significant positive
findings that those who donate money are likely to have

123

higher levels of trust in charities. However, with respect to
volunteering, as a direct familiarity with charities, the
association with trust in charities was not statistically significant. The results from the multiple regression analysis
provide partial support for our third set of hypotheses.
Thus, while accountability in previous literature was not
associated with trust, our study results show that among
this random sample of Canadians, those who determine
charities need to be more financially accountable have
significantly lower levels of trust toward charities. Furthermore, while previous research has indicated that there
is no relationship between direct familiarity (through
behaviors such as donating and volunteering) and trust in
charities, our findings show that those who donated money
had higher levels of trust. However, no statistically significant results were found for volunteer behavior.
Finally, the results show that those with higher levels of
education are more likely to trust in charities, those that are
of lower age cohorts are less likely to trust in charities, and
those that are single are less likely to trust in charities.
These findings can be important findings for charities as
they try to increase their levels of trust and engagement
within their local communities (Table 4).

Voluntas
Table 4 Results summarized
H1a: Charities will be perceived to be more trustworthy than for-profits or government organizations

Supported

H1b: Higher levels of trust in for-profits or government will be associated with increased trust in charitable sector

Not supported

H1c: Higher levels of trust in community leaders will be associated with increased trust in charitable sector

Supported

H2a: Higher demands for accountability will be associated with lower the levels of trust in charities

Supported

H2b: Higher perceptions of existing transparency will be associated with higher levels of trust in charities

Supported

H3a: Higher levels of general familiarity of charities will be associated with higher levels of trust in charities.

Supported

H3b: Donating to charities will be associated with higher levels of trust in charities. (Direct familiarity)

Supported

H3c: Volunteering at charities will be associated with higher levels of trust in charities. (Direct familiarity)

Not supported

Discussion and Conclusion
We set out to explore predictors of trust within the Canadian charitable sector, including broad institutional trust,
the need for accountability, the level of transparency, and
the importance of familiarity. This study extends our
understanding of trust in charities in several ways. First, it
leverages data on the Canadian charitable sector, one of the
larger (by per capita) nonprofit and voluntary sectors in the
world. Much of the literature on trust in charities has been
conducted in other contexts (e.g., the United States, United
Kingdom, Australia), and this study provides the opportunity to explore how these findings might translate to similar
(but not identical) liberal welfare states. Second, rather
than exploring the influence of trust on outcomes like
donating or volunteering, this study extends existing
research on the determinants of nonprofit trust, exploring
how accountability, transparency, familiarity, and general
trust in institutions may uniquely be associated with perceptions of trustworthiness of their charitable sector.
Consistent with extant literature, our findings demonstrate that Canadian charities are perceived as more trustworthy than the business sector, government, or other
community leaders. However, our findings also suggest
that this perception of trustworthiness is positively associated with overall trust; in other words, individuals who
generally trust their community leaders and the business
sector are more likely to also trust charities. However, one
striking exception to this relationship is trust in government. Respondents in our sample demonstrated an overall
low level of trust in government—more than half a point
below charities and the lowest of the sectors included in
our model—and our model demonstrated no statistically
significant relationship between trust in government and
trust in the charitable sector.
While these findings provide tentative support for our
hypothesis that charities benefit from general trust (and
calls into question whether charities are truly facing a crisis
of confidence due to lower levels of overall trust), they also
suggest charities may benefit by highlighting their

disassociation with government since trust in government
is low. Considering research (Handy et al. 2010) that
suggests challenges exist in distinguishing charities from
both for-profit and governmental actors, charities may
enhance trust by more clearly emphasizing distinction from
their for-profit and governmental counterparts.
One possible avenue for emphasizing this distinction is
increased public knowledge and awareness of the charitable sector. Both McDougle (2014) and Bourassa and Stang
(2016) argue that enhancing overall understanding of this
sector is a foundational step to improving trust: any campaign that seeks to improve confidence in the sector must
necessarily begin with helping the public to better comprehend who charities are and what charities do. This
distinction is particularly important given the sector’s everincreasing role in the development and administration of
social services. This growth was spurred, in a large part, by
general decreases in governmental support.
Given that we found a strong and positive relationship
between familiarity and trust, marketing efforts that
enhance overall understanding of the sector could be beneficial in two ways. First, public awareness campaigns that
emphasize charities’ unique and distinct contribution to the
Canadian culture, economy, and safety net would underscore its role as a critical sector and one deserving of
support. Second, enhanced knowledge of the sector as a
whole and charitable operations in general could reduce
misconceptions that ultimately damage trust. As Saxton
(2004) writes, ‘‘The gap between public understanding and
nonprofit reality is not sustainable. Because each time the
public ‘accidentally’ bumps into the reality of modern
charities they are likely to be left more suspicious, more
cynical, more wary and less supportive’’ (p. 189).
Schlesinger et al. (2004) also emphasize the relationship
between familiarity and trust, suggesting that one way to
enhance trust among individuals unfamiliar with the sector
(particularly charities’ unique ownership structure) is to
highlight organizational accountability. Our findings provide some support for this argument. Respondents, on
average, agreed that charities need to be more financially

123

Voluntas

accountable; stronger agreement with this sentiment was
associated with lower levels of trust in the sector. In other
words, respondents who believed charities should be subject to greater financial oversight were less likely to trust
organizations. However, this finding needs to be explored
in future research to better understand the impetus for this
link.
Additionally, transparency was strongly and positively
correlated with trust in charities: respondents who believed
charities provided adequate information about their operations and programming were more likely to find the sector
trustworthy. Given the relatively low perception of charities as transparent, organizations should seek new or
enhanced ways to share information about service delivery,
donation use, fundraising costs, and overall impact. Ideally,
this information would not only be more clearly communicated to existing stakeholders like donors and volunteers
but would also be readily accessible by individuals who
may be exploring the organization (or the sector) online or
in person for the first time.
As with all research, there are limitations to this study
and its generalizability. First, our sample over-represents
both women and older adults, likely a function of the
survey recruitment method (random digit dialing was
conducted during daytime hours). Second, as articulated by
Bourassa and Stang (2016), the dichotomous nature of our
direct familiarity variables does not capture intensity of
giving3 or volunteering. This structure suggests familiarity
with charities would not differ between an individual who
gave or volunteered only once in the past year compared
with someone who had done so multiple times, an
assumption that is likely to be untrue. Thus, the role of
direct familiarity in influencing organizational trust is
likely to be conservatively estimated. Furthermore, future
research might also consider how frequency and depth of
volunteering influence organizational trust. By virtue of
more directly working with organizational staff and/or
service recipients, volunteers are uniquely embedded
within the charity, yet our findings yielded no significant
impact of volunteering on trust. Understanding whether
this is simply a function of measurement challenges (e.g.,
blunt dichotomization) or indicative of how volunteers
relate to organizations would provide meaningful direction
for future studies. It could also imply that trust levels are
captured by the other variables and volunteering neither
enhances it or diminishes it.
One final limitation of our study is that the accountability measure relates only to financial accountability. As
3

We dichotomized this variable from the question ‘‘As far as you can
remember, did you donate to charities in 2012?’’ Regarding
volunteering, participants were asked whether they volunteered for
any charity in 2012.

123

discussed earlier, other areas of accountability might
include program related outcomes, social impact, and
mission adherence, but the items available within this
survey did not effectively capture these additional areas.
Future research should more fully explore the different
forms of accountability, including how they are communicated by organizations, understood and valued by donors
(or other stakeholders), and their comparative influence on
trust in charities. Understanding the relative weight of
organizational outcomes versus organizational spending
could provide fruitful direction for leadership and marketing staff in messaging their work and organization as
trustworthy. Each of our findings contributes to practical
implications for positive branding, marketing, and public
engagement strategies with the general population to
increase trust in the charitable sector.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to have this data which were
made available to us by generosity of the Muttart Foundation
(Canada) and Imagine Canada. The authors are very grateful to the
Muttart Foundation and Imagine Canada for the use of their 2013
dataset.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

References
Bekkers, R. (2003). Trust, accreditation, and philanthropy in the
Netherlands. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 32(4),
596–615. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764003258102.
Bekkers, R., & Bowman, W. (2009). The relationship between
confidence in charitable organizations and volunteering revisited. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 38(5), 884–897.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764008324516.
Berman, G., & Davidson, S. (2003). Do donors care? Some Australian
evidence. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and
Nonprofit Organizations, 14(4), 421–430. https://doi.org/10.
1023/B:VOLU.0000007467.74816.a4.
Bourassa, M. A., & Stang, A. C. (2016). Knowledge is power: Why
public knowledge matters to charities. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 21(1), 13–30. https://
doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1537.
Bowman, W. (2004). Confidence in charitable institutions and
volunteering. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 33(2),
247–270. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764004263420.
Brindle, D. (2018). Oxfam scandal is a body blow for the whole UK
charity sector. Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/volun
tary-sector-network/2018/feb/13/oxfam-scandal-body-blow-ukcharity-sector-sport-relief. Accessed 6 July 2018.
Bryce, H. J. (2007). The public’s trust in nonprofit organizations: The
role of relationship marketing and management. California
Management Review, 49(4), 112–131.
Burnett, K. (1992). Relationship fundraising. London: White Lion
Press.
Carolei, D. (2018). How is Oxfam being held accountable over the
Haiti scandal? British Politics and Policy at LSE. http://eprints.

Voluntas
lse.ac.uk/89096/1/politicsandpolicy-how-is-oxfam-being-heldaccountable-over-the-haiti.pdf. Accessed 3 July 2018.
Cave, J. (2016). A shifting sector: Emerging trends for Canada’s
nonprofits in 2016. The Philanthropist. http://thephilanthropist.
ca/2016/01/a-shifting-sector-emerging-trends-for-canadas-non
profits-in-2016/. Accessed 2 Dec 2017.
Charities Aid Foundation. (2018). CAF UK Giving 2018: An overview
of charitable giving in the UK [PDF document]. Kent. https://
www.cafonline.org/docs/default-source/about-us-publications/
caf-uk-giving-2018-report.pdf. Accessed 6 July 2018
Clarke, L., & Carroll, L. E. (2016). Sociological and economic
theories of markets and nonprofits: Evidence from home health
organizations. American Journal of Sociology, 97(4), 945–969.
Cnaan, R., Jones, K., Dickin, A., & Salomon, M. (2011). Nonprofit
watchdogs: Do they serve the average donor? Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 21(4), 381–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/
nml.20032.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Cooley, A., & Ron, J. (2002). The NGO scramble: Organizational
insecurity and the political economy of transnational action.
International Security, 27(1), 5–39.
Cornwall, A., Lucas, H., & Pasteur, K. (2000). Introduction:
Accountability through participation—Developing workable
partnership models in the health sector. Institute of Development
Studies Bulletin, 31(1), 1–13.
Coyne, A. (2017). Take the politics out of charity? Far better to just
cancel the tax break. National Post. http://nationalpost.com/
opinion/andrew-coyne-take-the-politics-out-of-charity-far-bet
ter-to-just-cancel-the-tax-break. Accessed 14 Mar 2017.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Anheier, H. K. (1990). The sociology of nonprofit
organizations and sectors. Annual Review of Sociology, 16,
137–159.
Donovan, K. (2007). Charity scams bust public trust. The Star. https://
www.thestar.com/news/investigations/2007/06/02/charity_
scams_bust_public_trust.html. Accessed 10 July 2017.
Dumont, G. E. (2013). Transparency or accountability? The purpose
of online technologies for nonprofits. International Review of
Public Administration, 18(3), 7–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/
12294659.2013.10805261.
Ebrahim, A. (2003). Accountability in practice: Mechanisms for
NGOs. World Development, 31(5), 813–829. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0305-750X(03)00014-7.
Ebrahim, A. (2005). Accountability Myopia: Losing sight of organizational learning. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
34(1), 56–87. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764004269430.
Ebrahim, A., & Weisband, E. (Eds.). (2007). Global accountabilities:
Participation, pluralism, and public ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Edwards, M., & Hulme, D. (1996). Too close for comfort? The
impact of official aid on nongovernmental organizations. World
Development, 24(6), 961–973.
Emmett, B., & Emmett, G. (2015). Charities in Canada as an
Economic Sector [PDF document]. Toronto, CA. http://www.
imaginecanada.ca/sites/default/files/imaginecanada_charities_
in_canada_as_an_economic_sector_2015-06-22.pdf. Accessed 5
June 2017.
Frumkin, P. (2002). On being nonprofit: A conceptual and policy
primer. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Furneaux, C., & Wymer, W. (2015). Public trust in Australian
charities: Accounting for cause and effect. Third Sector Review,
21(2), 99–127.
Gaskin, K. (1999). Blurred vision: Public trust in charities. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
4(2), 163–178. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.66.

Giving USA. (2017). The Annual Report on Philanthropy for the Year
2016. Chicago: Giving USA Foundation.
Grønbjerg, K. A. (2009). Are nonprofits trustworthy? Bloomington:
Indiana Nonprofit Sector: Scope and Community Dimensions.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/8f49/b7cd608b841af771989b870
7b73d4f0cbf32.pdf. Accessed 25 June 2017.
Grønbjerg, K. A., McGiverin-Bohan, K., Gallagher, A., Dula, L., &
Miller, R. (2016). Briefing series: Indiana government officials
and trust in nonprofits. Bloomington: Indiana Nonprofit Sector:
Scope and Community Dimensions.
Hager, M. A., & Hedberg, E. C. (2016). Institutional trust, sector
confidence, and charitable giving. Journal of Nonprofit & Public
Sector Marketing, 28(2), 164–184.
Hale, K. (2013). Understanding nonprofit transparency: The limits of
formal regulation in the american nonprofit sector. International
Review of Public Administration, 18(3), 31–49. https://doi.org/
10.1080/12294659.2013.10805262.
Hall, M. H., Barr, C. W., Easwaramoorthy, M., Sokolowski, S. W., &
Salamon, L. M. (2005). The Canadian Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector in Comparative Perspective [PDF document]. Toronto:
Imagine
Canada.
http://sectorsource.ca/sites/default/files/
resources/files/jhu_report_en.pdf. Accessed 24 June 2017.
Handy, F. (1997). Co-existence of nonprofits, for profits, and public
sector institutions. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics,
68(2), 201–223.
Handy, F. (2000). How we beg: The analysis of direct mail appeals.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 29(3), 439–454.
Handy, F., Seto, S., Wakaruk, A., Mersey, B., Mejia, A., & Copeland,
L. (2010). The discerning consumer: Is nonprofit status a factor?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 39(5), 866–883.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764010362113.
Hansmann, H. B. (1980). The role of nonprofit enterprise. The Yale
Law Journal, 89(5), 835–901. https://doi.org/10.2307/796089.
Hansmann, H. (1996). The ownership of enterprise. Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press.
Herzlinger, R. E. (1996). Can public trust in nonprofits and
governments be restored? Harvard Business Review, 74(2),
97–107.
Hillier, A. (2018). Oxfam: A crisis to end all crises. Third Sector.
https://www.thirdsector.co.uk/oxfam-crisis-end-crises/communi
cations/article/1459831. Accessed 10 July 2018.
Hyndman, N., & McConville, D. (2016). Transparency in reporting
on charities’ efficiency: A framework for analysis. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterlyn, 45(4), 844–865. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0899764015603205.
Imagine Canada. (2010). Bill C-470: Twelve frequently asked
questions [PDF document]. Toronto, CA: Imagine Canada.
http://www.imaginecanada.ca/sites/default/files/c-470_top12_
faq_en.pdf. Accessed 4 Feb 2017.
Independent Sector. (2016). United for charity: How Americans trust
and value the charitable sector [PDF document]. https://www.
independentsector.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/United-forCharity-v5.pdf. Accessed 9 June 2017.
Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the firm:
Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure.
Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), 305–360.
Kearns, K. (1994). The strategic management of accountability in
nonprofit organizations: An analytical framework. Public
Administration Review, 54(2), 185–192. https://doi.org/10.
2307/976528.
Keating, E. K., & Frumkin, P. (2003). Reengineering nonprofit
financial accountability: Toward a more reliable foundation for
regulation. Public Administration Review, 63(1), 3–15. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1540-6210.00260.

123

Voluntas
Keirouz, K. S. (1998). Public perceptions and confidence in Indiana
nonprofit organizations. Indianapolis: Indiana University Center
of Philanthropy.
Kissane, R. J. (2003). What’s need got to do with it? Barriers to use of
nonprofit social services. Journal of Sociology and Social
Welfare,
30(2),
127–148.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1016565426011.
Kissane, R. J. (2010). The client perspective on nonprofit social
service organizations. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 29(3), 632–637. https://doi.org/10.1002/pam.
Kline, R. B (2011). Principles and practice of structural equation
modelling (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Koppell, J. G. S. (2005). Pathologies of accountability: ICANN and
the challenge of ‘‘multiple accountabilities disorder’’. Public
Administration Review, 65(1), 94–108. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1540-6210.2005.00434.x.
Kramer, R. M. (2000). A third sector in the third millennium?
VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit
Organizations, 11(1), 1–23.
Lasby, D., & Barr, C. (2013). Talking about charities 2013:
Canadians’ opinions on charities and issues affecting charities
[PDF document]. Edmonton. https://www.muttart.org/wp-con
tent/uploads/2015/11/3.-Talking-About-Charities-Full-Report2013.pdf. Accessed 18 June 2017.
Lasby, D., & Barr, C. (2015). Giving in Canada: Strong philanthropic
traditions supporting a large nonprofit sector. In P. Wiepking &
F. Handy (Eds.), The Palgrave handbook of global philanthropy
(1st ed., pp. 25–43). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Light, P. C. (2008). How Americans view charities: A report on
charitable confidence, 2008 [PDF document]. Washington, DC.
https://wagner.nyu.edu/files/faculty/publications/04_nonprofits_
light.pdf. Accessed 2 Dec 2017.
McDougle, L. (2014). Understanding public awareness of nonprofit
organizations: Exploring the awareness–confidence relationship.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 19(3), 187–199. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.
McDougle, L., & Handy, F. (2014). The influence of information
costs on donor decision making. Nonprofit Management and
Leadership, 24(4), 465–485. https://doi.org/10.1002/nml.21105.
McDougle, L., & Lam, M. (2014). Individual and community-level
determinants of public attitudes toward nonprofit organizations.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 43(4), 672–692.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764013479830.
Muthén, L. K., & Muthén, B. O. (1998–2012). Mplus user’s guide
(7th edn.). Los Angeles: Muthén and Muthén.
Newport, F. (2017). Americans’ confidence in institutions edges up.
Gallup.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/212840/americans-confi
dence-institutions-edges.aspx. Accessed 7 July 2018.
Nye, J. S., Zelikow, P. D., & King, D. C. (Eds.). (1997). Why people
don’t trust government. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
O’Neill, M. (2009). Public confidence in charitable nonprofits.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 38(2), 237–269.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764008326895.
Prakash, A., & Gugerty, M. K. (2010). Trust but verify? Voluntary
regulation programs in the nonprofit sector. Regulation and
Governance, 4(1), 22–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-5991.
2009.01067.x.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of
American community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Ries, T. E., Bershoff, D. M., Adkins, S., Armstrong, C., & Bruening, J.
(2018). 2018 Edelman Trust Barometer Trust Barometer: Global
Report [PDF document]. New York. https://cms.edelman.com/
sites/default/files/2018-01/2018%20Edelman%20Trust%20Barom
eter%20Global%20Report.pdf. Accessed 10 July 2018.
Rimington, J. (2018). Five tips to avoid a scandal like Oxfam Great
Britain’s. Stanford Social Innovation Review. https://ssir.org/

123

articles/entry/five_tips_to_avoid_a_scandal_like_oxfam_great_
britain. Accessed 9 July 2018.
Rutley, R., & Stephens, I. (2017). Public Trust And Confidence in
Australian Charities. http://www.acnc.gov.au/ACNC/Publica
tions/Reports/Public_Trust_2017.aspx.
Salamon, L. M. (2012). The resilient sector. In L. M. Salamon (Ed.),
The state of nonprofit America. (2nd ed., pp. 3–88) Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.
Sargeant, A. (1999). Charitable giving: towards a model of donor
behaviour. Journal of Marketing Management, 15(4), 215–238.
https://doi.org/10.1362/026725799784870351.
Sargeant, A., & Lee, S. (2002). Individual and contextual antecedents
of donor trust in the voluntary sector. Journal of Marketing
Management, 18(7–8), 779–802. https://doi.org/10.1362/
0267257022780679.
Sargeant, A., & Lee, S. (2004). Donor trust and relationship
commitment in the U.K. charity sector: The impact on behavior.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 33(2), 185–202.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764004263321.
Saxton, J. (1995). A strong charity brand comes from strong beliefs
and values. Journal of Brand Management, 2(4), 211–220.
Saxton, J. (2004). Editorial: The Achilles’ Heel of modern nonprofits
is not public ‘‘trust and confidence’’ but public understanding of
21st century charities. International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, 9(3), 188–190. https://doi.org/10.
1002/nvsm.246.
Schatteman, A. (2013). Nonprofit accountability: To whom and for
what? An introduction to the Special Issue. International Review
of Public Administration, 18(3), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1080/
12294659.2013.10805260.
Schlesinger, M., Mitchell, S., & Gray, B. H. (2004). Restoring public
legitimacy to the nonprofit sector: A survey experiment using
descriptions of nonprofit ownership. Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly, 33(4), 673–710. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764004269431.
Schmitz, H. P., Raggo, P., & Bruno-van Vijfeijken, T. (2011).
Accountability of transnational NGOs: Aspirations versus practice. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 41(6),
1175–1194. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764011431165.
Shier, M. L., & Handy, F. (2013). Understanding online donor
behavior: the role of donor characteristics, perceptions of the
internet, website and program, and influence from social
networks. International Journal of Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 17(3), 219–230. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1425.
Sisco, H. F., Collins, E. L., & Zoch, L. M. (2010). Through the
looking glass: A decade of Red Cross crisis response and
situational crisis communication theory. Public Relations
Review, 36(1), 21–27.
Sloan, M. F. (2009). The effects of nonprofit accountability ratings on
donor behavior. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
38(2), 220–236. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764008316470.
Smith, S. R., & Lipsky, M. (1993). Nonprofits for hire: The welfare
state in the age of contracting. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tremblay-Boire, J., & Prakash, A. (2014). Accountability.org: Online
disclosures by U.S. Nonprofits. VOLUNTAS: International
Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 26(2),
693–719. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-014-9452-3.
Turcotte, M. (2015). Volunteering and charitable giving in Canada
[PDF document]. http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-652-x/89652-x2015001-eng.pdf. Accessed 25 June 2017.
Weisbrod, B. A. (1998). The nonprofit mission and its financing.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 17(2), 165–174.
Williams, A. P., & Taylor, J. A. (2013). Resolving accountability
ambiguity in nonprofit organizations. VOLUNTAS: International

Voluntas
Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 24(3),
559–580. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-012-9266-0.

Wilson, M., & Hegarty, N. (1997). Public perceptions of nonprofit
organizations in Michigan. Lansing: Institute for Public Policy
and Social Research.

123

