AMS Rev
DOI 10.1007/s13162-016-0078-z

THEORY/CONCEPTUAL

Reflections on customer-based brand equity: perspectives,
progress, and priorities

Kevin Lane Keller 1

Received: 11 January 2016 / Accepted: 29 April 2016
# Academy of Marketing Science 2016

Abstract BConceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing
Customer-Based Brand Equity,^ published in the Journal of
Marketing in 1993, was one of the early thought pieces and
review papers on branding in the field. Written to be a com-
prehensive bridge between the theory and practice of brand-
ing, it has received a large number of citations and several
awards through the years. Here, I look back at that article
and provide some perspective as to how it was developed,
highlighting some of its main contributions. I also outline
some of my subsequent related branding research, as well as
that of others. Finally, I consider some future research priori-
ties in branding, putting emphasis on the online and digital
developments that have occurred since the publication of the
article.

Keywords Brands . Branding . Brand equity .
Customer-based brand equity . Brand management

The publication of BConceptualizing, Measuring, and
Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity^ in the Journal of
Marketing in 1993 was an important crossroads in my re-
search career (Keller 1993). Writing the CBBE article gave
me a chance to both look back, in terms of what I had learned
and believed about branding, as well look forward, in terms of
what I wanted to focus my research and writing on in the
future. The article captured a lot of my thinking at that time
on a number of branding topics and provided a blueprint going

* Kevin Lane Keller

kevin.keller@dartmouth.edu

1

Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, 100 Tuck Hall,
Hanover, NH 03755, USA

forward that influenced my research agenda and writing for
years to follow.

The paper captured the imagination of many marketing
scholars too. The article was well-received and earned several
awards. It has become a Ph.D. seminar standard to read and
discuss in the years since and is one of the most widely cited
articles in the field, with over 10,000 citations (according to
Google Scholar). With this paper, almost 25 years later, I
would like to again look back and look forward. The branding
area continues to be deemed as vitally important by both ac-
ademics and practitioners and taking stock as to what we have
learned—and not learned—can offer valuable insight and
inspiration.

Specifically, I want to update the CBBE article by provid-
ing some background and context as to how the article came
about and was developed, what I feel were its important con-
tributions, and what research progress has been made on some
of its key topics since its publication, both in terms of my own
research program and those of others. I also want to look to the
future and suggest areas where I feel greater understanding
and insights are needed with branding. Specifically, I outline
two broad sets of topics which I feel have much potential for
productive research programs and significant managerial im-
pact going forward, putting special emphasis on digital
developments.

How it happened

It is interesting to look back at when, where, how and, most
importantly,why the CBBE article was written. The CBBE
article was written in the midst of a 3-summer, pre-tenure
sabbatical and leave during the 1991–1992 school year at
the Australian Graduate School of Management at the
University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia. Prior

to writing the paper, I had a productive research partnership
with Dave Aaker at UC-Berkeley that started when I joined
the faculty there in January 1986. At that time, Dave had been
concentrating more and more of his research on marketing
strategy; my Ph.D. thesis research had focused on the effects
of advertising memory retrieval cues on brand evaluations.
We both became interested in studying brand extensions,
and our first paper in the area (Aaker and Keller 1990), also
published in JM, became one of the early foundational pieces
and led to a number of follow-up studies that we conducted.
Over time, Dave became more interested in writing directly
to marketing practitioners and influencing how they thought
about their brands, which he has done with great success for
decades now. I had different goals at that time: I was interested
in getting tenure at the Stanford Business School, where I had
moved, and making my own academic mark. Although brand
extensions were clearly a central issue to branding, there were
many other important branding issues which also deserved
greater attention from academic researchers and marketing
practitioners, and I had begun to start thinking, writing, and
lecturing about them.

The branding area was just emerging as more broadly im-
portant, and there was increased interest in the topic by both
academics and practitioners. At the same time, because there
was also much uncertainty and confusion about many brand-
ing concepts and guidelines, I knew there was a tremendous
opportunity to contribute by offering some clarity to the area.
The time in Australia gave me the chance to pull together and
solidify my thoughts on branding, as I had already learned that
nothing clarifies thinking like having to write something down
and figure out exactly what you mean.

I also knew a good review paper could provide much
structure and direction to the field. As a Ph.D. student, I
was greatly influenced by Jim Bettman’s award-winning JM
review article on memory (Bettman 1979). In fact, the idea
for my thesis research came from an anecdote about the LIFE
cereal brand which Jim described and interpreted in his arti-
cle. LIFE cereal had suffered from poor ad recall until they
chose to put a scene from their popular BMikey^ TV com-
mercial on their actual product package. I became fascinated
by the notion that brand names and packages are often insuf-
ficient cues to advertising at the point-of-purchase and more
explicit cues à la Mikey may be necessary. Bettman’s JM
review paper provided some initial theoretical guidance for
my research on the topic.

Additionally, I had also become a big proponent of devel-
oping detailed conceptual frameworks that could offer insight
and guidance to both academic researchers and marketing
practitioners. I had the opportunity to supervise four Ph.D.
students while I was at Stanford (Jennifer Aaker, Sheri
Bridges, Christie Brown, and Meg Campbell). In each case,
I encouraged them to include a detailed, macro-level concep-
tual model to provide broader perspectives to the phemenona

AMS Rev

they were studying, before honing in on the more specific
research problems they would actually be investigating.

In my own case, for example, although my thesis research
dealt with advertising retrieval cues (Keller 1987), the second
chapter in my dissertation laid out a broad, comprehensive
model of memory effects in advertising that addressed
encoding, storage and retrieval factors in some detail. That
model provided much inspiration and direction to my subse-
quent advertising research efforts and led to 2-3 related re-
search streams where I explored additional effects of ad re-
trieval cues (Keller 1991a; Forehand and Keller 1996; Keller
et al. 1998), as well as the effects of coordinated media cam-
paigns (e.g., print reinforcement and radio replay of TV ads)
(Edell and Keller 1989, 1999), competitive ad interference
(Keller 1991b), and other advertising topics. All of this re-
search benefited from the theorizing that had been developed
in my Ph.D. thesis and, in particular, the mediating and mod-
erating factors that I had identified to explain how advertising
worked from a memory perspective.

For all of these reasons, I felt it made sense to write a review
paper on branding. I was hoping to make several contributions
with the paper. One, I wanted to provide some conceptual
structure and clarity to branding, but also offer some helpful
managerial guidelines. Two, I wanted to organize and interpret
the rapidly expanding body of research on the topic, but also
highlight areas in the greatest need of future research and pro-
vide some guidance as to how that research could be shaped.
Although lengthy, the article itself was written fairly easily.
I already had many ideas and much material to work with. I
received some helpful suggestions on early drafts from some
colleagues and benefited from a constructive review process
led by Tom Kinnear from the University of Michigan, the JM
editor at the time. The paper was published as the lead article
in the January 1993 issue of JM.

Most important contributions

With the CBBE article, there were several specific goals I was
trying to achieve. Most importantly, I wanted to provide a con-
ceptual overview of brand equity which would be helpful in
thinking about how to build, measure, and manage brand equity.
I also wanted to put forth a specific definition of the brand equity
concept. At that time, all kinds of definitions of brand equity
were being proposed, especially in the trade press. I wanted to
provide a definition of brand equity and a perspective on brand-
ing that would be helpful for marketing practitioners, but I
wanted to have it strongly rooted in consumer behavior theory.
This focus reflected my basic philosophy about branding. I
have always felt that consumers and customers are at the heart of
marketing, as reflected by the simple definition of marketing as
Bsatisfying consumer needs and wants better than competitors.^ I
chose to use the term Bcustomer-based brand equity^ because I

AMS Rev

wanted to distinguish my own more micro, consumer-focused
view of brand equity from other more macro, financial-oriented
views of brand equity. Brand valuation methods, and
Interbrand’s method in particular, were becoming more popular,
and there was much interest in industry at the time on putting
dollar figures on the value of brands. My interest, on the other
hand, was in providing strategic insight and guidelines, centered
in consumer behavior theory, which would create the value
which these financial models would then assess.

As I outlined in the article, the definition of customer-based
brand equity that I proposed – Bthe differential effect that
brand knowledge has on customer response to brand market-
ing activity^—was characterized by three dimensions that I
felt were critical to the theoretical development of the concept:
1) differential effects created by a brand; 2) brand knowl-
edge—defined very broadly as any type of mental brand as-
sociation—as the source of the differential effects and 3) re-
sponse to a wide variety of different marketing and other var-
iables for the brand as the basis or outcomes of those differ-
ential effects. As outlined below, those three key components
led to much subsequent research.

With that definition and conceptualization as a foundation, the
paper also attempted to provide some useful structure into how to
think about building, measuring, and managing customer-based
brand equity, including the following highlights.

& Building customer-based brand equity was defined in terms
of three activities: Choosing brand identities or elements;
designing and implementing marketing activities them-
selves; and leveraging secondary associations by linking
the brand to some other entity—a person, place or thing.
& Two approaches to measuring customer-based brand
equity were suggested: an indirect approach which fo-
cused on potential sources of brand equity by measuring
brand knowledge, and a direct approach that attempted to
actually measure the differential effect created by that
brand knowledge on consumer response to different as-
pects of the brand’s marketing program.
Six guidelines for managing customer-based brand
equity were identified: emphasizing the importance of
taking a broad and long-term view of marketing a
brand; specifying the desired consumer knowledge
structures and core benefits for a brand; considering a
wide range of traditional and nontraditional advertising,
promotion, and other marketing options; coordinating
the marketing options that were chosen; conducting
tracking studies and controlled experiments; and evalu-
ating potential extension candidates.

&

The final contribution of the paper was to outline a number
of branding topics in need of more research. As will be de-
scribed below, although much progress has been made on
those topics and others, much work remains.

My subsequent CBBE-related research

One of the advantages of writing a conceptual paper is the
research agenda it naturally spawns. In my case, perhaps the
most important follow-up to the CBBE article was my text-
book, Strategic Brand Management (SBM), which used much
of the structure and concepts from the article as a blueprint to
develop a comprehensive 600+ page examination of building,
measuring and managing brand equity. The SBM text, now in
its 4th edition (Keller 2013), has been translated and adapted in
many languages and countries and is viewed by many as one
of the leading textbooks in the area. Although there were
many specific research projects that I was involved with that
also followed fairly directly from the thinking expressed in the
CBBE article, I will only highlight two of my main research
streams here, on brand knowledge and brand extensions.

Brand knowledge

At the very core of customer-based brand equity is the concept
of brand knowledge. The original CBBE article viewed brand
knowledge from the perspective of an associative network
memory model. I had always found that model—and its no-
tion of spreading activation—to be very robust and useful to
explain and interpret all kinds of marketing and consumer
behavior phenomena. I felt it was particularly applicable to
brands and branding (John et al. 2006).

The CBBE article offered a very simple taxonomy of brand
knowledge that broke the concept down into two key compo-
nents: 1) Brand awareness, consisting of brand recall and
recognition, and 2) brand image, characterized by the
strength, favorability and uniqueness of different kinds of at-
tribute and benefit associations for the brand. Even though it
was fairly basic, the figure from the article displaying the full
taxonomy was subsequently reprinted in a number of different
publications, reinforcing the value of even simple conceptual
frameworks to facilitate understanding. I published several
follow-up articles that expanded or built on this depiction of
brand knowledge.

Articulating brand knowledge

A JCR article (Keller 2003) outlined in more detail the specific
dimensions of brand knowledge in terms of: Awareness, attri-
butes, benefits, images, thoughts, feelings, attitudes, and ex-
periences. The central thesis to that paper was that it was
critical to develop broader perspectives towards brand knowl-
edge given that: 1) marketing activity creates or affects multi-
ple dimensions of brand knowledge and 2) multiple dimen-
sions of brand knowledge, in turn, influence consumer re-
sponse to marketing activity.

The JCR paper also delved into more detail in the brand
leveraging process, making the case that any other entity –

person, place or thing—can be characterized by those same
dimensions of brand knowledge. A three-factor model was pro-
posed that maintained that the extent of equity transfer that
could potentially occur from linking a brand to another entity
depended on: 1) consumer knowledge of the other entity, 2)
meaningfulness of the knowledge of the entity to the brand, and
3) transferability of the knowledge of the entity to the brand.

Brand resonance model

Another important follow-up was the development of the
brand resonance model which focused on key dimensions of
brand knowledge and how they affected resulting consumer-
brand relationships. This model was first outlined in Keller
(2001) and expanded in greater detail in subsequent SBM text
editions. The resonance model outlines a series of branding
stages and building blocks to profile how consumers form
relationships with brands (see Fig. 1).

The resonance model makes some important additions to
the thinking in the original CBBE article. The concept of
brand salience, defined in terms of breadth and depth of brand
awareness, is introduced as the base level of the model. Brand
salience depends on the extent to which the brand is thought of
easily and often—at all the right times, in all the right places,
and in all the right ways. Even by just acknowledging the
importance of brand awareness at both purchase and con-
sumption, this was a much richer view of brand awareness
than the straight-forward brand recognition and top-of-mind
awareness measures often employed in industry, or even some
academic research, such as with the original CBBE article. An
important and rich concept, brand salience has now become a
much bigger part of the branding lexicon (e.g., as a key com-
ponent of market research leader Millward Brown’s
Meaningfully Different Framework).

AMS Rev

Building again on the original CBBE theorizing, the reso-
nance model also draws two key distinctions in its next two
levels up, in terms of brand image and brand responses. The
first important distinction is in the duality of brands, both in
terms of tangible and intangible associations, related to per-
formance and imagery respectively at the brand image level,
and in terms of the rational and emotional responses that either
type of information might evoke as brand responses at the next
level up.

With this structure in mind, the model highlights that
Bgoing up^ the left-hand side of the model of the pyramid
can be viewed as a more Brational route^ to brand-building
and going up the right-hand side can be seen as more of an
Bemotional route.^ The model acknowledges that strong
brands go up both sides of the pyramid, while also recognizing
the importance of Bcross-over effects,^ such that performance
associations affect feelings and imagery associations affect
judgments.

A second important distinction that is made in the reso-
nance model is in the notion of points-of-difference (PODs)
and points-of-parity (POPs) as a basis of positioning. Based
on joint research with the originators of the idea, Brian
Sternthal and Alice Tybout of Northwestern University, the
brand positioning model was explicated in detail in an HBR
article (Keller et al. 2002) and in later revisions of the SBM
text.

Addressing a fundamentally important component of brand
and marketing strategy, the POD and POP model provides a
much more competitively-realistic and consumer-grounded
approach to positioning vs. the classic approaches to position-
ing espoused by marketing pundits such as Ries and Trout or
found in traditional positioning statement templates. The real-
ization that brands need to both have advantages (PODs) in
some areas and break even in other areas (POPs) with respect

Fig. 1 Brand resonance model

Stages of Brand 
Development
(Questions)

RELATIONSHIPS:
What about you & me 
g oing forward? 

RESPONSE:
What do I think and 
feel about you?  

MEANING:
What are you 
and what makes 
you special?

IDENTITY:
Who are you 
and when 
and why do I 
think of you? 

4

3

2

1

Resonance

Judgments

Feelings

Performance

Imagery

Salience

Branding 
Objective at 
Each Stage

Intense,
Active Loyalty 

Positive,
Accessible
Reactions 

Points-of-Parity
& Difference

Deep, Broad
Brand
Awareness

AMS Rev

to a well-defined set of competitors has been enlightening to
many practitioners in particular.

Judgments and feelings, in turn, are the two key inputs into
the fourth and last stage of the model, and another important
contribution, the concept of brand resonance. Brand
resonance is defined in terms of the extent to which a con-
sumer feels he or she is Bin synch^ with a brand. It is reflected
by the level of intensity and activity in the relationship the
brand engenders with consumers and is conceptualized in
terms of four components: behavioral loyalty, attitudinal at-
tachment, sense of community and active engagement.
Although originally devised in the very early days of the
Internet, as it turns out, the model was constructed in such a
way that it is still highly relevant and applicable even in to-
day’s digital marketing environment.

In particular, the dimensions of brand resonance help to capture
developments in social media and how consumers have become
more involved in potentially new and different ways with brands.
The model describes how marketers need to go beyond mere
repeat buying (behavioral loyalty) so that consumers create strong
bonds with the brand (attitudinal attachment), as well as to each
other and the company as a whole (sense of community). An
especially useful concept, active engagement is defined to be when
customers are willing to invest time, energy, money, or any other
personal resources in the brand beyond those expended during
purchase or consumption of the brand.

Consumer engagement is inherently a broad concept—en-
gagement may be directed towards the brand, company, or
other consumers as a result of attitudinal attachment, a sense
of community or perhaps some other factor. In practice, how-
ever, engagement has often been operationalized as more of a
media phenomenon. The concept of active engagement put
forth in the brand resonance model is one that would seem
to be more faithful to the engagement concept in its broader
terms. By using the investment of different types of resources
as its foundation, it can potentially align with other resource-
based views of consumer behavior. Its broader scope offers
much research potential.

The resonance model, with its roots in the CBBE article,
has had impact in several different ways. It served as the basis
for Procter & Gamble’s global brand tracking system,
EquityScan, for years and has influenced brand tracking at a
number of other firms too. The resonance model has also been
used by instructors in more and more MBA classrooms
through the years as a means to explain brand building and
consumer-brand relationships to students.

Brand value chain model

Finally, working with Don Lehmann from Columbia
University, I developed one more model which built on all
of this prior research and theorizing. The brand value chain
model was designed to help marketers trace the value creation

process to better understand the financial impact of marketing
expenditures and investments to create loyal customers and
strong brands (Keller and Lehmann 2003). The model was
built on some fundamental premises originally introduced in
the CBBE article as to how the value of a brand ultimately
resided with consumers or customers and what they felt and
thought and how they acted, along with the importance of
measuring both sources and outcomes of brand equity.

Specifically, the details of the model, displayed in Fig. 2,
are as follows. First, brand value creation begins when the
firm targets actual or potential customers by investing in a
marketing program to develop the brand, including product
research, development, and design; trade or intermediary sup-
port; marketing communications; and so on. This marketing
activity changes customers’ mindsets—what customers think
and feel and everything that becomes linked to the brand, as
reflected by the various components of the brand resonance
model. Next, these customers’ mindsets affect buying behav-
ior and how they respond to all subsequent marketing activity
– pricing, channels, communications and the product itself—
and the resulting market share and profitability of the brand.
Finally, the investment community considers this market per-
formance of the brand to assess shareholder value in general
and the value of a brand in particular.

The model also assumes that three multipliers or filters
moderate the transfer between these four value stages, increas-
ing or decreasing the value that can transfer from one stage to
another: 1) program multiplier is a function of the quality of
the program investment and determines the marketing pro-
gram’s ability to actually affect the customer mindset; 2) The
customer multiplier depends on factors such as competitive
superiority, channel and other intermediary support, while
customer size and profile determine the extent to which value
created in the minds and hearts of customers affects market
performance; and 3) The market multiplier depends, in part,
on the actions of financial analysts and investors and deter-
mines the extent to which the value shown by the market
performance of a brand is manifested in shareholder value.

Summary

Grounded in consumer behavior theory, I view these three
models—the brand positioning model, the brand resonance
model and the brand value chain model—as offering mar-
keters a comprehensive set of tools to help them devise brand-
ing strategies and tactics to maximize profits and long-term
brand equity and track their progress along the way. Like the
famous Russian nesting Bmatryoshka^ dolls, the three models
are inter-connected or linked and become larger and increase
in scope (see Fig. 3 for a simplified depiction). The first model
is a component into the second model; the second model, in
turn, is a component into the third model. Combined, the three
models take much of the learning and beliefs from academic

Fig. 2 Brand value chain model

AMS Rev

VALUE
STAGES

Marketing
Program
Investment

Customer
Mindset

Market
Performance

Shareholder
Value

- Product
- Communications
- Trade
- Employee
- Other

- Awareness
- Associations
- Attitudes
- Attachment
- Activity

- Price premiums
- Price elasticities
- Market share
- Expansion success
- Cost savings
- Profitability

- Stock price
- P/E ratio
- Market capitalization

MULTIPLIERS/
FILTERS

Program
Quality

Market
Conditions

Investor
Sentiment

- Distinctiveness
- Relevance
- Integrated
- Value
- Excellence

- Competitive reactions
- Channel support
- Customer size and profile

- Market dynamics
- Growth potential
- Risk profile
- Brand contribution

research into branding to provide some micro and macro per-
spectives to successful brand building.

The CBBE article highlighted a three factor model of exten-
sion evaluations originally proposed in Keller and Aaker (1992):

Brand extensions

My other research stream I want to highlight concerns brand
extensions. An active research area to this day, literally hundreds
of papers on brand extensions have appeared in the marketing
literature over the last 25 years. Given their prevalence as a brand-
ing strategy, as well as the challenges which firms face in consis-
tently and successfully launching them, brand extensions are,
appropriately enough, one of the most studied areas in marketing.

1. How salient parent brand associations are in the minds of
consumers in the extension context, i.e., what associations come
to mind about the parent brand when consumers think of the
proposed extension and the strength of those associations.

2. How favorable any inferred associations are in the ex-
tension context, i.e., whether these associations suggest the
type of product or service that the brand extension would be,
and whether consumers view these associations as good or
bad in the extension context.

Fig. 3 An integrated set of brand
planning models

3)  Brand Value Chain Model

Marketing 
Activity

Customer 
Mindset

Market 
Performance

Shareholder 
Value

2)  Brand Resonance Model

Resonance

Judgments Feelings

Performance

Imagery

Salience

1)  Brand Positioning Model

Points of  
Parity

Points of 
Difference

AMS Rev

3. How unique any inferred associations are in the
extension category, i.e., how these associations compare
with those about competitors.

Building on these notions, later research described a four
factor model of the feedback effects of an extension on parent
brand knowledge and evaluations (Keller and Sood 2003;
Keller 2013):

1. How compelling the evidence is about the corresponding
attribute or benefit association in the extension context, e.g.,
how attention getting and unambiguous or easily interpretable
information about product performance or imagery is for that
association.

2. How relevant or diagnostic the extension evidence is for
attribute or benefit associations for the parent brand, e.g., how
much consumers see evidence on product performance or im-
agery in one category as predictive of product performance or
imagery for the brand in other categories.

3. How consistent the extension evidence is with the cor-
responding parent brand associations. Inconsistent extension
evidence creates the potential for change, with the direction
and extent of change depending on the relative strength and
favorability of the evidence.

4. How strongly existing attribute or benefit associations
are held in consumer memory for the parent brand, i.e., how
easy an association might be to change.

Much of my subsequent brand extension research looked at
different aspects of these models and the extension evaluation
and feedback effects process. The findings of several of the
published papers included:

& Keller and Aaker (1998) examined different dimen-
sions of corporate credibility and found that a cor-
porate brand association of being innovative was
particularly beneficial
to improve extension
acceptance.

& Bridges et al. (2000) showed how communicating the
right kind of information about extensions could provide
Bexplanatory links^ and reduce uncertainty to improve
extension evaluations.

& Desai and Keller (2002) showed how different ingre-
dient branding strategies affected acceptance of sub-
sequent extensions: Co-branded ingredients were
more beneficial
than self-branded ingredients for
more dissimilar extensions.
Sood and Keller (2012) found that sub-branding offered
two key benefits to marketers by enhancing extension
evaluations and protecting the parent brand from any un-
wanted negative feedback.

&

Some other subsequent branding research

The CBBE article outlined six main areas of future research,
each of which received much research attention since the ar-
ticle was published. Many other productive research streams
have emerged in the branding area in the last 25 years, how-
ever, that are not necessarily related to the thinking in the
CBBE article. Here, I briefly highlight some additional re-
search on the same two topics reviewed above—brand knowl-
edge and brand extensions. I also consider in some depth how
various individual differences impact consumer evaluations of
brand extensions.

Brand knowledge

Much branding research has highlighted all types of potential-
ly important brand intangibles and how they influence con-
sumer decision-making. Impactful research streams have
emerged on such diverse areas as brand personality (Aaker
1997; Mathur et al. 2012), brand anthropomorphism
(Aggrawal and McGill 2012), brand emotions (Pham et al.
2013; Verrochi and Williams 2013), sensory marketing
(Krishna 2013), and marketing aesthetics (Hoegg et al.
2010), among many other topics.

Flowing from Fournier’s seminal research (Fournier 1998),
a vast body of research has looked at self-brand relationships
in all kinds of interesting and useful ways (Aaker et al. 2004;
Batra et al. 2012; Cheng et al. 2012; Dommer et al. 2013;
Dunn and Hoegg 2014; Escalas 1996; Fedorikhin et al.
2008; Swaminathan et al. 2007; 2009; Thomson et al. 2005;
2012). Many specific branding considerations such as lifestyle
branding (Chernev et al. 2011), conspicuous brand consump-
tion (Ferraro et al. 2013), and brand tourism (Bellezza and
Keinan 2014) have also been illuminated from a consumer
brand knowledge perspective.

Collectively, this research, and that of many others, has shown
how important it is to understand consumer memory and knowl-
edge, and how consumers think and feel about brands.

Brand extensions

A number of interesting and important phenomena have
also been identified with brand extensions. For example,
by making brand extensions seem more concrete, Meyvis
et al. (2012) showed how the presence of visual informa-
tion and availability of comparison brands could create a
more concrete mindset towards a brand extension and
shift consumers’ preferences from extensions of better-
fitting brands to extensions from higher quality brands
(see also Milberg et al. 2010).

A number of studies have introduced useful constructs and
metrics to better understand brand extension dynamics. For
example, Spiggle et al. (2012) developed a brand extension

authenticity (BEA) scale that focuses on consumer perceptions
of the Blegitimacy and cultural contiguity^ of brand extensions.
Specifically, they propose four dimensions of brand extension
authenticity: 1) maintaining brand standards and style, 2) honor-
ing brand heritage, 3) preserving brand essence, and 4) avoiding
brand exploitation. In their particular experimental setting, BEA
provided additional explanatory value to evaluations of brand
extensions beyond consumer perceptions of fit on the basis of
perceived extension similarity or relevance, particularly among
consumers with strong self–brand connections.

Much research has explored the relationships among and
between brands (e.g., Heath et al. 2011; Mao and Krishnan
2006; Oakley et al. 2008), i.e., how various characteristics of
one brand or brands affects consumer perceptions and evalu-
ations of another brand. Brand dilution research, in particular,
considers how the introduction of a new product in some form
by a company can adversely affect the fortunes of existing
brands for the company, especially if the new product is
branded as an extension.

Because of its fundamental importance to brand manage-
ment, brand dilution has been a topic of enduring interest and
has received close research scrutiny from a variety of useful
angles (Ahluwalia and Gurhan-Canli 2000; Caldieraro et al.
2015; Ferraro et al. 2013; Gurhan-Canli and Maheswaran
1998; Keller and Sood 2003; Kirmani et al. 1999; Loken
and John 1993; Milberg et al. 1997; Pullig et al. 2006; John
et al. 1998).

Some of this dilution research uses an associative network
memory model (Morrin 1999). For example, Lei et al. (2008)
showed that the magnitude of spillover between brands in a
portfolio is a function of both the strength and directionality of
brand associations, as determined by the number and salience
of associations linked to each brand. They underscore the
possibility of association asymmetry between brands such that
a crisis with sub-brand A may not negatively influence eval-
uations of sub-brand B in the portfolio to the same extent as
the same crisis with sub-brand B would influence evaluations
of sub-brand A.

Research has also shown positive effects between brands.
Shine et al. (2007) showed that the simultaneous introduction
of two brand extensions (e.g., two digital cameras) had a
Bsynergistic^ effect on consumer evaluations of the extensions
independent of their similarity or fit to the parent brand (e.g.,
Xerox). Consumers appear to view a related set of products
from a single manufacturer as inherently appealing.

Similarly, people enjoy complimentary products con-
sumed at the same time more when the products are mere-
ly labeled as coming from the same brand vs. different
brands (Rahinel and Redden 2013). Complementarity
has also been shown to be beneficial with co-brand part-
ners, although it depends in part on consumer processing
style or strategy (property mapping vs. relational linking)
(Swaminathan et al. 2015).

AMS Rev

Summary Reviewing all of even just the more recent research
in the branding area on brand extensions in any depth is be-
yond the scope of this paper. A large part of Chapter 12 in my
Strategic Brand Management text, however, does catalog
some of the important research findings on brand extensions
that have emerged in the literature through the years. Table 1
summarizes that research into a set of proposed managerial
guidelines.

As is clear from those guidelines, many factors affect
how consumers evaluate brand extensions and whether or
not extensions are successful. Figure 4 offers a high-level
schematic overview of some of these different factors (see
also Czellar 2003). In the next section, I will focus on
research in that part of the figure that is relevant to

Table 1 Brand extension guidelines based on academic research

1. Successful brand extensions occur when the parent brand is seen as

having favorable associations and there is a perception of fit between
the parent brand and the extension product.

2. There are many bases of fit: product-related attributes and benefits, as
well as non-product-related attributes such as common usage situations
or user types.

3. Fit may also be based on technical or manufacturing commonalties or

more surface considerations such as necessary or situational
complementarity.

4. Knowledgeable Bexperts^ are more likely to use technical or
manufacturing commonalities to judge fit; less knowledgeable
Bnovice^ consumers are more likely to use superficial considerations.
5. Consumers may transfer associations that are positive in the original

product class but become negative in the extension context.

6. Consumers may infer negative associations about an extension,
perhaps even based on other inferred positive associations.

7. Concrete attribute associations tend to be more diffcult to extend than

abstract benefitt associations.

8. High quality brands stretch farther than average quality brands,

although both types of brands have boundaries.

9. A brand that is a product category prototype or exemplar can be

difficult to extend.

10. It can be difficult to extend into a product class that is seen as easy-to-

make.

11. A successful extension can contribute to the parent brand image and

enable a brand to be extended even farther.

12. An unsuccessful extension does not prevent a firm from
Bbacktracking^ and introducing a more similar extension.

13. An unsuccessful extension hurts the parent brand only when there is a

strong basis of fit between the two and it is a Bproduct failure.^

14. The most effective advertising strategy for an extension is one which
emphasizes information about the extension (rather than reminders
about the parent brand).

15. Sub-branding can enhance distant extension evaluations and protect

the parent brand from negative feedback from close extensions.
16. Vertical extensions can be difficult and often require sub-branding

strategies.

17. Individual differences across consumers can affect how they make an

extension decision and moderate extension effects.

18. Cultural differences across markets can influence extension success.

AMS Rev

Category A

Category B

Category C

Parent 
Brand

Extension
Category

Competitor X

Competitor Y

Competitor  Z

Consumer

Motivation

Ability

Opportunity

Fig. 4 Conceptualizing brand extension evaluations

Individual Difference Factors

consumers and what they know, how they think and feel,
and how that affects, in turn, how they evaluate an exten-
sion and its resulting success.

Research on individual differences and extension
evaluations

Consumers vary in their chronic or situational motivation,
ability and opportunity to evaluate an extension in a number
of important ways. Research has shown how extension fit and
evaluations can be influenced by several consumer character-
istics, as follows.

Expertise

Early research by Muthukrishnan and Weitz (1990) demon-
strated that knowledgeable Bexpert^ consumers were more
likely to use technical or manufacturing commonalities to
judge fit, considering similarity in terms of technology, design
and fabrication, as well as the materials and components used
in the manufacturing process. Less knowledgeable Bnovice^
consumers, on the other hand, were more likely to use super-
ficial, perceptual considerations such as common package,
shape, color, size, and usage.

Zhang and Sood (2002) showed a similar pattern of knowl-
edge effects based on age. Children – who have less brand
knowledge than adults—were more likely to evaluate exten-
sions on the basis of surface cues (e.g., brand name linguistic
characteristics of an extension) as compared to adults who
were more likely to use deep cues (e.g., category similarity
between the parent brand and extension category).

Decision style

Research has considered how the manner by which consumers
tend to make decisions in general affects how they make ex-
tension decisions in particular. Monga and John (2010) have
shown that one important individual difference in extension
evaluations is whether consumers are analytical thinkers,

focusing more on comparing specific attributes or benefits of
the parent brand and extension, or holistic thinkers, focusing
more on comparing overall attitudes and judgments of the
parent brand and extension. Analytical and holistic thinkers
both gave prestige brands permission to extend widely, but
holistic thinkers gave functional brands much greater permis-
sion to extend than analytical thinkers.

Similarly, Yorkston et al. (2010) have shown that con-
sumers known as incremental theorists, who believe that the
personality traits of a brand are malleable, are more accepting
of brand extensions than consumers known as entity theorists,
who believe that a brand’s traits are fixed. Cutright et al.
(2013) showed that when feelings of personal control are
low for consumers, they may seek greater structure in brands
and thus may be more likely to reject brand extensions that do
not seem to fit well with a parent brand.

Self-construal and schemas

Another important individual difference variable relates to
self-construal or how people view and make sense of life
and their lives (Lee et al. 2000; 2010). A person with an
independent self-construal is more concerned with the unique-
ness of individuals; a person with an interdependent self-
construal is more concerned with relationships between and
among individuals.

In a branding context, Ahluwalia (2008) posited that a con-
sumer with an interdependent self-construal should be better
able to uncover the possible relationships among a brand ex-
tension and its parent brand and thus have higher perceptions
of extension fit and favorability. In her study, these effects
were observed as long as consumers with interdependent
self-construal were sufficiently motivated.

Similarly, Kim and John (2008) show that consumers with
a low-level construal (i.e., view stimuli in their environments
in terms of concrete and contextualized features) are not as
sensitive to differences in perceived fit in evaluating brand
extensions as compared to those consumers with a high-
level construal (i.e., view stimuli in their environment in terms
of abstract and generalized features).

Relatedly, Puligadda et al. (2012) argue that brand-
schematic consumers are more likely than others to process
or organize information according to their brand knowledge.
Brand-aschematic consumers, on the other hand, use other
information such as product characteristics or attributes as a
frame of reference. Brand schematic consumers were shown
to be more likely to see the similarity in a brand extension
concept.

Regulatory focus

Another important individual difference between consumers
is regulatory focus (Higgins 1997, 2002) and the motivation

of people and how they go about pursuing their goals.
Individuals with a prevention focus are concerned with nega-
tive outcomes and avoiding losses via safety, security, respon-
sibility, and so on. Individuals with a promotion focus are
concerned with positive outcomes and seeking gains and plea-
sure and avoiding missed opportunities.

Yeo and Park (2006) showed that consumers who are either
chronically or temporally prevention focused tend to judge
dissimilar extensions less favorably than consumers with a
chronic or temporary promotion focus due to their different
interpretations of risk. Relatedly, Chang et al. (2011) showed
that promotion focused consumers are more likely to focus
more abstractly on the overlap in benefits in judging an exten-
sion, whereas prevention focused consumers are more likely
to focus more concretely on sheer category similarity.

Mindset and goals

Temporal and contextual factors can affect extension evalua-
tions in a variety of different ways. Barone et al. (2000) ex-
perimentally demonstrated that positive mood primarily en-
hanced evaluations of extensions that consumers viewed as
moderately similar (as opposed to very similar or dissimilar)
to a favorably evaluated parent brand (see also Yeung and
Wyer 2005). Monga and Guhan-Canli (2012) found that get-
ting men to think about their spouses or mates put them into a
more relational processing mode such that they increased their
fit perceptions of moderately dissimilar extensions.

Consumer goals can also play a role. Hamilton and
Chernev (2010) showed that upscale extensions could in-
crease the price image of a brand and downscale extensions
decrease its price image when consumers were browsing or
just looking around, but did not necessarily apply when con-
sumers were actively looking to make a purchase, in which
case the effects could even be reversed.

Culture

Recent research has also explored how different cultures re-
spond differently to brand extensions. Monga and John
(2007), as well as Ng and Houston (2006), have shown that
consumers from Eastern cultures (e.g., China) have a more
holistic style of thinking and perceive higher levels of exten-
sion fit than do consumers from Western cultures (e.g., U.S.)
who have a more analytical style of thinking.

Dilution effects for a typical or similar extension that fails
also can vary by culture and consumer motivation (Ng 2010):
Easterners exhibited significantly greater dilution when their
motivation is high; Westerners exhibited significantly greater
dilution when their motivation is low.

Additionally, Torelli and Ahluwalia (2012) have shown
that cultural congruency can aid culturally consistent brand
extensions over and beyond the effects of perceived fit (see

AMS Rev

also Torelli et al. 2012). They note that a cultural congruent
brand extension might be something like Sony electric car;
a culturally incongruent car might be something like Sony
cappuccino-macchiato maker. According to the research,
beyond the inherent levels of fit that any electronic manu-
facturer might enjoy with an electric car, Sony would be
expected to get an extra boost in fit and evaluations be-
cause of its Japanese country of origin and Japan’s strong
association with electronics.

Summary

As this body of research has clearly shown, individual differ-
ences between consumers matter a great deal and can play a
significant role as to how consumers interpret and judge brand
extensions. Although there are many different mediating fac-
tors that can help to explain these results, many of these indi-
vidual difference factors can potentially be linked to funda-
mental considerations of a consumer’s chronic or situational
motivation, ability and opportunity to process extension infor-
mation and make extension evaluations and choices.

Areas in need of additional research

With an area as broad and as important as branding, there is
naturally a wide variety of research opportunities.
Accordingly, the last 25 years have seen concerted research
efforts in branding from academics from many different dis-
ciplines and in all kinds of different domains. It is rare that an
issue of a top marketing journal appears without at least one
article that includes the word Bbrand^ in its title.

Along the way, there have been several reviews of research
on brands and branding to offer some helpful perspectives and
insights. For example, Keller and Lehmann (2006) provide a
detailed summary of noteworthy research findings on a host of
different branding topics, as well as a comprehensive inven-
tory of unanswered research questions. Schmitt (2012) offers
a thorough, incisive view of some consumer psychology per-
spectives on branding. Völckner and Sattler (2006) provide a
more focused review on brand extensions.

Despite all the progress documented by those reviews and
others, however, there is much we still need to learn about
brands, branding, and building, measuring, and managing
brand equity. In this concluding section, I focus on two broad
sets of topics that I feel have the greatest opportunity to gen-
erate productive research agendas and make significant man-
agerial impact going forward. The first set of topics concerns
various digital issues, an area obviously not explored in the
original CBBE article given the timing of its publication. The
second set of topics concerns updates to some of the future
research directions identified in that article.

AMS Rev

Understanding digital effects in branding

A hugely important area not addressed in the original CBBE
article is digital effects in branding. After the Internet boom of
the late 1990s, more marketers became interested in how to
build brands online, as well as how to build online brands.
Although this development spawned much academic re-
search, a great deal of activity was also found in industry
and trade publications. With the deep penetration and exten-
sive daily usage of smart phones and with the Internet of
things looming, understanding how to factor all things digital
into marketing and branding is unquestionably a top research
priority (Yadav and Pavlou 2014).

Although many important and interesting branding issues
can be identified in a digital marketing environment, five
broad topics are addressed here. Although all forms of re-
search—empirical, behavioral, analytical, managerial or oth-
er—may be helpful in the study of digital effects in branding,
note that many of these issues especially lend themselves to
empirical analyses capitalizing on the vast, abundant data
sources now available online on consumer’s attitudes and be-
haviors with respect to brands.

Understanding the value of brands and branding in a digital
world

Perhaps the most fundamental issue to consider is how the role
of brands and branding has changed in today’s dynamic and
fast-moving digital world. With so many new and different
consumer and firm capabilities, marketers need to rethink vir-
tually all of their beliefs and practices to make sure they are
still valid today and, if not for any reason, what they should be
doing differently.

Rigorous and relevant academic research can be extremely
helpful in that regard. Perhaps the best place to start is with the
basic functions of brands and what they do to reduce risk, set
expectations, and create tangible and intangible value for con-
sumers. Do consumers view risk and trust differently for
brands in a digital setting? Do consumers assess value differ-
ently in a digital setting? What role does digital play in com-
municating and delivering that value?

One well-documented change in a digital environment is
the Bpath to purchase^ or the Bconsumer decision journey.^
No longer as deliberately linear as suggested by classic
Bhierarchy of effects^ or Bdecision funnel models,^ much it-
eration can occur or steps skipped or compressed as con-
sumers move from awareness to purchase and beyond. An
important area of understanding is how the role of brands
may differ as a result of different types of consumer delibera-
tions. With consumers potentially influenced by other con-
sumers and others outside the firm virtually every step of the
way, how can brand marketing be equally timely and credible?

A number of communications issue come into play here.
What forms of online marketing communications are most
effective with such decision-making? What is the role of so-
cial media; search, display, and other forms of advertising;
web sites and so on in affecting consumer progress in the
decision journey? How do consumers blend all these forms
of communication with sources of influence from others?

Understanding how to manage customer relationships

Digital branding guidelines and principles are often stated in
terms of Bthe consumer^ as if so much homogeneity existed
that consumers could be treated as one group. A clearly more
nuanced view of consumers is necessary beyond the well-
worn marketing mantra often seen or heard these days that,
Bthe consumer (or customer) is now in charge of the
marketing.^

With digital communications, marketers can leverage what
consumers are willing to share as to their personal likes and
dislikes and their unmet needs and wants to develop a dia-
logue and forge stronger brand ties. This opportunity for a
firm, however, should not be overstated: The reality is, only
some of the consumers want to get involved with only some of
their brands and, even then, only some of the time. Although
some people may want to become highly engaged with the
brand; others may have little to no interest in having any kind
of relationship beyond purchase and consumption of the brand
and no more.

As much research in marketing has shown in general, and
with respect to branding in particular, consumers are hetero-
geneous in many different ways that affect how they think,
feel and act towards brands. As was outlined above, many
individual difference factors have been shown to affect how
consumers respond to brands or brand marketing. A much
more robust and flexible view of consumers must be devel-
oped in understanding branding in a digital world which re-
flects these differences.

Sharp conceptual thinking and frameworks are necessary
to provide perspective and insight. One tool which may be
helpful in that regard—at least in terms of recognizing how
different customers may want different relationships with a
brand—is the brand engagement pyramid (see Fig. 5). The
brand engagement pyramid distinguishes the smaller group
of customers at the top of the pyramid, who would like to be
highly engaged with the brand, from the broad base of cus-
tomers at the base, who would choose to not be very engaged,
or maybe even not at all engaged, with the brand.

The structure and dynamics of the brand engagement pyr-
amid helps to raise a number of different questions. What is
the shape of the pyramid and the distribution of engagement
with customers for a brand? How large is the group of cus-
tomers at the top of the pyramid who seeks engagement? For

Fig. 5 Brand engagement
pyramid

Consumers

Highly
Engaged

Moderately
Engaged

Not Very 
or At All Engaged

AMS Rev

1

2

Non- Brand
Marketing

3

1

2

Brand
Marketing

3

those customers who want to be highly engaged, what are the
most effective and efficient marketing activities for the brand?
On the other hand, what are the most effective and efficient
marketing activities for those customers at the base of the
pyramid who have little or no interest in being engaged with
the brand? What are the main non-marketing influences on
those different consumers? What are the influences among
consumers at the same level or across levels of the pyramid?
Is there any Btrickle down^ effect from highly engaged con-
sumers at the top of the pyramid to those less engaged down
below?

These questions have obvious managerial significance and
are in need of research attention. Marketers need tools to help
measure and assess what kinds of brand engagement pyramids
characterizes their brands, as well as how they should best
optimize their pyramids as a result. As part of the analysis of
the latter consideration, marketers must fully understand all
the potential costs and benefits of relationship-building in a
digital world from both the firm and consumer perspective.

For example, although digital technology makes it easy for
brand marketers to reach consumers in many different ways,
that is also true for the marketers of competitive brands too. A
deal or offer for a competitor is almost always just a click
away, potentially repeatedly testing a consumer’s bonds of
loyalty. Understanding the roots of true brand loyalty in a
competitive digital world is crucial.

Understanding targeting and segmenting

In a related sense, more precise targeting in a digital
world means that brand marketers have the ability to
tailor virtually all aspects of their marketing—and thus
their positioning—down to the individual level. Digital
capabilities allow marketers to target consumers unique-
ly and potentially provide them with a highly

customized and tailored brand experience which, as not-
ed above, reflects consumers’ specific goals and desires.
At the same time, such efforts in personalization may
make it harder to create an active brand community with
shared brand values and experiences. It can also potential-
ly dilute the meaning of the brand and create confusion in
the marketplace. With a less cohesive image, brand mar-
keting at a more macro or aggregate level, e.g., brand
extensions, brand sponsorships and so on, may become
less effective and efficient.

What should be the appropriate balance of personal-
ization vs. uniformity across a group of customers for a
brand? How does digital help or hurt those efforts? In
what ways can digital programs and activities maximize
individualization and community for consumers? Are
some consumers more digitally sensitive or susceptible
such that non-digital means of communication and mar-
keting are just fundamentally treated differently?

Understanding pricing power and switching behavior

An often overlooked part of the branding equation is pricing
power and the means by which firms can reap the financial
benefits of the value they create for consumers. With the rise
of easily accessible discount brands, private labels, and ge-
nerics in so many categories, online and elsewhere, a funda-
mentally important question is, what kind of price premiums
can national or global brands command in today’s transparent
and inter-connected marketing world?

A number of specific questions follow. How does the exis-
tence of so many product ratings, reviews and comparisons
change the ability of brands to command premiums? How do
readily available discount brands affect brand loyalty and
change consumers’ willingness to switch? How much price
transparency should brands willingly offer?

AMS Rev

Understanding pure digital brands

Finally, an important area largely untouched with deep aca-
demic research is how to build purely digital brands without
the physical presence of any products or off-line services.
Some of the fastest-growing and most successful brands in
recent years—notably Google and Facebook—have been
born and expanded strictly online, and markets around the
developments of apps has exploded.

How should purely digital brands be built? What are the
different recommendations and guidelines that emerge? How
important is the brand itself and its trademarks for purely
digital brands where little other tangible manifestations of
the brand exist? Similarly, how do purely digital brands estab-
lish credentials and build credibility and trust?

Other important branding topics

The CBBE article identified a number of important topics for
future research, which, as noted above, have received much
research attention. Nevertheless, there are still important un-
answered questions, some of which I highlight below. The
main theme in much of this discussion is the need for a
broader, more dynamic view of branding effects. Isolating
certain individual effects is helpful and can provide value,
but may fail to reflect the richness of branding effects that
actually operate in the marketplace.

Understanding brand purpose, narratives, and story-telling

Recognizing the increasing importance of social responsibility
and brand intangibles to consumers – especially millennials—
many marketers have begun to incorporate more abstract no-
tions such as brand purpose, brand narratives, brand stories
and many other similar constructs as crucial ingredients to
their brand strategies. Such efforts are laudable and potentially
very useful, but ensuring that these constructs provide enough
financial and branding benefits will undoubtedly be crucial to
their long-term success and wide-spread adoption.

Several questions are relevant here. What are the pluses and
minuses of higher-level brand constructs? What types of brand
purposes are generally more beneficial? How should they be
crafted internally and expressed externally? How should they
relate to other aspects of the brand positioning and strategy?
For example, how explicitly or implicitly should brand pur-
poses be connected to the product or service itself? What
makes brand stories or narratives compelling? Are there any
downsides to their use? For example, can brand stories or
narratives distract marketers or consumers away from more
fundamental positioning considerations?

Finally, many of these higher-level brand constructs are
designed to tap into brand emotions. The brand resonance
model includes a simple taxonomy of brand feelings both

more experiential in nature (warm, fun and exciting) and more
enduring in nature (sense of security, social approval and self-
respect). What are other important types of brand feelings and
emotions? More generally, how do brand feelings and emo-
tions work? How easily can they be linked to a brand and in
what ways do they affect consumer decision-making?

Understanding brand architecture and brands more
holistically

Good brand portfolio management has always emphasized the
importance of maximizing coverage and minimizing overlap
in the marketplace. That belief continues to drive much brand
thinking and strategies today. One of the major branding
trends in the marketplace in recent years is the consolidation
of brands into fewer, stronger brands. Even leading CPG firms
such as Proctor & Gamble, Unilever, and Nestle, with their
classic Bhouse of brands^ architectures, have begun to put
more emphasis on their corporate brands as endorsers to their
already well-known and liked family brands.

Firms are thus increasingly seeking to establish mega
brands. As corporate brands, in particular, expand their market
Bfootprints^ to encompass a wider range of products and more
varied marketing activities, an important question is how con-
sumers develop their more holistic impressions of a brand.
Although brands may not be as complex as Virgin with its
dizzying array of diverse products and services, it is becoming
more and more unusual to find any brand that specializes in
just one product or service, even if defined broadly.

With the realization that any one brand – especially a cor-
porate brand—may be associated with multiple products or
product lines, the challenge is how to optimally blend all the
different types of associations that might exist for any partic-
ular product or product line for a brand. How do marketers
ensure that consumers understand and appreciate brands in
their totality? Or are there times that marketers would prefer
that consumers view brands in more limited or focused ways?
Does the notion of Bflagship brands^ even make sense in that
regard?

Understanding how to develop timeless, inclusive brands

Marketers, no matter how successful, are always confronted
with the question of how to ensure that their brands continue
to grow and prosper over time despite whatever changes may
be occurring with customers, competitors, the company itself,
or anything else in the marketing environment. To be success-
ful, brands must be able to stay relevant over time as well as
across different types of consumers. The latter is especially
challenging when considering all the potentially meaningful
ways consumers may differ—demographically, geographical-
ly, psychologically, behaviorally and so on.

A number of important research questions follow from this
realization. Fundamentally, the issue is how robust or flexible
a brand can be. In other words, in what ways can a brand
image be crafted so that it is as relevant as possible to as many
of the members of the target market as possible for as long as
possible? Two particular noteworthy research questions here
are: 1) what are the most effective ways to enlist new cus-
tomers while not antagonizing existing customers if the two
groups differ for any reason and 2) what is the proper balance
of continuity and change in the brand image over time?

A number of other specific questions follow. How do mar-
keters understand what components of their brand and its im-
age need to be fixed and which ones can or need to be changed
over time? Can brand architecture or other brand strategies
help to partition the brand in the marketplace to accommodate
more customers? How can acquisition and retention efforts be
understood and optimized in the broadest possible ways to
both build healthy brands and grow a loyal customer franchise
over time?

Understanding how brand elements can work together

A central aspect of branding is naturally the brand itself and all
the various elements that make it up—names, logos, symbols,
slogans, packaging, signage, characters, and so on. Much ac-
ademic research has examined individual brand elements to
provide insight and guidance. Consumers encounter—and
marketers design—brand elements collectively and more ho-
listically. More attention needs to be placed on how combina-
tions of different types of brand elements work together—or
not—to help to drive sales and improve brand equity. Also,
what insights and guidelines can help marketers with newer
forms of potentially trademarkable brand identities—sounds,
physical environments and so on?

Understanding how to effectively and efficiently track brands

To manage their brands successfully, marketers need to have a
deep, rich understanding of how consumers and all relevant
parties think, feel and act towards their brands. Brand track-
ing, broadly defined, is the set of research methods and ap-
proaches that firms use to provide as complete and up-to-date
understanding of their brands as possible. Traditionally, the
centerpiece of brand tracking has been consumer surveys. In
recent years, however, it has become increasingly difficult to
actually administer those surveys as consumers have become
more difficult to contact and less willing to participate in sur-
veys. Yet, at the same time, the need to stay close to consumers
and their brands has not abated, suggesting that new means to
gain insight into consumers and brands are badly needed.

A whole host of different kinds of measures have been
proposed that go beyond surveys or other traditional data col-
lection methods (e.g., focus groups). Marketers are exploring

AMS Rev

new neural methods, ethnographic methods, and so on. Of
particular importance are the digital methods and measures
which can be used at the individual or aggregate level to track
online behavior. These measure need to be validated and care-
fully vetted in terms of what they can and cannot do. For new
and old data collection methods, strengths and weaknesses
must be identified in terms of the effectiveness and efficiency
by which they can be employed to gain consumer and brand
understanding.

In many ways, brand-building can be thought of in
terms of Bpainting a picture^ of the brand in the minds
and hearts of consumers. Extending that metaphor, it is
important that marketers understand the colors, vividness,
and texture of those mental images that they are creating. A
carefully constructed set of measures, summarized in dash-
boards or other accessible means (Pauwels 2014), can be
an important step in that pursuit. Academics need to pro-
vide the insight and inspiration through proven methods to
make that happen.

References

Aaker, J. L. (1997). Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of

Marketing Research, 34(3), 347–357.

Aaker, D. A., & Keller, K. L. (1990). Consumer evaluations of brand

extensions. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 27–41.

Aaker, J. L., Fournier, S., & Brasel, S. A. (2004). When good brands do

bad. Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1), 1–16.

Aggrawal, P., & McGill, A. L. (2012). When brands seem human, do
humans act like brands? automatic behavioral priming effects of
brand anthropomorphism. Journal of Consumer Research, 39(2),
307–323.

Ahluwalia, R. (2008). How far can a brand stretch? understanding the role
of self-construal. Journal of Marketing Research, 45(3), 337–350.
Ahluwalia, R., & Gurhan-Canli, Z. (2000). The effects of extensions on
the family brand name: an accessibility-diagnosticity perspective.
Journal of Consumer Research, 27(3), 371–381.

Barone, M. J., Miniard, P. W., & Romeo, J. B. (2000). The influence of
positive mood on brand extension evaluations. Journal of Consumer
Research, 26(4), 386–400.

Batra, R., Ahuvia, A., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2012). Brand love. Journal of

Marketing, 76(2), 1–16.

Bellezza, S., & Keinan, A. (2014). Brand tourists: how non-core users
enhance the brand image by eliciting pride. Journal of Consumer
Research, 41(2), 397–417.

Bettman, J. R. (1979). Memory factors in consumer choice: a review.

Journal of Marketing, 43(2), 37–53.

Bridges, S., Keller, K. L., & Sood, S. (2000). Explanatory links and the
perceived fit of brand extensions: the role of dominant parent brand
associations and communication strategies. Journal of Advertising,
29(4), 1–11.

Caldieraro, F., Ling-Jing, K., & Cunha, M. (2015). Harmful upward line
extensions: can the launch of premium products result in competi-
tive disadvantages? Journal of Marketing, 79(6), 50–70.

Chang, C.-C., Lin, B.-C., & Chang, S.-S. (2011). The relative advantages
of benefit overlap versus category similarity in brand extension

AMS Rev

evaluation: the moderating role of self-regulatory focus. Marketing
Letters, 22(4), 391–404.

Cheng, S. Y. Y., White, T. B., & Chaplin, L. N. (2012). The effects of self-
brand connections on responses to brand failure: a new look at the
consumer-brand relationship. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
22(2), 280–288.

Chernev, A., Hamilton, R., & Gal, D. (2011). Competing for consumer
identity: limits to self-expression and the perils of lifestyle branding.
Journal of Marketing, 75(3), 66–82.

Cutright, K. M., Bettman, J. R., & Fitzsimons, G. J. (2013). Putting
brands in their place: how a lack of control keeps brands contained.
Journal of Marketing Research, 50(3), 365–377.

Czellar, S. (2003). Consumer attitude toward brand extensions: an inte-
grative model and research propositions. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 20(1), 97–115.

Desai, K. K., & Keller, K. L. (2002). The effects of ingredient branding
strategies on host brand extendibility. Journal of Marketing, 66(1),
73–93.

Dommer, S. L., Swaminathan, V., & Ahluwalia, R. (2013). Using differ-
entiated brands to deflect exclusion and protect inclusion: the mod-
erating role of self-esteem on attachment to differentiated brands.
Journal of Consumer Research, 40(4), 657–675.

Dunn, L., & Hoegg, J. (2014). The impact of fear on emotional brand
attachment. Journal of Consumer Research, 41(1), 152–168.
Edell, J. A., & Keller, K. L. (1989). The information processing of coor-
dinated media campaigns. Journal of Marketing Research, 26(2),
149–163.

Edell, J. A., & Keller, K. L. (1999). Analyzing media interactions: the
effects of coordinated TV-print advertising campaigns. Marketing
Science Institute, Report No. 99–120.

Escalas, J. E. (1996). Narrative processing: building consumer connec-
tions to brands to brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14(1-2),
168–179.

Fedorikhin, A., Park, C. W., & Thomson, M. (2008). Beyond fit and attitude:
the effect of emotional attachment on consumer responses to brand
extensions. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 18(4), 281–291.
Ferraro, R., Kirmani, A., & Matherly, T. (2013). Look at me! look at me!
conspicuous brand usage, self-brand connection, and dilution.
Journal of Marketing Research, 50(4), 477–488.

Forehand, M. R., & Keller, K. L. (1996). Initial retrieval difficulty and
subsequent recall in an advertising setting. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 5(4), 299–323.

Fournier, S. (1998). Consumers and their brands: developing relationship
theory in consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research, 24(4),
343–373.

Gurhan-Canli, Z., & Maheswaran, D. (1998). The effects of extensions on
brand name dilution and enhancement. Journal of Marketing
Research, 35(4), 464–473.

Hamilton, R., & Chernev, A. (2010). The impact of product line exten-
sions and consumer goals on the formation of price image. Journal
of Marketing Research, 47(1), 51–62.

Heath, T. B., DelVecchio, D., & McCarthy, M. S. (2011). The asymmetric
effects of extending brands to lower and higher quality. Journal of
Marketing, 75(4), 3–20.

Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist,

52(12), 1280–1300.

Higgins, E. T. (2002). How self-regulation creates distinct values: the case
of promotion and prevention decision making. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 12(3), 177–191.

Hoegg, J., Alba, J. W., & Dahl, D. W. (2010). The good, the bad, and the
ugly: aesthetic influence on information processing. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 20(4), 419–430.

John, D. R., Loken, B., & Joiner, C. (1998). The negative impact of
extensions: can flagship products be diluted? Journal of
Marketing, 62(1), 19–32.

John, D. R., Loken, B., Kim, K., & Monga, S. B. (2006). Brand concept
maps: a methodology for identifying brand association networks.
Journal of Marketing Research, Special Issue on Practitioner-
Academic Collaborative Research, 43(4), 549–563.

Keller, K. L. (1987). Memory factors in advertising: the effect of adver-
tising retrieval cues on brand evaluations. Journal of Consumer
Research, 14(3), 316–333.

Keller, K. L. (1991a). Cue compatibility and framing in advertising.

Journal of Marketing Research, 28(1), 42–57.

Keller, K. L. (1991b). Memory and evaluations in competitive advertising
environments. Journal of Consumer Research, 17(4), 463–76.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing
customer-based brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Keller, K. L. (2001). Building customer-based brand equity: a blueprint
for creating strong brands. Marketing Management, 10(2), 15–19.
Keller, K. L. (2003). Brand synthesis: the multi-dimensionality of brand
knowledge. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(4), 595–600.
Keller, K. L. (2013). Strategic brand management (4th ed.). Upper

Saddle River: Pearson Prentice-Hall.

Keller, K. L., & Aaker, D. A. (1992). The effects of sequential introduction
of brand extensions. Journal of Marketing Research, 29(1), 35–50.
Keller, K. L., & Aaker, D. A. (1998). The impact of corporate marketing
on a company’s brand extensions. Corporate Reputation Review,
1(4), 356–378.

Keller, K. L., & Lehmann, D. (2003). How do brands create value.

Marketing Management, 3, 27–31.

Keller, K. L., & Lehmann, D. (2006). Brands and branding: research
findings and future priorities. Marketing Science, 25(6), 740–759.
Keller, K. L., & Sood, S. (2003). Brand equity dilution. MIT Sloan

Management Review, 45(1), 12–15.

Keller, K. L., Heckler, S., & Houston, M. J. (1998). The effects of brand
name suggestiveness on advertising recall. Journal of Marketing,
62(1), 48–57.

Keller, K. L., Sternthal, B., & Tybout, A. (2002). Three questions you need
to ask about your brand. Harvard Business Review, 80(9), 80–89.
Kim, H., & John, D. R. (2008). Consumer response to brand extensions:
construal level as a moderator of the importance of perceived fit.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 18(2), 116–126.

Kirmani, A., Sood, S., & Bridges, S. (1999). The ownership effect in
consumer responses to brand line stretches. Journal of Marketing,
63(1), 88–101.

Krishna, A. (2013). Customer sense: How the 5 senses influence buying

behavior. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Lee, A. Y., Aaker, J. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). The pleasures and pains
of distinct self-construals: the role of interdependence in regulatory
focus. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(6), 1122–
1134.

Lee, A. Y., Keller, P. A., & Sternthal, B. (2010). Value from regulatory
construal fit. Journal of Consumer Research, 36(2), 735–747.
Lei, J., Dawar, N., & Lemmink, J. (2008). Negative spillover in brand
portfolios: exploring the antecedents of asymmetric effects. Journal
of Marketing, 72(3), 111–123.

Loken, B., & John, D. R. (1993). Diluting brand beliefs — when do brand
extensions have a negative impact? Journal of Marketing, 57(3),
71–84.

Mao, H., & Krishnan, H. S. (2006). Effects of prototype and exemplar fit
on brand extension evaluations: a two-process contingency model.
Journal of Consumer Research, 33(1), 41–49.

Mathur, P., Jain, S. P., & Maheswaran, D. (2012). Consumers’ implicit
theories about personality influence their brand personality judg-
ments. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 22(4), 545–557.

Meyvis, T., Goldsmith, K., & Dhar, R. (2012). The importance of the
context in brand extension: how pictures and comparisons shift con-
sumers’ focus from fit to quality. Journal of Marketing Research,
49(2), 206–217.

Milberg, S. J., Park, C. W., & McCarthy, M. S. (1997). Managing nega-
tive feedback effects associated with brand extensions: the impact of
alternative branding strategies. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
6(2), 119–40.

Milberg, S. J., Sinn, F., & Goodstein, R. C. (2010). Consumer reactions to
brand extensions in a competitive context: does fit still matter?
Journal of Consumer Research, 37(3), 543–553.

Monga, A. B., & Guhan-Canli, Z. (2012). The influence of mating mind-
sets on brand extension evaluation. Journal of Marketing Research,
49(4), 581–593.

Monga, A. B., & John, D. R. (2007). Cultural differences in brand exten-
sion evaluation: the influence of analytic versus holistic thinking.
Journal of Consumer Research, 33(4), 529–536.

Monga, A. B., & John, D. R. (2010). What makes brands elastic? the
influence of brand concept and styles of thinking on brand extension
evaluation. Journal of Marketing Research, 74(3), 80–92.

Morrin, M. (1999). The impact of brand extensions on parent brand
memory structures and retrieval processes. Journal of Marketing
Research, 36(4), 517–525.

Muthukrishnan, A. V., & Weitz, B. A. (1990). Role of product knowledge
in brand extensions. In R. H. Holman & M. R. Solomon (Eds.),
Advances in consumer research (Vol. 18, pp. 407–413). Provo:
Association for Consumer Research.

Ng, S. (2010). Cultural orientation and brand dilution: impact of motiva-
tion level and extension typicality. Journal of Marketing Research,
47(1), 186–198.

Ng, S., & Houston, M. (2006). Exemplars or beliefs? the impact of self-
view on the nature and relative influence of brand associations.
Journal of Consumer Research, 32(4), 519–529.

Oakley, J. L., Duhachek, A., Balachander, S., & Sriram, S. (2008). Order
of entry and the moderating role of comparison brands in extension
evaluations. Journal of Consumer Research, 34(5), 706–12.
Pauwels, K. (2014). It’s not the size of the data: it’s how you use it:
Smarter marketing with dashboard and analytics. New York:
American Management Association (AMACOM).

Pham, M. T., Geuens, M., & Pelsmaker, P. D. (2013). The influence of ad-
evoked feelings on brand evaluations: empirical generalizations
from consumer responses to more than 1,000 tv commercials.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 30(4), 383–394.
Puligadda, S., Ross, W. T., Jr., & Grewal, R. (2012). Individual differ-
ences in brand schematicity. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(1),
115–130.

Pullig, C., Simmons, C. J., & Netemeyer, R. G. (2006). Brand dilution:
when do new brands hurt existing brands? Journal of Marketing,
70(2), 52–66.

Rahinel, R., & Redden, J. P. (2013). Brands as product coordinators:
matching brands make joint consumption experiences more enjoy-
able. Journal of Consumer Research, 39(6), 1290–1299.

Schmitt, B. (2012). The consumer psychology of brands. Journal of

Consumer Psychology, 22(1), 7–17.

Shine, B. C., Park, J., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (2007). Brand synergy effects in
multiple brand extensions. Journal of Marketing Research, 44(4),
663–70.

AMS Rev

Sood, S., & Keller, K. L. (2012). The effects of brand name structure on
brand extension evaluations and parent brand dilution. Journal of
Marketing Research, 49(3), 373–382.

Spiggle, S., Nguyen, H. T., & Caravella, M. (2012). More than fit: brand
extension authenticity. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(6), 967–
983.

Swaminathan, V., Page, K., & Gurhan-Canli, Z. (2007). My brand or our
brand: individual-and group-based brand relationships and self-
construal effects on brand evaluations. Journal of Consumer
Research, 34(2), 248–259.

Swaminathan, V., Stilley, K., & Ahluwalia, R. (2009). When brand per-
sonality matters: the moderating role of attachment styles. Journal of
Consumer Research, 35(6), 985–1002.

Swaminathan, V., Gürhan-Canli, Z., Kubat, U., & Hayran, C. (2015). How,
when, and why do attribute-complementary versus attribute-similar
cobrands affect brand evaluations: a concept combination perspective.
Journal of Consumer Research, 42(1), 45–58.

Thomson, M., MacInnis, D. J., & Park, C. W. (2005). The ties that bind:
measuring the strength of consumers’ emotional attachments to
brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(1), 77–91.

Thomson, M., Whelan, J., & Johnson, A. R. (2012). Why brands should
fear fearful consumers: how attachment style predicts retaliation.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 22(2), 289–298.

Torelli, C. J., & Ahluwalia, R. (2012). Extending culturally symbolic
brands: a blessing or curse? Journal of Consumer Research, 38(5),
933–947.

Torelli, C. J., Özsomer, A., Carvalho, S. W., Keh, H. T., & Maehle, N.
(2012). Brand concepts as representations of human values: do cul-
tural congruity and compatibility between values matter? Journal of
Marketing, 76(4), 92–108.

Verrochi, C., & Williams, N. P. (2013). Feeling like myself: emotion
profiles and social identity. Journal of Consumer Research, 40(2),
203–222.

Völckner, F., & Sattler, H. (2006). Drivers of brand extension success.

Journal of Marketing, 70(2), 1–17.

Yadav, M. S., & Pavlou, P. A. (2014). Marketing in computer-mediated
environments: research synthesis and new directions. Journal of
Marketing, 78(1), 20–40.

Yeo, J., & Park, J. (2006). Effects of parent-extension similarity and self
regulatory focus on evaluations of brand extensions. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 16(3), 272–282.

Yeung, C. W. M., & Wyer, R. S. (2005). Does loving a brand mean loving
its products? the role of brand-elicited affect in brand extension
evaluations. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(4), 495–506.
Yorkston, E. A., Nunes, J. C., & Matta, S. (2010). The malleable brand:
the role of implicit theories in evaluating brand extensions. Journal
of Marketing, 74(1), 80–93.

Zhang, S., & Sood, S. (2002). ‘Deep’ and ‘surface’ cues: brand extension
evaluations by children and adults. Journal of Consumer Research,
29(1), 129–141.