M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y
LT A   1 / 9 9   •     P .   6 5 – 1 0 0

P E K K A   T U O M I N E N

Managing Brand Equity

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this study is to discuss and elaborate the main issues encountered in managing brand

equity. In order to achieve this purpose, we first analyse the concept of brand equity; second, we

provide a comprehensive framework for managing brand equity; and finally, we distinguish different

ways to leverage and measure brand equity. The concept of brand equity emerged in the early 1990s.

Brand equity can be regarded as a managerial concept, as a financial intangible asset, as a relation-

ship concept or as a customer-based concept from the perspective of the individual consumer. The

main asset dimensions of brand equity can be grouped into brand loyalty, brand awareness, perceived

quality and brand associations. There are three alternative ways to leverage brand equity: first build-

ing it, second borrowing it, or third buying it. Brand equity can create advantages and benefits for the

firm, the trade or the consumer.

Key Words: Brands, Brand Equity, Brand Management

1 . I N T R O D U C T I O N

The historical evolution of brands has shown that brands initially have served the roles of dif-

ferentiating between competing items, representing consistency of quality and providing legal

protection from copying. Apart from providing the offering with the badge of its maker, there-

by indicating legal ownership of all the special technical and other relevant features that the

offering may possess, the brand can have a powerful symbolic significance. The brand can in

itself imply status, enhance image and project or augment lifestyle so that the ownership of the

PEKKA TUOMINEN, Ph.D. (Econ. & Bus. Adm.)

Turku School of Economics and Business Administration

• e-mail: pekka.tuominen.tukkk.fi

6 5

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

brand becomes of value in its own right. Its accepted qualities can simplify the decision mak-

ing process by reducing perceived risk while from the supplier’s perspective, it can not only

assist in differentiating the offering, but also lead to brand loyalty, deter market entry and, well

deployed, enable its owners to command higher prices and profit margins. (Bradley 1995, 522–

524; Egan – Guilding 1994, 450–453)

1.1 Different characteristics of brands

A brand is a name, term, sign, symbol, or design, or a combination of them intended to identi-

fy the goods or services of one seller from among a group of sellers and to differentiate them

from those of the competitors. Thus, a brand identifies the seller or manufacturer. Under trade-

mark law the seller is granted exclusive rights to the use of the brand name in perpetuity. This

differs from other assets such as patents and copyrights that have expiration dates. If a com-

pany treats a brand only as a name, it misses the point of branding. The challenge in branding

is to develop a deep set of meanings for the brand. Perhaps the most distinctive skill of profes-

sional marketers is their ability to create, maintain, protect, and enhance brands. (Kotler 1994,

444–445)

Two  principal  approaches  to  branding  can  be  identified:  1)  manufacturer  brands  and  2)

private label brands which are also called own label, distributor, retailer, dealer or store brands.

Manufacturer brands usually contain the name  of  the  manufacturer.  These  brands  appeal to a

wide range of consumers who desire good quality and a low risk of poor product performance.

Manufacturers, which brand their products, face a decision of whether to use individual or fami-

ly  brands  or  a  combination.  Manufacturers  sell  their  brands  in  many  competing  retail  outlets,

spend large sums on promoting them and frequently run co-operative advertisements with retail-

ers so that costs can be shared. Recently, there has been considerable growth in private label

brands,  whereby  channel  members  such  as  retailers  are  able  to  sell  products  using  their  own

brand name or label. By doing so these retailers do not incur the large promotional cost normal-

ly associated with manufacturers brands. Part of this cost saving is usually passed on to the con-

sumer in the form of a lower price. Private label brands mean that retailers have greater control

over  the  supplier,  since  private  labels  have  become  more  powerful.  (Bradley  1995,  529–535;

Burton  –  Lichtenstein  –  Netemeyer  –  Garretson  1998,  293–306;  Hankinson  –  Cowking  1993,

106–119; Keegan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995, 326; Kotler 1994, 448-451)

A successful brand is an identifiable product (consumer or industrial), service, person or

6 6

place, augmented in such a way that the buyer or user perceives relevant and unique added

values, which match their needs closely. If a brand provides good service over many years of

regular  use,  it  acquires  added  values  of  familiarity  and  proven  reliability.  The  added  values

can  come  for  example,  from  experience  of  using  the  brand,  e.g.,  familiarity,  reliability,  risk

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

reduction and character; from the kind of people who use the brand, e.g., rich and snobbish,

young and glamorous; from a belief that the brand is effective, e.g., promised satisfaction and

delivered uniform and consistent quality; from the appearance of the brand, which is one of

the  prime  functions  of  packaging;  and  from  a  manufacturer’s  name  and  reputation.  (Bradley

1995, 517–519; de Chernatony – McDonald 1992, 18–19; Doyle 1998, 169–170; Jones 1986,

30–31)

Consumers’ feelings about themselves are often reflected in their brand choices and the

particular associations embedded for them in brand personalities. One way to build a relation-

ship between a brand and a consumer is to create an appealing brand personality – that is, to

associate  human  characteristics  with  a  brand  to  make  it  more  attractive  to  consumers.  This

works because personality is generally seen as a bundle of traits – e.g., friendliness, neighbor-

liness and responsibility – which make a person distinctive. A considerable amount of research

has focused on how the personality of a brand enables a consumer to express his or her own

self, and ideal self, or specific dimensions of the self through the use of a brand. Further brand

personality  can  be  viewed  as  a  key  way  to  differentiate  a  brand  in  a  product  category,  as  a

central driver of consumer preference and usage, and as a common denominator that can be

used  to  market  a  brand  cross  cultures.  (Aaker  1997,  347–350;  Keegan  –  Moriarty  –  Duncan

1995, 319)

Advertising  and  sponsorship  are  often  used  to  convey  images  of  prestige  or  success  by

associating the brand with personalities. Beliefs in efficacy can be created by comparative eval-

uations and rankings from, e.g., consumer associations and industry endorsements. The design

of  the  brand  can  clearly  affect  preference  by  offering  cues  to  quality.  In  many  situations  a

strong  company  name  attached  to  a  new  product  will  provide  confidence  and  incentive  to

trial. (Doyle 1998, 169–170)

A  brand  can  be  seen  consisting  of  generic  or  core,  expected,  augmented  and  potential

levels. The generic level is the commodity form that meets the buyer’s or user’s basic needs.

Within the expected level, the commodity is value engineered to satisfy a specific target’s min-

imum purchase conditions, such as functional capabilities, availability and pricing. With in-

creased experience, buyers and users become more sophisticated, so the brand would need to

be augmented in more refined ways with added values satisfying both emotional and function-

al  needs.  The  augmented  brand  provides  a  range  of  basic  ancillary  services  not  associated

with the core brand. These include guarantees, credit and purchase terms, customer service,

installation, training and delivery. With even more experience with the brand, it is only crea-

tivity that limits the extent to which the brand can mature to its full potential level. (Bradley

1995,  515–516;  de  Chernatony  –  McDonald  1992,  160–166;  Christopher  –  Payne  –  Ballan-

tyne 1991, 57–62; Doyle 1998, 174–179)

6 7

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

Brands vary in the amount of power and value they have in the marketplace. Brands are

complex entities, but ultimately they reside in consumers’ minds. Consumers are not passive

recipients of marketing activity and consequently branding is not something done to consum-

ers,  but  rather  something  customers  do  things  with.  Brands  can  be  seen  developing  through

evolutionary stages. At one extreme are brands that are unknown to most buyers in the mar-

ketplace. Further, there are brands for which buyers have a fairly high degree of brand aware-

ness  as  measured  either  by  brand  recall  or  recognition.  Beyond  this  are  brands  that  have  a

high degree of brand acceptability, i.e., most customers would not resist buying them. Then

there are brands, which enjoy a high degree of brand preference. They would be selected over

the others. Finally, there are brands that command a high degree of brand loyalty. (de Cherna-

tony 1993, 174–175; Kotler 1994, 445)

With  the  advent  of  experienced  buyers  and  increasingly  sophisticated  marketing  tech-

niques, de Chernatony and McDonald (1992, 31–41) have identified eight different functions

of brands. These functions include brand as 1) a sign of ownership; 2) a differentiating device;

3) a communicator of functional capability; 4) a device which enables buyers to express some-

thing about themselves; 5) a risk reducing device; 6) a shorthand communication device; 7) a

legal device and 8) a strategic device.

Recently,  de  Chernatony  and  Dall’Olmo  Riley  (1998a,  418–424)  have  published  a  de-

tailed content analysis of over one hundred articles from trade as well as from academic jour-

nals, providing a broad and rich perspective of the range of definitions used for brands. As a

result of their analysis they identified twelve main brand elements which clearly indicate the

broad range of definitions of the ”brand” in the literature. These brand elements consider brands

as 1) legal instrument; 2) logo; 3) company; 4) shorthand; 5) risk reducer; 6) identity system,

7)␣ image  in  consumers’  minds;  8)  value  system;  9)  personality;  10)  relationship;  11)  adding

value; and 12) evolving entity.

The twelve brand elements are not entirely mutually exclusive, but they clearly represent

a categorisation of the most important elements of brands in the marketing literature. Each of

the twelve brand elements takes the perspective of either company or consumers (or both) in

determining the antecedents and the consequences of the brand. Hence, the company’s activ-

ities and consumers’ perceptions emerge as the two main boundaries of the brand. The brand

exists mainly by virtue of a continuous process whereby the values and expectations imbued

in the brand are set and enacted by the company and interpreted and redefined by the con-

6 8

sumers. (de Chernatony – Dall’Olmo Riley 1998a, 427–428)

Brand  success  is  a  complex  and  multidimensional  construct,  which  should  be  assessed

over  a  long-term  perspective  and  in  relation  to  both  the  brands’  stakeholders  and  its  com-

petitors. The criteria for a brand’s success can be classified to business-based measures or to

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

consumer-based measures. They are interrelated and cannot be considered in isolation. Rather,

they are mutually dependent because business-based measures such as profit or market share

often  follow  from  consumers’  perceptions  and  responses  to  a  brand.  (de  Chernatony  –

Dall’Olmo Riley – Harris 1998, 766–778)

1.2 Brand  pyramid

A brand is not a product: it is the product’s source, its meaning and its direction, and it defines

its identity in time and space. Too often brands are examined through their component parts:

the brand name, its logo, design, packaging, advertising or name recognition. Real brand man-

agement, however, begins much earlier with a strategy and a consistent integrated vision. Its

central concept is brand identity, which must be defined and managed. A brand identity is the

message sent out by the brand. (Doyle 1998, 172; Kapferer 1992, 12)

A model of brand pyramid is suitable for analysing and understanding the concept of brand

identity.  The  pyramid  model  consists  of  three  tiers.  The  fundamental  and  upper  part  of  the

brand pyramid is the brand core, which remains fairly fixed over time. The middle tier of the

pyramid is called the brand style. It articulates the brand core in terms of the culture it con-

veys,  its  personality  and  its  self-image.  The  base  layer  of  the  pyramid  comprises  the  brand

themes. These themes indicate how the brand currently communicates e.g., through its adver-

tising,  press  releases,  and  packaging.  Brand  themes  include  the  physique  of  the  brand  (e.g.,

colour, logo, packaging), its reflection (e.g., type of spokesperson used to advertise the brand)

and the relationship expressed (e.g., glamour, prestige). Brand themes are more flexible than

the brand style and brand core, and will change easier with fashion, style or technology. (Doyle

1998, 172–174; Kapferer 1992, 37–42)

The  set  of  brand  style  and  themes  can  be  described  as  a  six-sided  identity  prism.  The

identity prism emphasises the brand’s identity as a structured whole of six integrated facets of

culture, personality, self-image, physique, reflection, and relationship. The first three facets of

culture, personality and self-image are incorporated within the brand itself and the last three

facets  of  physique,  reflection  and  relationship  are  the  social  facets  which  give  the  brand  its

outward  expression.  These  outward  facets  are  communicated  explicitly  and  they  are  visible

and material. The brand pyramid and the identity prism are illustrated in figure 1. (Doyle 1998,

172–174; Kapferer 1992, 75–77)

The emotional and representational components in the identity prism are more valuable,

because the component of physique only forms the first stage in brand building. The intangi-

ble elements refer to the beliefs and meanings created in the minds of consumers. These intan-

gible and symbolic elements include the brand personality, the way brands reinforce consum-

6 9

ers’  self-images  and  brands’  abilities  to  represent  consumers  to  others.  (de  Chernatony  –

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

FIGURE 1. The brand pyramid and the identity prism.

Dall’Olmo  Riley  1998a,  420;  de  Chernatony  –  Dall’Olmo  Riley  1998b,  1076–1077;  Doyle

1998, 172–174)

The concepts of the brand pyramid and identity prism are effective in use. First, they ena-

ble management and their agencies to understand the brand, its strengths and opportunities.

Second, they help to develop brand strategy and the formulation of the brand’s positioning in

the  market.  Third,  they  enable  the  brand  team  to  develop  consistency  in  the  message  being

transmitted through packaging and design, advertising, below-the-line activities and through

potential  brand  extensions.  Finally,  understanding  the  brand’s  core  and  style  helps  to  deter-

mine how far the brand can be meaningfully stretched to other products and market segments.

(Doyle 1998, 173–174)

7 0

1.3 The purpose of the study

The primary capital of many firms consists of their brands. For decades the value of a firm was

measured in terms of its real estate, then tangible assets, plants and equipment. However, it

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

has  been  recognised  that  a  firm’s  real  value  lies  outside  the  business  itself:  in  the  minds  of

potential buyers. (Aaker 1996; Pearson 1996; Ind 1997) Customers and other stakeholders in-

tegrate all they see, hear and read about a product with all their experiences using or consum-

ing it to form a single, but often complex, mental image about both the physical product and

the company that makes it. (Keegan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995, 318) In paying very high pric-

es for companies with brands, buyers are actually purchasing a position in the minds of poten-

tial customers. Awareness, trust and reputation are the best guarantees of future earnings. (Kap-

ferer 1992, 9)

In order to better understand the tangible and intangible values of brands the concept of

brand equity has emerged in the marketing literature and it has become a central issue in mar-

keting management research. Previous research has approached brand equity mainly from two

perspectives.  The  original  focus  was  on  brands  as  financial  assets.  (See,  e.g.,  Blackett  1991,

27–35; de Chernatony – McWilliam 1990, 111–119; Crimmins 1992, 11–19; Farquhar – Ijiri

1993, 77–92; Kamakura – Russell 1993, 9–22; Kerin – Sethuraman 1998, 260–273; Saunders

1990, 95–110; Swait – Erdem – Louviere – Dubelaar 1993, 23–45) Previous research on brand

equity has further focused on the short-term responses of consumers to brand extensions un-

der experimental conditions. (See, e.g., Aaker 1990, 47–56; Aaker – Keller 1990, 27–41; Aaker

–  Keller  1993,  55–59;  Arnold  1992,  208–222;  Boush  –  Loken  1991,  16–28;  Keller  –  Aaker

1992, 35–50; Park – Milberg – Lawson 1991, 185–193; Rangaswamy – Burke – Olivia 1993,

61–75; Sullivan 1992, 793–806; Sunde – Brodie 1993, 47–53)

This study focuses mainly on the strategic and managerial aspects of brand equity: e.g., in

defining, managing and leveraging brand equity. The management of brand equity can be seen

as a continuous, planned and long-term strategy, which aims at increasing confidence in the

brand. The current study will provide a holistic framework for managers developing successful

brand strategies, so that the relationship with the consumer can be strengthened.

The purpose of this study is to discuss and elaborate the main issues encountered in man-

aging  brand  equity.  In  order  to  achieve  this  purpose,  we  first  analyse  the  concept  of  brand

equity; second, we provide a comprehensive framework for managing brand equity; and final-

ly, we distinguish different ways to leverage and measure brand equity.

2. THE  CONCEPT  OF  BRAND  EQUITY

2.1 Literature  review

The concept of brand equity emerged in the early 1990s. It was not defined precisely, but in

practical terms it meant that brands are financial assets and should be recognised as such by

top  management  and  the  financial  markets.  Brand  equity  includes  not  only  the  value  of  the

7 1

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

brand, but also implicitly the value of proprietary technologies, patents, trademarks, and other

intangibles  such  as  manufacturing  know-how.  Although  a  company’s  stock  price  represents

more than brand equity, when one of a company’s brands gets into trouble, a change in brand

equity can significantly affect the stock price. (Aaker 1996; Keegan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995,

325; Kerin – Sethuraman 1998; 260–261) The financial value of a brand depends on its brand

strength. It can be strengthened by investing in product quality and in advertising. In contrast,

price promotions produce short-term increases in sales but do nothing to build long-term brand

equity. (Barwise 1993, 94–95)

In a general sense, brand equity is defined in terms of the marketing effects uniquely at-

tributable to the brand. That is, brand equity relates to the fact that different outcomes result

from the marketing of a product or service because of its brand element, as compared to out-

comes if that same product or service did not have hat brand identification. Although a number

of different views of brand equity have been expressed, they all are generally consistent with

the  basic  notion  that  brand  equity  represents  the  ”added  value”  endowed  to  a  product  or  a

service  as  a  result  of  past  investments  in  the  marketing  for  the  brand.  Researchers  studying

brand  equity  at  least  implicitly  acknowledge  that  there  exist  many  different  ways  that  value

can be created for a brand; that brand equity provides a common denominator for interpreting

marketing  strategies  and  assessing  the  value  of  a  brand;  and  that  there  exists  many  different

ways in which the value of a brand can be manifested or exploited to benefit the firm. (Keller

1993, 1; Keller 1998, 42–44)

There  have  been  two  general  motivations  for  studying  brand  equity.  One  is  financially

based motivation to estimate the value of a brand more precisely for accounting purposes in

terms of asset valuation for the balance sheet or for merger, acquisition or divestiture purpos-

es. A second reason for studying brand equity arises from a strategy-based motivation to im-

prove marketing productivity. Given higher costs, greater competition, and flattening demand

in many markets, firms seek to increase the efficiency of their marketing expenses. As a conse-

quence, marketers need a more thorough understanding of consumer behaviour as a basis for

making better strategic decisions about target market definition and product positioning. Per-

haps one of the firm’s most valuable assets for improving marketing productivity is the knowl-

edge that has been created about the brand in consumers’ minds from the firm’s investment in

previous marketing programs. Financial valuation issues have little relevance if no underlying

value for the brand has been created or if managers do not know how to exploit that value by

7 2

developing profitable brand strategies. (Keller 1993, 1–2)

Brand equity can be defined in several ways and it has value both to a branding company

and to a brand’s user. An important characteristic of virtually all definitions of brand equity is

that they focus on the incremental effect of the brand compared with some concept of what

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

the  customer  response  would  be  to  the  same  product  or  service,  if  it  were  unbranded.  (Bar-

wise 1993, 99–100) In the literature we can, e.g., find the following different definitions for

brand equity:

– a set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name and symbol that add

to  or  subtract  from  the  value  provided  by  a  product  or  service  to  a  firm  and/or  to

that firm’s customer (Aaker 1991, 15),

– a utility not explained by measured attributes (Barwise 1993, 100),

– a differentiated, clear image that goes beyond simple product preference (Barwise

1993, 100),

– the value a brand name adds to a product (Broniarczyk – Alba 1994, 214),

– the added value that a brand endows a product with (Farquhar 1990, RC7; Farquhar

– Herr – Fazio 1990, 856),

– the differential effect that brand knowledge has on consumer response to the mar-

keting of that brand (Keller 1993, 2; Keller 1998, 45),

– the combination of brand awareness, liking and perceptions (Moore 1993, 36),

– the added value endowed by the brand to the product as perceived by a consumer

(Park – Srinivasan 1994, 271),

– the  value  attached  to  a  brand  because  of  the  powerful  relationship  that  has  been

developed between the brand and customers and other stakeholders over time (Kee-

gan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995, 323),

– the  incremental  price  that  a  customer  will  pay  for  a  brand  versus  the  price  for  a

comparable  product  or  service  without  a  brand  name  on  it  (Keegan  –  Moriarty  –

Duncan 1995, 324),

– a long-term relationship with those people who loyally buy the brand over and over

again (Keegan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995, 340),

– the accumulated brand support by all stakeholders, not only by customers (Duncan

– Moriarty 1997, 10),

– a product of the total net brand support of customers and other stakeholders that is

determined by all communication interactions of the company (Duncan – Moriarty

1998, 165–166),

– off-balance sheet intangible brand properties embedded in a company’s brand (Ke-

rin – Sethuraman 1998, 260).

The preceding review of the literature reveals that brand equity can be regarded as a manage-

rial concept, as a financial intangible asset, as a relationship concept or as a customer-based

concept from the perspective of the individual consumer.

7 3

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

We can further conclude on the basis of the prior literature review that several authors

provide  definitions  of  brand  equity  that  are  broadly  consistent  with  Farquhar’s  definition  of

equity as the value added by the brand to the product. According to the definitions of brand

equity, no single number of concepts captures brand equity. Rather, brand equity should be

thought  of  as  a  multidimensional  concept  that  depends  on  which  knowledge  structures  are

present in the consumers’ minds and which actions a company can take to capitalise on the

potential offered by these knowledge structures. (Park – Srinivasan 1994, 271)

The literature review reveals further that brand equity provides value for both the custom-

er  and  the  firm.  Brand  equity  creates  value  to  customers  by  enhancing  efficient  information

processing and shopping, building confidence in decision making, reinforcing buying, and con-

tributing to self-esteem. Brand equity creates value to firms by increasing marketing efficiency

and effectiveness, building brand loyalty, improving profit margins, gaining leverage over re-

tailers, and achieving distinctiveness over the competition. (Bagozzi – Rosa – Celly – Coronel

1998, 320)

Brand equity offers certain strategic benefits to companies. It is important for adding line

extension.  When  a  product  category  has  entered  the  decline  stage  of  the  product  life  cycle,

strong brand equity can help a brand survive longer than its competitors. Likewise, in periods

of economic downturn, brand equity provides a platform that keeps the brand afloat at a profit

long after competing products without strong brand identification begin to flounder. The power

of brand equity is especially important in international marketing. Global brands have interna-

tional presence and visibility, and this ”equity” makes it easier for them to expand. Brand equity

is also what enables branded products or services to charge premium prices. Many major brands

are  positioned  as  quality  products,  and  many  people  are  willing  to  pay  more  for  a  quality

product they are familiar with, particularly if the brand has an image with which they would

like to be associated. The challenge is to find the point where the premium price is still ac-

ceptable in exchange for the confidence embedded in the brand. (Keegan – Moriarty – Dun-

can 1995, 324–325)

We have found that brand equity helps to differentiate the product from competitors’ of-

ferings; serves as a proxy for quality and creates positive images in consumers’ minds; presents

market share erosion during price and promotional wars; and prevents market share erosion

by giving a firm time to respond to competitive threats.

7 4

2.2 Customer-based  brand  equity

We have experienced from the previous literature review that brand equity can be approached

from the perspective of the individual consumer. The basic premise with customer-based brand

equity is that the power of a brand lies in the minds of consumers and what they have experi-

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

enced and learned about the brand over time. The advantage of conceptualising brand equity

from the consumer’s perspective is that it enables managers to consider specifically how their

marketing program improves the value of their brands. Though the eventual goal of many mar-

keting programs is to increase sales, it is first necessary to establish knowledge structures for

the  brand  so  that  consumers  respond  favourably  to  marketing  activity  for  the  brand.  (Keller

1993, 8)

Customer-based brand equity can be defined as the differential effect that brand knowl-

edge has on consumer response to the marketing of that brand. There are three key ingredi-

ents  to  this  definition:  1)  ”differential  effect”,  2)  ”brand  knowledge”,  and  3)  ”consumer  re-

sponse to marketing”. First, brand equity arises from differences in consumer response. If no

differences occur, then the brand can essentially be classified as a commodity or generic ver-

sion of the product. Second, these differences in response are a result of consumers’ knowl-

edge about the brand. Thus, although strongly influenced by the marketing activity of the firm,

brand equity ultimately depends on what resides in the minds of consumers. Third, the differ-

ential response by consumers that makes up the brand equity is reflected in perceptions, pref-

erences, and behaviour related to all aspects of the marketing of a brand. (Keller 1993, 8–9;

Keller 1998,␣ 45)

Conceptualising brand equity from the consumer’s perspective is useful because it sug-

gests  both  specific  guidelines  for  marketing  strategies  and  tactics  and  areas  where  research

can be useful in assisting managerial decision making. Two important points emerge from this

conceptualisation. First, marketers should take a broad view of marketing activity for a brand

and recognise the various effects it has on brand knowledge, as well as how changes in brand

knowledge affect more traditional outcome measures such as sales. Second, markets must re-

alise that the long-term success of all future marketing programs for a brand is greatly affected

by  the  knowledge  about  the  brand  in  memory  that  has  been  established  by  the  firm’s  short-

term  marketing  efforts.  In  short,  because  the  content  and  structure  of  memory  for  the  brand

will  influence  the  effectiveness  of  future  brand  strategies,  it  is  critical  that  managers  under-

stand how their marketing programs affect consumer learning and thus subsequent recall for

brand-related information (Keller 1993, 2)

A brand is said to have positive (negative) customer-based brand equity when consumers

react more (less) favourably to a product and the way it is marketed when the brand is identi-

fied as compared to when it is not. Thus, a brand with positive customer-based brand equity

might  result  in  consumers  being  more  accepting  of  a  new  brand  extension,  less  sensitive  to

price increases and withdrawal of advertising support, or more willing to seek the brand in a

7 5

new distribution channel. Customer-based brand equity occurs when the consumer is familiar

with the brand and holds some positive brand associations in memory. Favourable consumer

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

response, in turn, can lead to enhanced revenues, lower costs, and greater profits for the firm.

(Keller 1993, 8; Keller 1998, 45)

Brand knowledge is the key issue in creating customer-based brand equity. Brand knowl-

edge can be conceptualised as consisting of a brand node in memory with a variety of brand

associations.  Brand  knowledge  is  a  composed  of  1)  brand  awareness,  which  relates  to  con-

sumers’ ability to recognise or recall the brand and 2) brand image, which consists of consum-

ers’ perceptions of and associations for the brand. Building brand awareness requires repeat-

edly exposing consumers to the brand as well as linking the brand in consumer memory to its

product category and to purchase, usage and consumption situations. Creating a positive brand

image requires establishing strong, favourable and unique associations for the brand. Figure 2

illustrates the main elements of brand knowledge. (Keller 1993, 3–7; Keller 1998, 94)

Brand awareness is related to the strength of the brand node in memory, as reflected by

consumers’ ability to identify the brand under different conditions. Brand awareness consists

of  1)  brand  recognition  reflecting  the  ability  of  consumers  to  confirm  prior  exposure  to  the

brand and 2) brand recall reflecting the ability of consumers to retrieve the brand, when given

the product category, the needs fulfilled by the category, or some other type probe as a cue.

Brand  awareness  can  be  characterised  according  to  depth  and  breadth.  The  depth  of  brand

awareness concerns the likelihood that the brand can be recognised or recalled and the breadth

of brand awareness relates to the variety of purchase and consumption situations in which the

brand comes to mind. (Keller 1993, 3; Keller 1998, 120–123)

Brand  image  is  defined  as  consumer  perceptions  of  a  brand  as  reflected  by  the  brand

associations held in consumers’ memory. Brand associations are informational nodes linked to

the brand node in memory and contain the meaning of the brand for consumers. Brand associ-

ations  come  in  many  different  types,  which  include  e.g.,  product-related  and  non-product-

related  attributes,  functional,  symbolic  or  experiential  benefits  and  attitudes.  For  customer-

based brand equity to occur, some of these brand associations must be strong, favourable, and

unique. Strong associations are likely to result with information deemed relevant and present-

ed consistently over time. Favourable brand associations occur when consumers believe that

the brand possesses attributes and benefits that satisfy their needs and wants. In terms of unique-

ness brand associations may or may not be shared with other competing brands. The strength,

favourability, and uniqueness of brand associations play an important role in determining the

differential response that makes up customer-based brand equity, especially in high involve-

ment decision settings where consumer motivation and ability are sufficiently present. (Keller

1993, 3–8; Keller 1998, 124)

Brand  image  is  the  sum  of  impressions  that  affect  how  we  perceive  a  brand,  including

elements that identify or distinguish the brand from others, the personality the brand acquires,

7 6

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

FIGURE 2. The main elements of brand knowledge.

and the benefits it promises. Brand image is largely a subjective and perceptual phenomenon

that is formed through consumer interpretation, whether reasoned or emotional. When brand

images  are  strong,  they  can  be  used  to  enhance  a  person’s  self-image.  (de  Chernatony  –

Dall’Olmo Riley 1998a, 429; Keegan – Moriarty – Duncan 1995, 319–324)

Six  general  guidelines  (Keller  1993,  14–15)  for  managing  customer-based  brand  equity

7 7

emphasise the importance of taking a broad view of marketing a brand; specifying the desired

consumer knowledge structures and core benefits of a brand; considering a wide range of tra-

ditional and non-traditional marketing communication options; co-ordinating and taking a long-

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

term view of the marketing decisions to be taken; conducting tracking studies; and evaluating

potential extension candidates. (Keller 1993, 17)

First, a marketer should adopt a broad view of marketing decisions. Marketing activity for

a brand can create value for the brand by potentially improving consumers’ ability to recall or

recognise the brand and/or by creating, maintaining, or changing the strength, favourability,

or uniqueness of various types of brand associations.

Second, marketers should define the knowledge structures that they would like to create

in the minds of consumers by specifying desired levels of awareness and strength, favourabili-

ty, and uniqueness of product and non-product-related attributes, and functional, experiential,

and symbolic benefits. In particular, marketers should decide on the core needs and wants of

consumers to be satisfied by the brand. Marketers should also decide the extent to which it is

necessary to leverage secondary associations for the brand by linking the brand to the com-

pany,  product  class,  particular  person,  place,  or  event  in  such  a  way  that  associations  with

those entities become indirect associations for the brand.

Third, marketers should evaluate the increasingly large number of tactical options avail-

able, especially in terms of various marketing communication alternatives. The entire market-

ing program should be co-ordinated to create congruent and strong brand associations. Differ-

ent marketing tactics with the same strategic goals, if effectively integrated, can create multi-

ple links to core benefits or other key associations, helping to produce a consistent and cohe-

sive brand image.

Fourth, marketers should take a long-term view of marketing decisions. The changes in

consumer  knowledge  about  the  brand  on  the  basis  of  current  marketing  activities  will  also

have an indirect effect on the success of future marketing activities. It is important to consider

how resulting changes in brand awareness may help or hurt subsequent marketing decisions.

Fifth, marketers should evaluate potential extension candidates for their viability and pos-

sible  feedback  effects  on  core  brand  image.  Brand  extensions  capitalise  on  the  brand  image

for  the  core  product  or  service  to  efficiently  inform  consumers  and  retailers  about  the  new

product or service.

Finally, marketers should employ tracking studies to measure consumer knowledge struc-

tures over time to detect any changes in the different dimensions of brand knowledge and to

suggest how these changes might be related to the effectiveness of different marketing actions.

Consumer knowledge of competitive brands should be similarly tracked to provide informa-

7 8

tion on their sources of customer-based brand equity. (Keller 1993, 14–15)

There  are  two  basic  complementary  approaches  to  measuring  customer-based  brand

equity.  The  indirect  approach  attempts  to  assess  potential  sources  for  customer-based  brand

equity by measuring brand knowledge structures, that is, consumers’ brand awareness and brand

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

image.  The  indirect  approach  is  useful  for  identifying  what  aspects  of  the  brand  knowledge

may potentially cause the differential response that creates customer-based brand equity. The

direct  approach  to  measuring  customer-based  brand  equity,  on  the  other  hand,  attempts  to

more  directly  assess  the  impact  of  brand  knowledge  on  consumer  response  to  different  ele-

ments of the marketing program for the firm. The direct approach is useful in approximating

the possible outcomes and benefits that arise from the differential response that creates cus-

tomer-based  brand  equity.  The  indirect  and  direct  approaches  to  measuring  customer-based

brand  equity  are  complementary  and  should  be  used  together.  In  order  to  apply  these  two

different types of measures in a managerial setting, it is necessary to design and put into place

a customer-based brand equity measurement system. There exists an extensive set of research

procedures designed to provide timely, accurate and actionable information for marketers so

that they can make the best possible tactical decisions in the short run and strategic decisions

in the long run. (Keller 1993, 12–14; Keller 1998, 75–78)

A number of benefits can result from strong customer-based brand equity in terms of both

greater revenue and lower costs. The benefits from customer-based brand equity can be grouped

into 1) factors related to growth (e.g., a brand’s ability to attract new customers, resist compet-

itive activity, introduce line extensions and cross international borders), and 2) factors related

to  profitability  (e.g.,  brand  loyalty,  premium  pricing,  lower  price  elasticity,  and  grater  trade

leverage). Brands with positive customer-based brand equity may provide also other benefits

to the firm not directly related to the products or services themselves, such as helping the firm

to attract better employees, generating greater interest from investors, and garnering more sup-

port from shareholders. (Keller 1998, 53–68)

3. A  COMPREHENSIVE  FRAMEWORK  FOR  MANAGING  BRAND  EQUITY

3.1 Asset dimensions of brand equity

The intangible assets of brands create the basis of brand equity. Brand equity consists of five

different asset dimensions. These assets include 1) brand loyalty, 2) brand awareness, 3) per-

ceived  quality,  4)  brand  associations,  and  5)  other  proprietary  assets  such  as  patents,  trade-

marks  and  channel  relationships.  If  managed  well,  these  assets  add  value  to  the  product  or

service and create additional customer satisfaction, which, in turn, provide a number of bene-

fits to the firm. (Aaker 1991, 19–21)

3.1.1 Brand loyalty

7 9

Brand loyalty represents a favourable attitude toward a brand resulting in consistent purchase

of the brand over time. It is the result of consumers’ learning that only the particular brand can

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

satisfy their needs. Two approaches to the study of brand loyalty have dominated marketing

literature. The first, a behavioural approach to brand loyalty, views consistent purchasing of

one  brand  over  time  as  an  indication  of  brand  loyalty.  Behavioural  measures  have  defined

loyalty by the sequence of purchases and/or the proportion of purchases. Repeat purchasing

behaviour is assumed to reflect reinforcement and a strong stimulus-to-response link. But, such

loyalty  may  lack  commitment  to  the  brand  and  reflect  repeat  buying  based  on  inertia.  The

second, a cognitive approach to brand loyalty, underlines that behaviour alone does not re-

flect brand loyalty. Loyalty implies a commitment to a brand that may not be reflected by just

measuring continuous behaviour. A family may buy a particular brand because it is the low-

est-priced brand on the market. A slight increase in price may cause the family to shift to an-

other brand. In this case, continuous purchasing does not reflect reinforcement or loyalty. The

stimulus (product) and reward links are not strong. We can conclude that some of the appar-

ent limitations of the strictly behavioural approach in measuring brand loyalty are overcome

when loyalty includes both attitudes and behaviour. (Assael 1992, 87–89; Samuelsen – Sanvik

1997, 1123–1128)

Brand loyalty – which can reflect a range from the habitual buyer to the satisfied buyer to

those that like the brand to the truly committed – generates value mainly by reducing market-

ing costs: retaining existing customers is much less costly than attracting new ones. It is also

difficult for competitors to communicate to satisfied brand users because they have little moti-

vation to learn about alternatives. The burden on the competitor brand is substantial. A com-

mon mistake is to grow sales by enticing new customers to the brand while neglecting existing

ones. Loyal customers, in some cases, can also entice others by using the product or advising

others to use it. (Aaker 1992, 30)

Brand loyalty is a complex phenomenon. At least seven different types of brand loyalty

can be distinguished. In emotional loyalty, unique, memorable, reinforcing experiences create

a  strong  emotional  bond  with  a  brand.  Positive  word-of-mouth  is  likely  to  be  very  high.  In

identity loyalty, the brand is used as an expression of self, to bolster self-esteem and manage

impressions. Branding prospects into related product categories are good. In differentiated loy-

alty,  brand  loyalty  is  based  on  perceived  superior  features  and  attributes.  Here,  demonstra-

tions and trials are very important tools of marketing tactics. In contract loyalty, a consumer

believes that continued loyalty earns him or her special treatment, but a competitor can ques-

tion whether the consumer’s trust is being exploited. In switching cost loyalty, a consumer is

8 0

loyal because the effort involved in considering alternatives and adapting to a new alternative

is not worth the expected return. Sometimes, the consumer may even be dissatisfied but will

remain loyal because a competitor is perceived to be same. Competitors can undermine loyal-

ty by making it easy to switch through, e.g., product design, training and terms. In familiarity

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

loyalty, brand loyalty is the result of top-of-mind brand awareness. This kind of loyalty is de-

fended  and  attacked  by  constant,  attention  arising  advertising  that  builds  top-of-mind  brand

awareness.  Finally,  in  convenience  loyalty,  brand  loyalty  is  based  on  buying  convenience.

This type of loyalty may be attacked by the expansion of a competitor into convenience chan-

nels. It can be concluded that some types of loyalties are relatively easy to change because the

habit is only superficial, sustained by buying convenience or the fact that the brand is the first

to occur to mind. (Dickson 1994, 100–101)

The  brand  loyalty  of  the  customer  base  is  often  the  core  of  a  brand’s  equity.  It  reflects

how likely a customer will be ready to switch to another brand, especially when that brand

makes a change, either in price or in product features. As brand loyalty increases, the vulnera-

bility of the customer base to competitive action is reduced. There are at least five potential

levels  of  loyalty.  These  levels  are  stylised,  and  they  do  not  always  appear  in  the  pure  form.

These five levels do, however, provide a feeling for the variety of forms that loyalty can take

and how it impacts upon brand equity. (Aaker 1991, 39–41)

The bottom loyalty level is the nonloyal buyer who is completely indifferent to the brand.

Each  brand  is  perceived  to  be  adequate,  and  the  brand  name  plays  only  a  small  role  in  the

purchase decision. This buyer might be termed a switcher. The second level includes buyers

who are satisfied with the product or at least not dissatisfied. These buyers might be termed

habitual buyers. The third level consists of those who are also satisfied and, in addition, have

switching costs, e.g., costs in time or money associated with switching. This group might be

called switching-cost loyal. On the fourth level we find those that truly like the brand. Their

preference may be based upon a symbol, a set of use experiences or a perceived high quality.

Segments at this fourth level might be termed friends of the brand, because there is an emo-

tional/feeling attachment. At the top level are committed customers. They feel pride in being

users of a brand. The brand is very important to them either functionally or as an expression of

who they are. Their confidence in the brand is such that they will recommend it to others.

The brand loyalty of existing customers represents a strategic asset that, if properly man-

aged and exploited, has the potential to provide value in several ways. A loyal set of custom-

ers can reduce marketing costs, since it is much less costly to keep a customer than to gain

and regain, and it provides trade leverage over others in the distribution channel. Customers

can create brand awareness and generate reassurance to new customers. Loyal customers will

also give a company time to respond to competitive threats. (Aaker 1991, 46-49; Dekimpe –

Steenkamp – Mellens – Abeele 1997, 405–407)

3.1.2 Brand awareness

Brand  awareness  is  the  ability  of  a  potential  buyer  to  recognise  or  recall  that  a  brand  is  a

8 1

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

member  of  a  certain  product  category.  A  link  between  product  class  and  brand  is  involved.

Brand  awareness  involves  a  continuum  ranging  from  an  uncertain  feeling  that  the  brand  is

recognised to a belief that it is the only one in the product category. (Aaker 1991, 61–62)

Brand  awareness  consists  of  brand  recognition  and  brand  recall.  Brand  recognition  re-

lates to consumers’ ability to confirm prior exposure to the brand when given the brand as a

cue. In other words, brand recognition requires that consumers correctly discriminate the brand

as having been seen or heard previously. Brand recognition is the minimal level of brand aware-

ness. It is based upon an aided recall test. Brand recognition is particularly important when a

buyer chooses a brand at the point of purchase. The next level of brand awareness is brand

recall. It relates to the consumers’ ability to retrieve the brand when given the product catego-

ry, the needs fulfilled by the category, or some other type of probe as a cue. In other words,

brand  recall  requires  that  consumers  can  correctly  generate  the  brand  from  memory.  Brand

recall is based on unaided recall, which is a substantially more difficult task than recognition.

The first-named brand in an unaided recall task has achieved top-of-mind awareness. The rel-

ative importance of brand recognition and recall depends on the extent to which consumers

make decisions in the store versus outside the store. Brand recognition may be more important

to the extent that product decisions are made in the store. (Keller 1993, 3; Keller 1998, 87–92)

Brand awareness can be characterised according to depth and breadth. The depth of brand

awareness concerns the likelihood that a brand element will come to mind and the ease with

which it does so. A brand that can be easily recalled has a deeper level of brand awareness

than one that only can be recognised. The breath of brand awareness concerns the range of

purchase and usage situations where the brand element comes to mind. The breadth of brand

awareness depends to a large extent on the organisation of brand and product knowledge in

memory. (Keller 1998, 88)

Brand awareness creates value in different ways. Brand awareness provides the anchor to

which other associations can be linked. Recognition provides the brand with a sense of famili-

arity and people like the familiar. In the absence of motivation to engage in attribute evalua-

tion, familiarity may be enough. Brand awareness can be a signal of substance. The first set in

the buying process often is to select a group of brands to consider. Brand awareness can be

crucial to getting into this group. (Aaker 1991, 63–67)

Brand  awareness  plays  an  important  role  in  consumer  decision  making  for  three  major

reasons.  First,  it  is  important  that  consumers  think  of  the  brand  when  they  think  about  the

8 2

product  category.  Raising  brand  awareness  increases  the  likelihood  that  the  brand  will  be  a

member of the consideration set. Second, brand awareness can affect decisions about a brand

in the consideration set. For example, some consumers have been shown to adopt a decision

rule to buy only familiar, well-established brands. In low involvement decision settings, a min-

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

imum level of brand awareness may be sufficient for product choice, even in the absence of a

well-formed attitude. Finally, brand awareness affects consumer decision making by influenc-

ing the formation and strength of brand associations in the brand image. (Keller 1993, 3)

3.1.3 Perceived quality

Perceived quality can be defined as the customer’s perception of the overall quality or superi-

ority  of  a  product  or  service  relative  to  alternatives.  Perceived  quality  cannot  necessarily  be

objectively determined, because perceived quality itself is a summary construct. (Aaker 1991,

85–86)

Perceived quality is valuable in several ways. In many contexts, the perceived quality of

a brand provides a pivotal reason to buy. It is influencing which brands are included and ex-

cluded from the consideration set and which brand is to be selected. A principal positioning

characteristic of a brand is its location within the dimension of perceived quality. A perceived

quality advantage provides the option of charging a premium price.  The price premium can

increase profits and/or provide resources with which to reinvest in the brand. Perceived quali-

ty can also be meaningful to retailers, distributors and other channel members and thus aid in

gaining distribution. Channel members are motivated to carry brands that are well regarded.

In addition, the perceived quality can be exploited by introducing brand extensions, using the

brand name to enter new product categories. A strong brand with respect to perceived quality

will be able to extend further, and will find a higher success probability than a weak brand.

(Aaker 1991, 86–88)

3.1.4 Brand associations

A brand association is any mental linkage to the brand. Brand associations may include, e.g.,

product attributes, customer benefits, uses, life-styles, product classes, competitors and coun-

tries of origins. The association not only exists but also has a level of strength. The brand posi-

tion is based upon associations and how they differ from the competition. An association can

affect  the  processing  and  recall  of  information,  provide  a  point  of  differentiation,  provide  a

reason to buy, create positive attitudes and feelings and serve as the basis of extensions. The

associations  that  a  well-established  brand  name  provides  can  influence  purchase  behaviour

and  affect  user  satisfaction.  Even  when  the  associations  are  not  important  to  brand  choices,

they can reassure, reducing the incentive to try other brands. (Aaker 1991, 272; Aaker 1992, 31)

Brand associations may take different forms. One way to distinguish among brand associ-

8 3

ations is the level of abstraction, that is, how much information is summarised or subsumed in

the association. Within this dimension, the types of brand associations can be classified into

three major types of increasing scope: 1) attributes, 2) benefits, and 3) attitudes. Several addi-

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

FIGURE 3. The main types of brand associations.

tional distinctions can be made within these types according to the qualitative nature of the

association.  Figure  3  illustrates  the  main  types  of  brand  associations.  (Dickson  1994,  310–

311; Keller 1993, 4; Keller 1998, 93–102)

The first types of brand associations are brand attributes. Attributes are those descriptive

features  that  characterise  a  product  or  service.  Attributes  can  be  distinguished  according  to

how directly they relate to product or service performance. Along these lines, attributes can be

classified into product-related and non-product-related attributes. (Keller 1993, 4)

Product-related attributes are defined as the ingredients necessary for performing the pri-

mary product or service function sought by consumers. Hence, they relate to a product’s phys-

ical composition or a service’s requirements. Product-related attributes determine the nature

and level of product performance. Product-related attributes can be further distinguished ac-

cording to essential ingredients and optional features, either necessary for a product to work,

or allowing for customisation and more versatile, personalised usage. (Keller 1998, 93–99)

Non-product-related  attributes  are  defined  as  external  aspects  of  the  product  or  service

that relate to its purchase or consumption. Non-product-related attributes may affect the pur-

chase or consumption processes but do not directly affect the product performance. The four

8 4

main types of non-product-related attributes are price information, packaging or product ap-

pearance  information,  user  imagery  i.e.,  what  kind  of  a  person  uses  the  product  or  service,

and usage imagery i.e., where and in which situations the product or service is used. The price

of the product or service is considered a non-product-related attribute because it represents a

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

necessary step in the purchase process but is not intrinsic related to the product performance

or service function. Price is a particularly important attribute, because consumers often have

strong beliefs about the price and quality. In most cases, packaging does not directly relate to

the necessary ingredients for product performance. User and usage imagery attributes can be

formed directly from a consumer’s own experiences and contact with brand users or indirectly

through the depiction of the target market as communicated, e.g., in brand advertising. Asso-

ciations of a typical brand user may be based on, e.g., demographic factors or psychographic

factors.  Association  of  a  typical  usage  situation  may  be  based  on  the  time  of  day,  week,  or

year,  the  location  (inside  or  outside  the  home),  or  the  type  of  activity  (formal  or  informal),

among other aspects. (Keller 1993, 4)

The second types of brand associations are brand benefits. Benefits are the personal value

and meaning that consumers attach to the product or service. Benefits can be further distin-

guished  into  three  categories  according  to  the  underlying  motivations  to  which  they  relate:

functional  benefits,  experiential  benefits,  and  symbolic  benefits.  Functional  benefits  are  the

more  intrinsic  advantages  of  product  or  service  consumption  and  usually  correspond  to  the

product-related attributes. These benefits often are linked to fairly basic motivations, such as

physiological and safety needs, and may involve a desire for problem removal or avoidance.

Experiential benefits relate to what is felt when the product or service is used and they usually

also correspond to both product-related attributes as well as non-product-related attributes such

as usage imagery. These benefits satisfy experiential needs such as sensory pleasure, variety,

and cognitive stimulation. Symbolic benefits are the more extrinsic advantages of product or

service consumption. They usually correspond to non-product-related attributes and relate to

underlying needs for social approval or personal expression. Symbolic benefits are especially

relevant for socially visible products. Thus, consumers may value the prestige, exclusivity, or

fashionability of a brand because of how it relates to their self-concepts. (Keller 1993, 4; Kel-

ler 1998, 99–100)

The  third  and  most  abstract  types  of  brand  associations  are  brand  attitudes.  Brand  atti-

tudes  are  defined  in  terms  of  consumers’  overall  evaluations  of  a  brand.  Brand  attitudes  are

important  because  they  often  form  the  basis  for  actions  and  behaviour  that  consumers  take

with the brand (e.g., brand choice) Consumers’ brand attitudes generally depend on specific

considerations concerning the attributes and benefits of the brand. It is important to note that

brand  attitudes  can  be  formed  on  the  basis  of  benefits  about  product-related  attributes  and

functional benefits and/or beliefs about non-product-related attributes and symbolic and expe-

riential benefits. (Keller 1993, 4–5; Keller 1998, 100–102)

The different types of brand associations can vary according to their favourability, strength,

and  uniqueness.  Brand  associations  differ  according  to  how  favourably  they  are  evaluated.

8 5

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

The success of a marketing program is reflected in the creation of favourable brand associa-

tions, i.e., consumers believe the brand has attributes and benefits that satisfy their needs and

wants, so that a positive overall brand attitude is formed. The strength of brand associations

depends on how the information enters consumer memory and how it is maintained as a part

of  the  brand  image.  Thus,  the  more  actively  a  consumer  thinks  about  and  elaborates  on  the

significance of product or service information, the stronger associations are created in memory.

This strength, in turn, increases both the likelihood that information will be accessible and the

ease with which it can be recalled. The presence of strongly held favourably evaluated asso-

ciations  that  are  unique  to  the  brand  and  imply  superiority  over  other  brands  is  crucial  to  a

brand’s  success.  Yet,  unless  the  brand  has  no  competitors,  the  brand  will  most  likely  share

some associations with other brands. Shared associations can help to establish a category mem-

bership and define the scope of competition with other products and services. The favourabili-

ty and strength of a brand association can be affected by other brand associations in memory.

Congruence is defined as the extent to which a brand association shares content and meaning

with another brand association. In general, information that is consistent in meaning with ex-

isting brand associations should be more easily learned and remembered than unrelated infor-

mation. The congruence among brand associations determines the cohesiveness of the brand

image. The cohesiveness of the brand image may determine consumers’ more holistic or ge-

stalt reactions to the brand. (Keller 1993, 5–8; Keller 1998, 103–109)

Secondary brand association occurs when the brand association itself is linked to other

memorised information that is not directly related to the product or service. Because the brand

becomes identified with this other entity, consumers may infer that the brand shares associa-

tions with that entity, thus producing indirect links for the brand. Secondary associations may

arise  from  associations  related  to,  e.g.,  the  company,  the  country  of  origin,  the  distribution

channels, a celebrity spokesperson of the product or service, or an event. The first three types

of secondary associations involve factual sources for the brand. First, the brand may vary by

the extent to which it is identified with a particular company. Similarly, a brand may be asso-

ciated with its ”country of origin” in such a way that consumers infer specific beliefs and eval-

uations.  Finally,  the  distribution  channels  for  a  product  may  also  create  secondary  associa-

tions. The last two types of secondary associations occur when the primary brand associations

are linked to user and usage situation attributes, especially when they are for a particular per-

son or event. Consider the case in which a well-known person lends credibility to product or

8 6

service claims because of his or her expertise, trustworthiness, or attractiveness. Similarly, when

a brand becomes linked with an event, some of the associations with the event may become

indirectly associated with the brand. Secondary brand associations may be important if exist-

ing brand associations are deficient in some way. In other words, secondary associations can

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

be leveraged to create favourable, strong, and unique associations that otherwise may not be

present. (Keller 1993, 11–12; Keller 1998, 268)

3.2 A five assets model of brand equity

The five asset dimensions (brand loyalty, brand awareness, perceived quality, brand associa-

tions and other proprietary brand assets) that underlie brand equity are creating brand equity.

In figure 4, a five assets model of brand equity is illustrated. (Aaker 1991, 269–270)

The five assets model implicates that brand equity provides value to the customer, as well

as to the firm. The resulting customer value becomes a basis for providing value to the firm.

The  implication  is  that  in  managing  brand  equity,  it  is  important  to  be  sensitive  as  to  how

value can be created in order to manage brand equity effectively and to make informed deci-

sions about brand-building activities. (Aaker 1992, 30)

Brand equity provides value to the customer in at least three ways. (Aaker 1992, 31) First,

brand equity assets can help a customer interpret, process, store and retrieve a huge quantity

of  information  about  products  and  brands.  Second,  the  assets  can  also  affect  the  customer’s

confidence  in  the  purchase  decision,  a  customer  will  usually  be  more  comfortable  with  the

brand that was last used, is considered to have high quality, or is familiar. The third way that

brand equity assets, particularly perceived quality and brand associations, provide the customer

with value is by increasing the customer’s satisfaction when the individual uses the product.

Brand  equity  provides  value  to  the  firm  in  at  least  six  ways.  (Aaker  1992,  31–32)  First,

brand equity can enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of marketing programs. A promo-

tion,  for  example,  that  provides  an  incentive  to  try  a  new  flavour  or  new  use  will  be  more

effective if the brand is familiar and if the promotion does not have to influence a consumer

sceptical of brand quality. An advertisement announcing a new feature or model will be more

likely  to  be  remembered  and  stimulate  action,  if  the  potential  consumer  has  a  high-quality

perception of the brand.

Second, brand awareness, perceived quality, and brand associations can strengthen brand

loyalty  by  increasing  customer  satisfaction  and  providing  reasons  to  buy  the  product.  Even

when these assets are not visibly pivotal to brand choice, they can reassure the customer, re-

ducing  the  incentive  to  try  other  brands.  Enhanced  brand  loyalty  is  especially  important  in

buying time to respond to competitor innovations.

Third, brand equity will usually provide higher margins for products by permitting premi-

um  pricing  and  reducing  reliance  on  promotions.  In  many  contexts,  the  elements  of  brand

equity serve to support premium pricing or to resist price erosion. In addition, a brand with a

disadvantage  in  brand  equity  will  often  have  to  invest  more  in  promotional  activity  just  to

8 7

maintain its position in the distribution channel.

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

FIGURE 4. A five assets model of brand equity.

8 8

Fourth, brand equity can provide a platform for growth by brand extensions.

Fifth, brand equity can provide leverage in the distribution channel as well. Like custom-

ers,  channel  members  have  less  uncertainty  dealing  with  a  proven  brand  name  that  has  al-

ready achieved recognition and has established strong associations. Further, by having a strong

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

brand, companies have the potential to gain efficiencies and synergies by the use of the prod-

uct’s visual impact on the store shelf and in promotion.

Finally, brand equity assets provide a firm with a significant advantage: a barrier that may

prevent customers from switching to a competitor.

4. LEVERAGING  AND  MEASURING  BRAND  EQUITY

4.1 Leveraging  brand  equity

There  are  three  ways  to  leverage  brand  equity:  firstly  building  it,  secondly  borrowing  it,  or

thirdly buying it. Increasingly, ”building” brand equity is not easy – given the proliferation of

brands and the intense competition that is prevalent in many industries. Within a given industry,

there typically exist many high quality products and high levels of advertising, making it diffi-

cult to introduce superior quality brand and shape perceptions through advertising. Thus, the

alternative to building brand equity is by borrowing or buying it. (Farquhar 1990, RC10–RC11)

4.1.1 Building brand equity

Brand equity is built firstly, by creating positive brand evaluations with a quality product, sec-

ondly, by fostering accessible brand attitudes to have the most impact on consumer purchase

behaviour, and thirdly, by developing a consistent brand image to form a relationship with the

consumer. (Farquhar 1990, RC8–RC10) Of these three elements, positive brand evaluation may

be considered the most important, and it is based on a quality product that delivers superior

performance. (Barwise 1993, 96)

The first element in building a strong brand is a positive brand evaluation. Quality is the

cornerstone of a strong brand. A firm must have a quality product that delivers superior per-

formance to the consumer in order to achieve a positive evaluation of the brand in the con-

sumer’s memory.

Three types of evaluations can be stored in a consumer’s memory: 1) affective responses,

2) cognitive evaluations and 3) behavioural intentions. Affective responses involve emotions

or feelings toward the brand (e.g., the brand makes me feel good about myself, the brand is a

familiar friend or the brand symbolises status, affiliation or uniqueness). Cognitive evaluations

are inferences made from beliefs about the brand (e.g., the brand lowers the risk of something

bad). Behavioural intentions are developed from habits or heuristic interest toward the brand

(e.g.,  the  brand  is  the  only  one  my  family  uses  or  the  brand  is  on  sale  this  week).  Efforts  to

create  positive  brand  evaluations  are  usually  aimed  at  one  of  these  types.  (Farquhar  1990,

8 9

RC8–RC9)

The  second  element  in  building  a  strong  brand  is  attitude  accessibility.  It  refers  to  how

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

quickly an individual can retrieve something stored in memory. Stored evaluations can be re-

trieved from memory in two ways. Automatic activation occurs spontaneously from memory

upon the mere observation of the attitude object. Controlled activation requires the active at-

tention of the individual to retrieve a previously stored evaluation or to construct a summary

evaluation of the attitude object.

The third element in building a strong brand is to have a consistent brand image. Consist-

ency of the brand’s image is a part of managing the relationship between the consumer and

the brand. A relationship develops between the personality of the brand and the personality of

the consumer with each purchase.

Building brand equity requires the creation of a familiar brand that has favourable, strong,

and unique brand associations. This can be done both through the initial choice of the brand

identities, such as the brand name, logo, or symbol, and through the integration of the brand

identities into the supporting marketing program. The judicious choice of brand identities can

contribute significantly to brand equity, but the primary input comes from supporting market-

ing activities for the brand. The product or service specifications themselves are the primary

basis  for  the  product-related  attribute  associations  and  determine  a  consumer’s  fundamental

understanding of what the product or service means. Similarly, the pricing policy for the brand

directly creates associations to the relevant price tier or level for the brand in the product cate-

gory, as well as its corresponding price volatility or variance, e.g., in terms of the frequency

and  magnitude  of  discounts.  The  marketing  communication  efforts  by  the  firm,  in  contrast,

afford a flexible means of shaping consumer perceptions of the product or service. Marketing

communication may also be helpful in increasing user and usage imagery attributes. Word-of-

mouth and other social influences also play an important role, especially for user and usage

imagery attributes. (Keller 1993, 9–10)

Investment to build or maintain strong brands can be difficult or impossible to justify when

considering the short-term financial outlook. It is required a vision and a belief that such in-

vestments will pay off. A key to developing a vision and having faith in it is to understand the

ways  in  which  a  brand  can  generate  competitive  advantage.  With  a  vision  established,  it  is

necessary to be vigilant with brands. The temptation is put a priority in other areas, such as to

correct a market-share problem or to pursue a cost reduction program. As a result, brand equi-

ty  is  temporarily  put  on  hold.  This  temptation  is  particularly  strong  when  the  organisation’s

structure and reward systems do not protect brand equity. (Aaker 1992, 32)

9 0

4.1.2 Borrowing brand equity

Many firms borrow on the brand equity in their brand names by extending existing brand names

to other products. Two types of extensions can be distinguished: a line and a category exten-

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

sion. The latter is frequently also called brand extension. A line extension is when a current

brand  name  is  used  to  enter  new  market  segment  in  the  existing  product  class.  A  category

extension is when the current brand name is used to enter a different product class. (Aaker –

Keller 1990, 27–28; Farquhar 1990, RC10; Farquhar – Herr – Fazio 1990, 856; Hankinson –

Cowking 1993, 74–75; Keller 1998, 67)

A line extension occurs when a company introduces additional items in the same product

category under the same brand name. A line extension often involves a different size, colour,

flavour or ingredient, a different form or a different application for the brand. Products in line

extensions are technically congruent, i.e., similar in many attributes. They belong to the same

product category or subclass. The vast majority of new-product activity consists of line exten-

sions.  Excess  manufacturing  capacity  often  drives  a  company  to  introduce  additional  items.

The company might want to meet the consumers’ desire for variety. The company may recog-

nise  a  latent  consumer  want  and  try  to  capitalise  on  it.  The  company  may  want  to  match  a

competitor’s successful line extension. Many companies introduce line extensions primarily to

command  more  shelf  space  from  resellers.  Line  extensions  involve  risks.  There  is  a  chance

that the brand name will lose its specific meaning. This is called the line-extension trap. The

other  risk  is  that  many  line  extensions  will  not  sell  enough  to  cover  their  development  and

promotion  costs.  Furthermore,  even  when  they  sell  enough,  the  sales  may  come  at  the  ex-

pense  of  other  items  in  the  line.  A  line  extension  works  best  when  it  takes  sales  away  from

competing brands, not when it cannibalises the company’s other products. (Keller 1998, 455–

469; Kotler 1994, 452–454; van Raaij – Schoonderbeek 1993, 482)

A category extension occurs when a company decides to use an existing brand name to

launch a product in a new product category. Category extensions capitalise on the brand im-

age of the core product or service to efficiently inform consumers and retailers about a new

product or service. The potential benefits of category extensions include immediate name rec-

ognition  and  the  transference  of  benefits  associated  with  a  familiar  brand.  A  well-regarded

brand name gives the new product instant recognition and earlier acceptance. It enables the

company to enter into new-product categories more easily. Moreover, category extensions elim-

inate the high costs of establishing a new brand and often reduce the costs of gaining distribu-

tion.  Category  extensions  also  involve  risks.  The  new  product  might  disappoint  buyers  and

damage their respect for the company’s other products. The brand name may lose its special

positioning  in  the  consumer’s  mind  through  over-extension.  Brand  dilution  is  said  to  occur

when consumers no longer associate a brand with a specific product or highly similar prod-

ucts.  Companies  that  are  tempted  to  transfer  their  brand  name  must  research  how  well  the

brand’s associations fit the new product. The best result would occur when the brand name

builds the sales of both the new product and the existing product. An acceptable result would

9 1

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

be  when  the  new  product  sells  well  without  affecting  the  sales  of  the  existing  product.  The

worst result would be when the new product fails and hurts the sales of the existing product.

(Farquhar – Herr – Fazio 1990, 856; Hankinson – Cowking 1993, 74–82; Keller 1993, 15–16;

Kotler 1994, 454–455; Loken – John 1993, 79–83)

The  relationship  between  the  core  product  and  the  extended  product  may  be  based  on

technical  attributes,  benefits,  or  values  and  lifestyles.  First,  products  may  be  technically

related,  based  on  physical  attributes.  Extensions  based  on  technical  attributes  are  often  suc-

cessful,  if  the  products  have  a  large  set  of  similar  attributes.  Second,  the  extension  may  be

based  on  product  benefits,  if  a  brand  offers  clear  and  distinguishing  benefits.  These  exten-

sions may have dissimilar attributes, but they are similar for one or more benefits, e.g., qual-

ity. Third, well-known brand names with a good reputation may extend to new products based

on  their  associated  value  and  lifestyle.  The  precondition  is  that  the  brand  is  already  associ-

ated with a clear set of values. These extensions may be completely dissimilar in a technical

sense, but similar in values and lifestyle for the target group and for usage situations. The core

of these extensions is the set of values and the lifestyle of the target group. These brand names

often have a connotation of high class or luxury. The new product may be technically differ-

ent from the core product. Brand extensions based on values and lifestyle may enrich the as-

sociations of the core product. These extensions may also keep the brand name in the evoked

set of consumers. If the schema of the core product is high in the hierarchy, i.e., associated

with values and lifestyle, one could extend it to completely dissimilar products. The new prod-

ucts  should,  however,  fit  in  the  schema  of  the  core  product  and  appeal  to  the  same  values

and  lifestyle  of  the  target  group.  Cross  selling  is  possible,  because  these  products  are  often

complementary for the same lifestyle. Brands should avoid, however, becoming only associ-

ated with values that are too far away from the original product benefits. (van Raaij – Schoon-

derbeek 1993, 482–483)

The relational model for category extensions includes three types of associations: brand

to category, category to brand, and category to category. The strengths of these associations

are called typicality, dominance, and relatedness, respectively. The possible asymmetry in the

relationship between typicality and dominance is a distinguishing feature of the model. Typi-

cal brands in a product category are more easily extended to closely related target categories

than to distant target categories. Furthermore, dominant brands are not easily extended to dis-

tant target categories, because of the exemplary nature of such brands in their original product

9 2

categories. The relationship between typicality and dominance is of practical interest for ex-

ploring the limitations of category extensions. When the same brand has been extended to a

wide variety of target categories, we do not expect the parent brand’s dominance in the origi-

nal category to diminish, but we would expect a dilution of typicality. Furthermore, some brands

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

are so typical in a particular target category that consumers mistakenly may believe that the

brand extension exists when it does not. This spurious awareness of non-existent brand exten-

sions  might  sound  a  blessing  for  marketers.  To  the  extent  that  a  strong  association  already

exists, a firm might well consider a category extension to that target category. Less effort would

be  needed  for  creating  awareness,  and  more  could  be  spent  on  other  activities.  (Farquhar  –

Herr – Fazio 1990, 857–859; Roux – Lorange 1993, 495)

The association network of the core product indicates how far one could stretch the brand.

If the network of the core product is low in the hierarchy, i.e., only associated with technical

and  functional  product  attributes,  one  should  not  go  beyond  line  extensions.  On  the  other

hand, brands develop over time. The typical history of a brand is that it starts narrowly with a

complete overlap with the product. Then, line extensions of, e.g., flavour and colour variants

may  be  developed.  The  brand  becomes  broader  and  obtains  connotations  of  quality,  design

and  other  psychosocial  attributes  and  benefits.  Then,  the  brand  may  transcend  the  physical

reality  and  become  associated  with  values.  This  case  provides  the  richest  opportunities  for

brand  extensions.  However,  not  all  brands  develop  according  to  these  lines.  (Van  Raaij  –

Schoonderbeek 1993, 483)

Consumers may hold four types of associations in long-term memory that bears on cate-

gory  extensions.  These  associations  occur  between  a  brand  and  the  attributes  of  that  brand;

consumer  attitudes  toward  that  brand;  the  attributes  of  the  product  category;  and  consumer

attitudes toward the product category. The presence and strength of these associations affect

consumer judgements of the degree of fit between the existing brand and its potential exten-

sion to a new category. These intervening judgements are important in predicting the success

of a given category extension. (Farquhar – Herr – Fazio 1990, 858)

Transferring an existing brand name to a new product category requires great care. Three

factors are needed to extend a brand successfully to a new category: perceptual fit, competi-

tive leverage, and benefit transfer. Perceptual fit means that the consumer must perceive the

new  item  to  be  consistent  with  the  parent  brand.  Competitive  leverage  means  that  the  new

item must be comparable or superior to other products in the category. Benefit transfer means

that  the  benefit  offered  by  the  parent  brand  is  desired  by  consumers  of  products  in  the  new

category. (Farquhar 1990, RC10; McWilliam 1993, 485; Roux – Lorange 1993, 492–496; Sattler

– Zatloukal 1998, 97–104)

4.1.3 Buying brand equity

A final method to enhance brand equity is to buy it through acquisition or licensing. Given the

potential difficulties associated with building brand equity, there is a trend toward acquiring

well-established brands. Acquisition of a firm, its brands and products is obviously one way of

9 3

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

leveraging  brand  equity.  A  more  common  approach  is  licensing  brands.  However,  licensing

brands can be counter-productive, if the extended products have little or no association with

the original product category. The same requirements of perceptual fit, competitive leverage

and  the  benefit  transfer  apply  to  all  category  extensions,  whether  licensed  or  not.  (Farquhar

1990, RC11; Keller 1998, 288–294)

4.2 Measuring  brand  equity

The  concept  of  brand  equity  has  gained  much  prominence  both  in  academia  and  industry,

especially due to the growing recognition of brands as valuable assets for the firm. Unlike the

developments at a conceptual level, however, the existing literature does not provide a satis-

factory measurement method for understanding the sources of brand equity. An understanding

of where the equities of the firm’s and competitors’ brands come from is obviously essential

for a brand manager to enhance his or her brand’s equity relative to those of competitive brands.

Some  of  the  previously  proposed  measurement  approaches  take  the  firm’s  perspective  and

measure brand equity at the firm level. For example, brand equity has been estimated as the

incremental  cash  flows  that  accrue  to  the  firm  due  to  its  investment  in  brands.  This  method

relies on data aggregated to the firm level, so the estimate of brand equity is not very useful to

brand managers managing an individual brand in a multibrand firm operating in multiple prod-

uct categories. (Park – Srinivasan 1994, 271)

Brand equity can be measured by the incremental cash flow from associating the brand

with  the  product.  Incremental  cash  flow  also  results  from  premium  pricing  and  reduced  ex-

penses. Brand valuation is a relatively new phenomenon. Many different methods have been

proposed because financial accounting standards for valuing intangible assets vary across coun-

tries. However, little consensus has emerged about how brand performance should be mea-

sured. (Birkin 1991, 186–193; Egan – Guilding 1994, 453–466; Farquhar 1990, RC7)

A classical method for estimating brand equity is to include the brand name as a factor in

the  full-profile  method  of  conjoint  analysis  performed  at  the  individual  level.  By  estimating

brand  equity  at  the  individual  rather  than  aggregate  or  segment  level,  brand  managers  can

aggregate the individual-level measures to quantify both the mean and standard deviation of

brand equity for any segment of interest. In addition, starting with individual-level measures

difficult aggregation problems encountered in estimating the market share premium and price

premium attributable to brand equity can be avoided. A difficulty with the conjoint analysis

9 4

method in the context of brand equity measurement is that the conjoint card-sort task can lead

to unrealistic product profiles. Another important concern with conjoint analysis is that it does

not provide an understanding of the sources of brand equity and suggested directions for en-

hancing it. (Park – Srinivasan 1994, 272)

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

A survey-based method for measuring and understanding brand equity at the individual

consumer level in a specific product category offers brand managers an indication of the sources

of brand equity. This method measures brand equity as the difference between an individual

consumer’s overall brand preference and his or her brand preference on the basis of objective-

ly measured product attribute levels. To understand the sources of brand equity, the approach

divides brand equity into attribute-based and nonattribute-based components, thus providing

the brand manager with an indication of different plausible bases of brand equity. The attribute-

based component of brand equity captures the impact of brand-building activities on the con-

sumer’s  attribute  perceptions.  In  other  words,  attribute-based  equity  incorporates  the  differ-

ence between subjectively perceived and objectively measured attribute levels. The nonattrib-

ute-based  component  of  brand  equity  captures  brand  associations  unrelated  to  product  at-

tributes. For example, the masculine image conveyed by the Marlboro man has nothing to do

with product attributes, and yet, it may play a significant role in accounting for preferences for

the brand. This two-component decomposition of brand equity provides valuable information

because the two components often relate to different actions by brand management. For ex-

ample, although image-oriented advertising can create the nonattribute-based component, at-

tribute-specific advertising can create the attribute-based component of brand equity. (Park –

Srinivasan 1994, 272)

The survey-based method for measuring and understanding brand equity at the individual

consumer level in a specific product category also provides a method for assessing the impact

of a brand’s equity on its markets share and profit margin. The market share premium due to

brand equity tells the brand managers how much of a brand’s current market share is attributa-

ble  to  the  brand’s  equity  in  holding  a  price  fixed.  The  price  premium  due  to  brand  equity

provides the additional price the firm is able to charge currently for the brand, while holding

the market share fixed. The market share and price premiums constitute meaningful summary

measures of brand equity because they closely relate to brand profitability. The survey-based

method for measuring and understanding brand equity also provides brand managers with di-

agnostic information as to how a brand extension into a related product category builds on (or

detracts from) the equity of an established brand. Brand managers who want to extend their

established  brands  can  use  the  model  to  select  an  extension  product  category  from  a  set  of

candidate categories. (Park – Srinivasan 1994, 273)

5. SUMMARY  AND  MANAGERIAL  IMPLICATIONS

9 5

Brands have gained renewed interest in recent years. Brand managers realise that after years of

look-alike advertising and over-coping with me-too brands, they now live in a world of prod-

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

uct parity. Hard competition ensured through short-term price promotions reduces the profita-

bility of brands leading manufactures to examine ways to enhance loyalty toward their brands.

In addition, faced with the increasing power of retailers manufacturers of consumer products

realise that having the strongest brands is vital to strengthening their presence with retailers.

Furthermore, the escalation of new product development costs coupled with the high rate of

new  product  failures  has  led  firms  to  acquire  licenses,  and  extend  brand  names  to  a  degree

unseen in previous decades.

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  discuss  and  elaborate  the  main  issues  encountered  in

managing brand equity. In order to achieve this purpose, we first analysed the concept of brand

equity; second, we provided a comprehensive framework for managing brand equity; and fi-

nally, we distinguished different ways to leverage and measure brand equity.

The concept of brand equity emerged in the early 1990s. Brand equity can be regarded as

a  managerial  concept,  as  a  financial  intangible  asset,  as  a  relationship  concept  or  as  a  cus-

tomer-based concept from the perspective of the individual consumer.

In a general sense, brand equity is defined in terms of the marketing effects uniquely at-

tributable to the brand. That is, brand equity relates to the fact that different outcomes result

from the marketing of a product or service because of its brand element, as compared to out-

comes if that same product or service did not have hat brand identification. Although a number

of different views of brand equity have been expressed, they all are generally consistent with

the  basic  notion  that  brand  equity  represents  the  ”added  value”  endowed  to  a  product  or  a

service as a result of past investments in the marketing for the brand.

The  main  asset  dimensions  of  brand  equity  can  be  grouped  into  brand  loyalty,  brand

awareness, perceived quality and brand associations.

Brand loyalty represents a favourable attitude toward a brand resulting in consistent pur-

chase  of  the  brand  over  time.  It  is  the  result  of  consumers’  learning  that  only  the  particular

brand can satisfy their needs. Brand awareness is the ability of a potential buyer to recognise

or recall that a brand is a member of a certain product category. Brand awareness involves a

continuum ranging from an uncertain feeling that the brand is recognised to a belief that it is

the only one in the product category. Perceived quality can be defined as the customer’s per-

ception  of  the  overall  quality  or  superiority  of  a  product  or  service  relative  to  alternatives.

Perceived quality cannot necessarily be objectively determined, because perceived quality it-

self is a summary construct. Brand associations may include, e.g., product attributes, customer

benefits, uses, life-styles, product classes, competitors and countries of origins. Brand associa-

tions  can  affect  the  processing  and  recall  of  information,  provide  a  point  of  differentiation,

provide a reason to buy, create positive attitudes and feelings and serve as the basis of brand

extensions.

9 6

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

There are three alternative ways to leverage brand equity: firstly building it, secondly bor-

rowing it, or thirdly buying it.

Brand equity can be built by creating positive brand evaluations with a quality product,

by fostering accessible brand attitudes to have the most impact on consumer purchase behav-

iour, and by developing a consistent brand image to form a relationship with the consumer.

Many firms borrow on the brand equity in their brand names by extending existing brand names

to other products. Two types of extensions can be distinguished: a line and a category exten-

sion. The later is frequently also called brand extension. The third way to leverage brand equi-

ty is to buy it through acquisition or licensing. Given the potential difficulties associated with

building brand equity, there is a trend toward acquiring well-established brands.

Brand  equity  can  be  measured  by  the  incremental  cash  flow  from  associating  the  brand

with the product. Incremental cash flow also results from premium pricing and reduced expenses.

Brand valuation is a relatively new phenomenon. Many different methods have been proposed

because financial accounting standards for valuing intangible assets vary across countries. How-

ever, little consensus has emerged about how brand performance should be measured.

Brand equity can create advantages and benefits for the firm, the trade or the consumer.

From the firm’s perspective brand equity imparts competitive advantages to the firm. These

aspects  of  brand  equity  typically  involve  uncertainties  that  are  difficult  to  quantify  in  brand

valuation studies. First, a strong brand provides a platform for new products and for licensing.

A  strong  brand  can  serve  as  an  umbrella  under  which  to  launch  new  products  or  to  license

existing ones. The strategic potential of a brand platform should be a part of measuring brand

equity. Second, a strong brand has a resiliency to endure crisis situations, periods of reduced

corporate support or shifts in consumer tastes. Thus, another important component of brand

equity is brand resiliency to survive difficult times. Third, strong brands provide resistance from

competitive attacks. A dominant brand name can be a barrier to entry into some markets. Thus,

brand dominance is the third strategic component of brand equity.

Strong  brands  in  a  product  category  have  obvious  value  to  the  trade,  as  well  as  to  the

firm.  Brand  equity  from  the  trade’s  perspective  is  measurable  in  brand  leverage  over  other

products in the market. This source of added value comes from easier acceptance and wider

distribution of a strong brand. Well-known consumer brands pay lower slotting fees and are

given more shelf facings for new products than weaker brands. Brand leverage also protects

against private labels. Less leverage means that market shares are eroded and less expensive

generic brands become dominant. There is evidence that distributors want brand names as a

means of making the product easier to manage in a number of respects: easier to handle, easi-

9 7

er to identify suppliers, easier to maintain quality standards, and easier to increase buyer pref-

erence.

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

Brand equity from an individual consumer’s perspective is reflected by the increase in the

strength of associations an individual has for a product by using the brand. Successful brand-

ing means lower uncertainty in purchasing. There is also less need for an extensive decision

making process on the part of the customer. Brands carry with them certain assurances of prod-

uct  quality  and  reliability  in  use.  Product  identification  in  large,  cluttered  supermarkets,  de-

partment stores or mass merchandising outlets is facilitated. There are also psychological ben-
efits to the customer using brands.  j

REFERENCES

AAKER, DAVID (1990) Brand Extensions: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly. Sloan Management Review

1990:4, 47–56.

AAKER, DAVID (1991) Managing Brand Equity. Capitalizing on the Value of a Brand Name. Free Press:

New York.

AAKER, DAVID (1992) The Value of Brand Equity. Journal of Business Strategy 1992:4, 27–32.

AAKER, DAVID (1996) Building Strong Brands. Free Press: New York.

AAKER, DAVID – KELLER, KEVIN (1990) Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions. Journal of Marketing

1990:1, 27–41.

AAKER,  DAVID  –  KELLER,  KEVIN  (1993)  Interpreting  Cross-Cultural  Replications  of  Brand  Extension

Research. International Journal of Research in Marketing 1993:1, 55–59.

AAKER, JENNIFER (1997) Dimensions of Brand Personality. Journal of Marketing Research 1997:8, 347–

356.

ARNOLD, DAVID (1992) The Handbook of Brand Management. The Economist Books: London.

ASSAEL, HENRY (1992) Consumer Behavior and Marketing Action. Kent Publishing Company: Boston.

BAGOZZI,  RICHARD  –  ROSA,  JOSE  –  CELLY,  KIRTI  –  CORONEL,  FRANCISCO  (1998)  Marketing

Management. Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River.

BARWISE, PATRICK (1993) Brand Equity: Snark of Boojum? International Journal of Research in Marketing

1993:1, 93–104.

BIRKIN, MICHAEL (1991) Brand Valuation. In: Understanding Brands, ed. by Don Cowley, 183–198. Kogan

Page: London.

BLACKETT, TOM (1991) The Valuation of Brands. Marketing, Intelligence and Planning 1991:1, 27–35.

BOUSH,  DAVID  –  LOKEN,  BARBARA  (1991)  A  Process-tracing  Study  of  Brand  Extension  Evaluation.

Journal of Marketing Research 1991:1, 16-28.

BRADLEY,  FRANK  (1995)  Marketing Management. Providing, Communicating and Delivering Value.

Prentice Hall: London.

BRONIARCZYK, SUSAN – ALBA, JOSEPH (1994) The Importance of the Brand in Brand Extension. Journal

of Marketing Research 1994:5, 214-228.

BURTON, SCOT – LICHTENSTEIN, DONALD – NETEMEYER, RICHARD – GARRETSON, JUDITH (1998)
A Scale for Measuring Attitude Toward Private Label Products and an Examination of Its Psychological
and Behavioral Correlates. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 1998:4, 293–306.

de CHERNATONY, LESLIE (1993) Categorizing Brands: Evolutionary Processes Underpinned by Two Key

Dimensions. Journal of Marketing Management 1993:2, 173–188.

9 8

de CHERNATONY, LESLIE – DALL’OLMO RILEY, FRANCESCA (1998a) Defining a ”Brand”: Beyond the

Literature with Experts’ Interpretations. Journal of Marketing Management 1998:5, 417–443.

de CHERNATONY, LESLIE – DALL’OLMO RILEY, FRANCESCA (1998b) Modelling the Components of the

Brand. European Journal of Marketing 1998:12, 1074–1090.

de CHERNATONY, LESLIE – DALL’OLMO RILEY, FRANCESCA – HARRIS, FIONA (1998) Criteria to Assess

Brand Success. Journal of Marketing Management 1998:7, 765–781.

M A N A G I N G   B R A N D   E Q U I T Y

de  CHERNATONY,  LESLIE  –  MCDONALD,  MALCOLM  (1992) Creating Powerful Brands. The Strategic
Route to Success in Consumer, Industrial and Service Markets. Butterworth-Heinemann: Oxford.

de  CHERNATONY,  LESLIE  –  MCWILLIAM,  GIL  (1990)  Appreciating  Brands  as  Assets  Through  Using  a

Two-Dimensional Model. International Journal of Advertising 1990:2, 111–119.

CHRISTOPHER,  MARTIN  –  PAYNE,  ADRIAN  –  BALLANTYNE,  DAVID  (1991) Relationship Marketing.

Bringing Quality, Customer Service and Marketing Together. Butterworth-Heinemann: Oxford.

CRIMMINS, JAMES (1992) Better Measurement and Management of Brand Value. Journal of Advertising

Research 1992:4, 11–19.

DEKIMPE, MARNIK – STEENKAMP, JAN-BENEDICT – MELLENS, MARTIN – ABEELE, PIET (1997) Decline
and Variability in Brand Loyalty. International Journal of Research in Marketing 1997:5, 405–420.

DICKSON, PETER (1994) Marketing Management. The Dryden Press: New York.

DOYLE, PETER (1998) Marketing Management and Strategy. Prentice Hall: London.

DUNCAN,  TOM  –  MORIARTY,  SANDRA  (1997) Driving Brand Value. Using Integrated Marketing to

Manage Profitable Stakeholder Relationships. McGraw-Hill: New York.

DUNCAN, TOM – MORIARTY, SANDRA (1998) IT’s Role in Managing Relationships and Building Brands.
In: Proceedings of the 6th International Colloquium in Relationship Marketing, ed.  by  Rod  Brodie,
164–172. Publications of the University of Auckland: Auckland.

EGAN, COLIN – GUILDING, CHRISTOPHER (1994) Dimensions of Brand Performance: Challenges for
Marketing Management and Managerial Accountancy. Journal of Marketing Management 1994:6, 449–
472.

FARQUHAR, PETER – HERR, PAUL – FAZIO, RUSSELL (1990) A Relational Model for Category Extensions

of Brands. Advances in Consumer Research 1990:17, 856–860.

FARQUHAR, PETER – IJIRI, YUJI (1993) A Dialogue on Momentum Accounting for Brand Management.

International Journal of Research in Marketing 1993:1, 77–92.

FARQUHAR, PETER (1990) Managing Brand Equity. Journal of Advertising Research 1990:4, RC7–RC12.

HANKINSON,  GRAHAM  –  COWKING,  PHILIPPA  (1993) Branding in Action. Cases and Strategies for

Profitable Brand Management. McGraw-Hill: London.

IND, NICHOLAS (1997) The Corporate Brand. Macmillan: Basingstoke.

JONES,  JOHN  (1986) What’s in a Name? Advertising and the Concept of Brands.  Gower  Publishing:

Aldershot.

KAMAKURA, WAGNER – RUSSELL, GARY (1993) Measuring Brand Value with Scanner Data. International

Journal of Research in Marketing 1993:1, 9–22.

KAPFERER, JEAN (1992) Strategic Brand Management. New Approaches to Creating and Evaluating Brand

Equity. Kogan Page: London.

KEEGAN,  WARREN  –  MORIARTY,  SANDRA  –  DUNCAN,  THOMAS  (1995)  Marketing.  Prentice  Hall:

Englewood Cliffs.

KELLER, KEVIN – AAKER, DAVID (1992) The Effects of Sequential Introduction of Brand Extensions. Journal

of Marketing Research 1992:1, 35–50.

KELLER, KEVIN (1993) Conceptualizing, Measuring and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity. Journal

of Marketing 1993:1, 1–22.

KELLER,  KEVIN  (1998) Strategic Brand Management. Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity.

Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River.

KERIN,  ROGER  –  SETHURAMAN,  RAJ  (1998)  Exploring  the  Brand  Value-Shareholder  Value  Nexus  for

Consumer Goods Companies. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 1998:4, 260–273.

KOTLER, PHILIP (1994) Marketing Management. Analysis, Planning, Implementation and Control. Prentice

Hall: Englewood Cliffs.

LOKEN, BARBARA – JOHN, DEBORAH (1993) Diluting Brand Beliefs: When Do Brand Extensions Have

a Negative Impact? Journal of Marketing 1993:3, 71–83.

MCWILLIAM,  GIL  (1993)  The  Effect  of  Brand  Typology  on  Brand  Extension  Fit. European Advances in

Consumer Research 1993:1, 485–491.

9 9

MOORE, JERI (1993) Building Brands Across Markets: Cultural Differences in Brand Relationships within
the European Community. In: Brand Equity & Advertising. Advertising’s Role in Building Strong Brands,
ed. by David Aaker – Alexander Biel, 31–49. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale.

L T A   1 / 9 9   •   P .   T U O M I N E N

PARK,  WHAN  –  MILBERG,  SANDRA  –  LAWSON,  ROBERT (1991)  Evaluation  of  Brand  Extensions:  The
Role  of  Product  Feature  Similarity  and  Brand  Concept  Consistency. Journal of Consumer Research
1991:2, 185–193.

PARK, WHAN – SRINIVASAN, VERN (1994) A Survey-Based Method for Measuring and Understanding

Brand Equity and Its Extendibility. Journal of Marketing Research 1994:2, 271–288.

PEARSON,  STEWART  (1996)  Building  Brands  Directly.  Creating  Business  Value  from  Customer

Relationships. Macmillan: Basingstoke.

RANGASWAMY,  ARVIND  –  BURKE,  RAYMOND  –  OLIVIA,  TERENCE  (1993)  Brand  Equity  and  the

Extendibility of Brand Names. International Journal of Research in Marketing 1993:1, 61–75.

ROUX, ELYETTE – LORANGE, FREDERIC (1993) Brand Extension Research: A Review. European Advances

in Consumer Research 1993:1, 492-500.

SAMUELSEN,  BENDIK  –  SANDVIK,  KÅRE  (1997)  The  Concept  of  Customer  Loyalty.  In:  26th EMAC
Conference Proceedings, Volume 3. Marketing: Progress, Prospects and Perspectives,  ed.  by  David
Arnott, Susan Bridgewater et al, 1122–1140. Publications of the University of Warwick: Coventry.
SATTLER, HENRIK – ZATLOUKAL, GRIT (1998) Success of Brand Extensions. In: 27th EMAC Conference
Proceedings. Marketing: Research and Practice. Track 4. Marketing Management and Communication,
ed. by Per Andersson, 97–107. Publications of the Stockholm School of Economics: Stockholm.

SAUNDERS, JOHN (1990) Brands and Valuations. International Journal of Advertising 1990:2, 95–110.

SULLIVAN, MARY (1992) Brand Extensions: When to Use Them? Management Science 1992:6, 793–806.

SUNDE,  LORRAINE  –  BRODIE,  RODERICK  (1993)  Consumer  Evaluations  of  Brand  Extensions:  Further

Empirical Results. International Journal of Research in Marketing 1993:1, 47–53.

SWAIT, JOFFRE – ERDEM, TULIN – LOUVIERE, JORDAN – DUBELAAR, CHRIS (1993) The Equalization
Price: A Measure of Consumer-perceived Brand Equity. International Journal of Research in Marketing
1993:1, 23–45.

VAN RAAIJ, FRED – SCHOONDERBEEK, WIM (1993) Meaning Structure of Brand Names and Extensions.

European Advances in Consumer Research 1993:1, 479–484.

100