ARTICLES

Building and Valuing Global
Brands in the Nonproﬁt Sector
Nathalie Laidler-Kylander, 
John A. Quelch, Bernard L. Simonin

Global nonprofit brands are the world’s new “super brands”
(Wootliff and Deri, 2001). Nonprofit organizations command
unprecedented levels of trust, and nonproﬁt brand valuations are
on par with major international corporations. Leaders and man-
agers of nonprofits face new challenges in the stewardship of
their brands. Based on current thinking in nonprofit manage-
ment and detailed interviews with close to one hundred execu-
tives of ten international nonprofit organizations, this article
draws strategic lessons on brand building and brand valuation
activities of international nonprofits. The multiple roles and
stakeholders that global nonprofit brands must address make
nonproﬁt brand building complex and challenging. In particu-
lar, differences between advocacy and relief organizations must
be explained. Despite the complexity, international nonprofit
organizations may have an advantage over for-proﬁts in lever-
aging public trust and brand communication. Advocacy organi-
zations in particular successfully link brand and cause to good
effect. The valuation of nonprofit brands is a new strategic
challenge with signiﬁcant appeal, but also signiﬁcant concerns
for international nonproﬁts. In addition to providing nonproﬁt
leaders and managers with a better understanding of brand-
building activities, imperatives, and best practices in the ﬁeld,
this article outlines the opportunities and threats associated with
the valuation of nonproﬁt brands.

THE WORLD OF NONPROFIT leaders and managers has changed

substantially over the past decades. The number of international
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) has skyrocketed,
fostering intense competition. Around 25 percent of the thirteen
thousand  international  NGOs  in  existence  today  were  created

NONPROFIT MANAGEMENT & LEADERSHIP, vol. 17, no. 3, Spring 2007
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/nml.149

© 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

253

254

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Global nonproﬁt
brands command
a high level of
consumer trust.

after 1990, and overall the number of international NGOs increased
by 19.3 percent between 1990 and 2000 (Eizenstat, 2004). New
forms of nonproﬁt organizations have emerged, and new technolog-
ical and communication capabilities have revolutionized the way
nonproﬁts interact with their publics (Andreasen and Kotler, 2002).
The forces of globalization have caused many nonproﬁt organizations
to become more international, and partnerships and alliances of all
types in increasing numbers have opened new frontiers and created
new challenges (Austin, 2000a). Concurrently, the roles of national
governments and the private sector have changed, as have the nature
of philanthropy, social needs, and complex emergencies (Lindenberg
and Bryant, 2001). This changing landscape has profoundly altered
the  mind-set  and  duties  of  nonprofit  managers  and  leaders,
propelling them into new competitive arenas where astute brand
stewardship can be a differential advantage.

Global nonprofit brands command a high level of consumer
trust. Global brands are deﬁned by Aaker and Joachimsthaler (1999)
as brands whose positioning, advertising strategy, personality, look,
and feel are in most respects the same from one country to another.
Edelman Public Relations conducts an annual study that asks respon-
dents to rate, on a nine-point scale, the degree to which they trust a
series of companies and organizations. In January 2004, the study
found that global nonproﬁt brands ranked remarkably high on brand
trust. In the United States, Amnesty International ranked as the thir-
teenth most trusted brand, coming in at 55 percent, behind compa-
nies such as UPS at 81 percent, Johnson & Johnson at 75 percent,
and Procter & Gamble at 70 percent. Equally important perhaps,
Amnesty’s brand trust increased from 36 percent in 2001 to 55 per-
cent in 2004. In Europe, global nonproﬁt brand trust is even greater,
with the Amnesty International brand coming in top place with
63 percent and the World Wildlife Fund coming in fourth place, just
behind Michelin and Microsoft at 59 percent and 57 percent, respec-
tively. Although the Edelman studies measure only brand trust, brand
value and trust are closely linked. James Burke, former CEO of
Johnson & Johnson, famously stated that “the value of a brand is the
value of the cumulative trust it has generated.” As Keller (2000)
notes, a brand is a promise kept, so trust is integral to delivering
brand value.

Nonprofit  brands  with  high  trust  scores  are  therefore  very
valuable. Wootliff and Deri (2001) further argue that “NGOs are no
longer perceived as small bands of activists but rather as the new
super brands” (p. 158). The relevance and visibility of major nonproﬁt
organizations have blossomed, and their brands have gained in both
trust and value. However, we still know relatively little about how
these brands are managed and valued. For example, do international
nonproﬁt organizations build their brands differently than interna-
tional for-profits? And what benefits can international nonprofits
leverage from building high brand value?

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

255

The growing interest in branding has captured the attention of
nonproﬁt leaders. A recent survey of nonproﬁt organizations in Illinois
revealed that enhancing the visibility and reputation of the organiza-
tion was a major challenge for 80 percent of nonproﬁts (Grønbjerg and
Child, 2003). We hope that this article can shed some additional
light on the strategic role and relevance of brands for international
nonproﬁts and help nonproﬁt leaders and managers in their under-
standing of brand-building activities and best practices in the ﬁeld.

Research Context and Approach
Although there is much excitement and interest in nonproﬁt brand-
ing, we found little research to explain the high brand trust levels
and values that Edelman described. We could ﬁnd few publications
that determine if and how nonproﬁt brand building differs from for-
profit brand building (Richie, Swami, and Weinberg, 1999) and no
research on the subject of nonproﬁt brand values and their potential
role. Much of the literature on nonproﬁt branding stresses the impor-
tance of the brand for a nonprofit organization and adopts brand-
building strategies directly from the for-profit world. To date, few
field-based studies have looked at nonprofit brands in depth to
answer some of the questions we have outlined.

Case study research has been found to be an effective method-
ology when there exists a paucity of knowledge and theory and
when  the  phenomenon  to  be  studied  is  broad  and  complex
(Bonoma, 1985). In addition, case studies, as a research methodol-
ogy, have proved useful for generating both theoretical and practi-
cal insights (Austin, 2000b). Therefore, we selected ten case studies
of international nonprofit organizations engaged in development,
relief, or advocacy work. These case studies reﬂect a variety of social
purpose, activities, country of origin, and stages of global branding
(see Table 1). Of the organizations studied, only BRAC was not
international in scope. In terms of brand visibility and awareness,
BRAC, ACCION, and Peacewinds were at the time of the study not
well known by the general public. The remaining organizations were
fully international, had strong brand awareness, and could be cate-
gorized as global brands (Aaker and Joachimsthaler, 1999).

Over two years, we conducted several waves of in-depth inter-
views with these organizations’ CEOs and general managers, country
managers and field directors, and headquarters staff and field per-
sonnel. Based on our probing of nearly one hundred key informants
and access to supplemental material from these ten organizations and
secondary  sources,  we  completed  a  set  of  detailed  case  studies
(Quelch and Laidler-Kylander, 2005). Our research focus was to
deepen our understanding in ﬁve related areas: (1) the prerequisites
to building successful nonproﬁt brands, (2) the comparison between
nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt brand building, (3) the conundrum of brand
valuation, (4) implications for brand stewardship of a relief and

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

256

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Table 1. Case Study Organizations

Organization

Number of
Interviewsa

Time Line

Main Issue

ACCION International

Eight

October–November 2002

Amnesty International

Six

January–February 2003

BRAC

Sixteen

March 2003

Brand evolution and
awareness
Brand management and 
leadership
Creating and sustaining
the growing brand
Rebranding for alignment
Brand valuation

Five
Six

October–November 2002
October–November 2003

Twelve

November–December 2003

Protecting the brand

CARE USA
Habitat for Humanity 
International
International Federation 
of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies
Médecins Sans Frontières

Five

September–October 2003

Peacewinds 
Unicef

Six
Twelve

December–February 2003
September–October 2002

World Wildlife Fund

Eight

September–October 2002

The brand as the
organizational glue
Expanding internationally
Rebranding for organizational
change
Leveraging the brand

aInterviews were conducted with the CEO or general manager, country managers and ﬁeld directors, and headquarters
staff and ﬁeld personnel.

development or an advocacy focus, and (5) the “global” meaning of
global nonproﬁt brands.

This article reﬂects the efforts of a ﬁrst stage of research into the
ﬁeld of nonproﬁt branding and focuses on the stages of description,
classiﬁcation, and, to a limited extent, theory building, as deﬁned by
Bonoma (1985). The following sections address each of the areas we
have highlighted and seek to weave together a synthesis of current
thinking on nonproﬁt branding and practical insights gained from the
case studies.

Building Successful Nonproﬁt Brands
Among the top three skills identiﬁed as critical for future nonproﬁt
leaders is the ability to “build your organization’s brand” (Brunham,
2002, p. 34). Other authors add that brands are vital internal instru-
ments for galvanizing nonprofit organizations and that the most
important advantage a nonproﬁt has is its brand, deﬁned as a name,
symbol, logo, personality, or promise that immediately tells the com-
munity and the world who you are (Birkin, 2003; Bosc, 2002).

According  to  Aaker  (1996),  the  keys  to  successful  brand 
building are to understand how to develop a brand identity, to know
what the brand stands for, and to express that identity effectively. 

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

257

The  following  sections  integrate  these  existing  brand-building
concepts with additional insights from the ﬁeld.

Developing the Brand Identity
Developing a brand identity requires both the creation of a brand
meaning and the development of a clear brand positioning. Creating
brand meaning involves three sequential phases of consumer com-
munications. The first phase requires communicating to the con-
sumer a definition of the function, quality, and roots of the brand.
The second phase communicates who the users are and the use of
the brand. The third phase associates enduring values with the brand
in order to create emotional connections. Amnesty International, for
example, successfully deﬁned its core function as acting on behalf of
and for prisoners of conscience. The organization’s prospective mem-
bers were people not just concerned about this issue; they were
willing to take concrete action through letter-writing campaigns. The
result was a brand with clear values and strong emotional connec-
tions with its membership base.

Developing a clear brand position also involves specifying three
components: a target market, a superiority claim, and a reason why.
For Unicef, the brand positioning is, “For people who want to make
a difference, Unicef is the champion of rights for all the world’s chil-
dren, with the knowledge, certainty, and resources to get things done.”
Although this positioning statement identifies the target market
segment and superiority claim, it does not perhaps provide that
compelling a reason “why.”

When positioning an organization, it is useful to think about the
importance of a brand’s benefits in driving consumers’ choice, and
the organization’s ability to differentiate itself relative to the compe-
tition. Table 2 depicts these two dimensions, and we argue that an
organization should strive to position its brand in the top left quad-
rant, the “jugular” benefits quadrant. (For a discussion of benefit
positioning, see Kotler, 2003.) Here the beneﬁts offered by the brand
are both important to consumer choice and differentiate the organi-
zation clearly from the competition. The other quadrants all imply
substantially weaker brand positions.

Table 2. Position Against Jugular Beneﬁts

Importance

Differentiation

Differ signiﬁcantly
among alternatives
Do not differ
signiﬁcantly among
alternatives

Very Important 
to Choice

Not Very Important
to Choice

Jugular beneﬁts

Fringe beneﬁts

Defensive beneﬁts

Irrelevant beneﬁts

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

Developing a
brand identity
requires both the
creation of a
brand meaning
and the
development of a
clear brand
positioning.

258

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Sometimes the
branding exercise
itself can 
give clarity to 
a nonproﬁt’s
mission.

Brand identity is the perception an organization seeks to create.
Identity  often  differs  from  brand  image,  which  is  the  existing
perception of the brand in the minds of consumers or other stake-
holders. Any gap between brand perception and reality may require
rebranding or brand revitalization efforts (Arnold, 1992). Brands do
age, and perceptions of an organization are not always in line with
the organization’s current activities. Therefore, attention to brand
identity and brand image and the difference between the two can
help guide brand-building efforts. Many executives we interviewed
expressed some concern about what they perceived as discrepancies
between their external brand images and desired brand identities.
For two of the organizations, CARE and Unicef, this led to multiyear,
in-depth rebranding efforts. For ACCION, BRAC, and, to a lesser
extent, Amnesty International, branding was not a recognized orga-
nizational activity. As an executive at Amnesty International conﬁded,
“We don’t actively manage our brand.”

Revitalizing the Brand
Developing a revised brand identity can be a long and complex
process requiring input from many stakeholders. Much like strate-
gic planning, the process of modifying a brand identity can be of
tremendous value to an organization. Brand identity flows from the
organization’s mission, analysis of customers and their needs, and
recognition of the organization’s strengths, weaknesses, and core
characteristics. Sometimes the branding exercise itself can give
clarity to a nonprofit’s mission. Different approaches can be used
to create a new brand identity. A brand footprint can be elabo-
rated to characterize the brand in terms of human characteristics,
such as visionary or dynamic, and the core values it espouses.
A brand essence can capture the form, personality, differentiation, and
source of authority of a brand (Aaker and Joachimsthaler, 2000),
and a brand model can combine the internal vision for the brand and
the external needs of the brand’s customers. The older, more estab-
lished nonprofit organizations in our study seemed to have looked
into  their  brand  identities  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  newer
organizations. CARE, Unicef, Habitat for Humanity International,
the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, and the World Wildlife Fund had all used brand foot-
prints, brand essences, or brand models at some point in their
brand analyses.

Expressing the Brand
Communicating a brand identity requires translating the brand
identity to a tagline and logo, or modifying these to reflect the new
brand identity. This is often the most controversial and politically
difficult aspect of branding. In 2001, CARE developed an entire
new brand identity, logo, and colors following a two-step rebranding
process. Communicating the new brand proved to be challenging.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

259

In CARE’s direct-mail fundraising strategy, management was torn
between keeping the old well-known logo and tagline to ensure
adequate financial returns, or using the new brand that they knew
would result in a lower rate of fundraising. CARE’s management
decided that they needed to invest in the new brand and work to
attract the new pool of donors that had been identified in the devel-
opment of their new brand identity. CARE’s approach was therefore
to “brand-raise” with the direct-mail effort: fundraise and at the
same time raise brand awareness.

Protecting the Brand
Protecting a brand is a key part of brand management. Strong
brands  are  built  slowly,  with  substantial  investments  in  time,
money, and energy. However, a brand can be easily destroyed, and
nonprofit brands, which rely heavily on trust, are particularly
vulnerable. The negative impacts of scandals and criticisms, asso-
ciation with undesirable corporations, or simply the dilution of the
brand through too many partnerships or the use of different logos
and taglines throughout the world can weaken a brand and sub-
stantially reduce its value. The publicity surrounding the misuse of
funds by the American Red Cross following the attacks of Septem-
ber 11, 2001, for example, had a negative impact on the fundrais-
ing ability of other Red Cross societies around the world. The broad
and sometimes haphazard use of the World Wildlife Fund panda
logo on everything from clothing to fresh bread has diluted this
brand somewhat. However, only two organizations in the study—
Unicef and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies—indicated any real concern with brand protec-
tion  issues.  This  finding  was  surprising  given  the  importance
of brand protection in the literature and the role of many of these
brands  in  fundraising.  One  possibility  is  that  the  majority  of
the organizations studied had little conscious awareness of the
implications of brand dilution and erosion.

Three Key Roles of Nonproﬁt Brands
In addition to the general brand-building activities, some speciﬁc fea-
tures and characteristics of nonproﬁt organizations directly inﬂuence
brand building.

The ﬁrst key role of a brand is to reﬂect the mission of the non-
proﬁt organization. Nonproﬁts are mission-driven organizations that
lack the common objective shared by for-profit companies. For a
nonproﬁt organization, the mission is its very reason for existence.
Oster (1995) argues that although both for-profits and nonprofits
manage their organizations on the basis of mission, the role of the
mission for a nonproﬁt is substantially more important. The mission
not only creates trust among clients and donors and helps define
organizational boundaries and motivate staff; it also helps in perfor-
mance evaluations.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

A brand can be
easily destroyed,
and nonprofit
brands, which
rely heavily 
on trust, are
particularly
vulnerable.

260

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Bosc (2002) suggests that “a powerful brand that portrays the
mission can increase funding, public awareness, consumer confi-
dence, and donor support. In addition, it can unite an organization’s
employees and supporters around your mission and goals” (p. 29).
Successful global nonprofit brands capture and communicate the
mission clearly. As an organization’s mission evolves, its brand iden-
tity and brand image must be revitalized to reflect these mission
changes. Our research supports the central role mission plays for
nonproﬁt organizations. Indeed, all the organizations studied empha-
sized the critical nature of their missions—both for the organizations
themselves and for deﬁning their brands.

The second key role of a nonprofit brand is to build trust. In
many nonprofits, there is a disconnect between the purchaser and
the user of the organization’s product or services. In for-proﬁt orga-
nizations, the purchaser and the user of the product are often the
same. Sometimes family members and friends may inﬂuence the pur-
chase decision, but a direct feedback loop also exists between the
purchaser and the company. If the customer experience is positive,
sales and market share are likely to increase, resulting in a positive
ﬁnancial reward for the company.

For many nonprofits, however, purchasers are individual and
institutional donors, and users are the recipients of the goods or ser-
vices that the nonproﬁt provides. Although users may choose not to
accept the goods or services or may be required to pay a token fee for
services, the relationship between the recipient and the nonprofit
organization is not a market-based transaction. Rarely does a direct
feedback loop exist to help the purchaser gauge the organization’s
success or the merit of its products and services. Instead, purchasers
must rely on their trust in the nonproﬁt’s ability to carry out its mis-
sion successfully. They cannot, as is the case with for-proﬁts, rely on
firsthand experience in order to decide whether to repeat their
purchase and continue funding the nonprofit’s operations. Donor
trust is therefore critical, and “brands facilitate the development
of trust between a nonproﬁt and its constituencies” (Richie, Swami,
and Weinberg, 1999, p. 2).

Finally, a nonprofit brand must address multiple stakeholders.
Some observers believe that nonprofit organizations are more com-
plex to manage than for-profits (Letts, Ryan, and Grossman, 1998).
Much of this complexity stems from a nonprofit’s broader spec-
trum of stakeholders and brand audiences. A nonprofit brand must
address at least six stakeholder groups: individual donors, institu-
tional donors, employees, volunteers, beneficiaries, and potential
partners. In addition, nonprofits can be viewed as having upstream
activities  focused  on  fundraising  and  downstream  activities
focused on program implementation. A single brand must encom-
pass  both  sets  of  activities  and  address  their  corresponding
stakeholders.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

261

Top management at Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors With-
out Borders) acknowledges that the brand is crucial in fundraising,
where more than 80 percent of funds are derived from individual
donors. Recognition of the brand enables the organization to imple-
ment its mission while ensuring the safety of its volunteers in the
field and providing the credibility necessary to bear witness and
provide emergency medical relief. Médecins Sans Frontières is
an international organization composed of autonomous country
sections, where volunteers and staff serve for only a few years. Our
interviews suggest that the Médecins Sans Frontières brand, itself
a reflection of the organization’s mission, provides the backbone for
organizational continuity and culture and that the shared Médecins
Sans Frontières brand acts as a form of glue, binding together
the country sections. Seven of the ten organizations in our study
recognized to some extent the multiple roles their brands play.
ACCION, BRAC, and Amnesty International seemed to have spent
less time thinking about the role of their brands. For ACCION,
consumer fundraising had traditionally been less of an issue and
the organization was well respected within the microfinance com-
munity in which it operated. BRAC’s modest approach of “letting
our actions speak for themselves” contrasted with the promotional
emphasis and global branding approach of the key competitor,
Grameen Bank, despite the fact that it could have leveraged what
in Bangladesh is a household name.

As summarized in Figure 1, a nonprofit brand must reflect the
current mission of the organization, build trust with consumers, and
address multiple stakeholders by reﬂecting both upstream and down-
stream activities. The brand must also be ﬂexible enough to embrace
three evolving objectives: enhancing fundraising, ensuring the imple-
mentation of the organization’s mission, and expanding the future
scope of the organization.

Figure 1. Roles and Objectives of Global Nonproﬁt Brands

Reflect the current
mission

(cid:1)

Roles

Build trust to
overcome
user-purchaser
disconnect

(cid:1)

Address multiple
stakeholders and
reflect upstream and
downstream activities

Objectives
1. Enhance fundraising
2. Ensure mission implementation
3. Expand future scope

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

A nonproﬁt brand
must reﬂect the
current mission of
the organization,
build trust with
consumers, and
address multiple
stakeholders by
reﬂecting both
upstream and
downstream
activities.

262

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Similarities and Differences Between Nonproﬁt
and For-Proﬁt Brand Building
Many similarities exist between nonprofits and for-profits in terms
of the components and challenges of building strong brands. Both
face intensive competition for share of mind, share of wallet, and
share of heart. Brand competition is increasingly a reality for non-
proﬁts. As their traditional sources of government funding diminish,
they are turning to individual donors to ensure greater independence
and are thereby becoming more credible advocates.

For both nonproﬁts and for-proﬁts, fundamental organizational
values drive the brand essence and positioning and form the basis of
brand communications. Simple brand names, the global consistency
of the brand presentation across multiple markets and geographies,
and the use of a single brand as opposed to multiple brand names are
characteristics of a strong brand-focused organization in both the
nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt arenas. As Murley (2004) suggests, the “right
name opens doors, invites people in, and sets the stage for the mar-
keting process to begin” (p. 21). He argues that the brand is the
“single most important marketing decision you can make” (p. 21).
As organizations and their environments change, brands need to be
revitalized so that brand image, or perception in the market, is more
closely aligned with brand identity, itself an aspirational reﬂection of
the organization. This holds true for both nonproﬁts and for-proﬁts.
Both nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations have seen an increase
in the use of brand alliances and co-marketing programs (Wymer and
Samu, 2003). Negotiating such arrangements requires knowledge of
a brand’s ﬁnancial value and is equally important for nonproﬁt and
for-proﬁt organizations, as we shall see in subsequent sections of this
article. Half of the ten organizations studied were engaged in brand
alliances with the private sector. The World Wildlife Fund, in par-
ticular, had developed detailed partnership guidelines and objectives
and allocated substantial resources to the management of these part-
nerships. Unicef, Habitat for Humanity International, the Interna-
tional Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and CARE
also engaged in multiple partnerships with for-profit corporations.
BRAC had perhaps gone one step further by developing its own
commercial businesses and brand.

A major difference between nonproﬁt and for-proﬁt brand build-
ing stems from the importance of the mission. International non-
profits  are  mission  driven,  but  they  often  have  broad  or  lofty
missions  that  can  make  brand  positioning  difficult.  A  mission
defined too narrowly runs the risk of being insufficiently engaging
and motivating. A mission deﬁned too broadly, however, can encour-
age mission creep (an unintended extension of the mission) and an
unclear brand position, which could result in brand dilution and
confusion. As Allen Grossman, former CEO of Outward Bound,
notes, “The difficulty is often deciding who not to serve with the

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

263

mission.  Often,  brand  dilution  comes  from  adopting  multiple
beneﬁciaries.” Consistency between mission and message is of great
importance for nonproﬁts. Baker (2004) notes: “The best nonproﬁt
brands today are built on two things. First, doing excellent and
trustworthy work, and second, presenting the same single consis-
tent message over many years.”

Given the complex stakeholder mix and the multiple roles that
a global nonproﬁt brand must play, brand management of nonprof-
its runs the risk of trying to be all things to all people, which under-
mines the potential for brand clarity and consistency. The use of
acronyms rather than descriptive names is one approach used fre-
quently to add flexibility to a brand’s positioning. Despite the fact
that the vast majority of nonprofits rely on acronyms rather than
their full names, Murley (2004) believes that “using acronyms is
rarely a good marketing ploy” (p. 21). He notes that “over 90% of
nonproﬁt organizations introduce themselves on their Web sites by
their acronyms” and believes that this is a mistake. “For most non-
profits,” he adds, “it makes no sense to reinforce an acronym that
holds no meaning for potential audiences. The acronym alone doesn’t
communicate a market position” (p. 21). Three of the organizations
studied—World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the International Federation
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), and Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF)—routinely used these acronyms rather than
their full names. For three others (BRAC, CARE, and Unicef) the
acronyms had essentially replaced the organizations’ original names.
For Amnesty International (AI), the name and acronym were used
interchangeably, but Habitat for Humanity International (HFHI) 
used the acronym only internally. Only Peacewinds and ACCION
International did not use an acronym.

Compared to many international for-proﬁt companies, interna-
tional nonproﬁt organizations have highly decentralized organizational
structures with little or low control by headquarters. This, coupled
with little formal hierarchy and a consensus-building culture valued
by many individuals choosing to work for nonprofit organizations,
makes the implementation of a single strong global brand identity
particularly challenging. In our case studies on CARE and Unicef, the
implementation  of  a  rebranding  initiative  proved  to  be  a  highly
contentious and multiyear endeavor. Any attempt to modify the brand
logo in particular triggered an outpouring of pent-up concerns about
the nonproﬁt’s mission, values, and resource allocation.

Many international nonproﬁt organizations profess resistance to
and skepticism of so-called commercial techniques, including brand
building and advertising. Nonproﬁt leaders and managers sometimes
question the cost-benefit of investing in brand-building activities,
particularly when this might direct funds from programs to reach
beneﬁciaries.

Although both nonprofit and for-profit brands use media and
celebrity endorsements, some nonprofits, particularly advocacy

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

Brand
management of
nonproﬁts runs
the risk of trying
to be all things 
to all people.

264

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Nurturing a
strong global
nonproﬁt brand
requires patience,
consensus
building, and 
the ability to
manage a greater
degree of
complexity.

organizations such as Amnesty International, have successfully
linked their brand with a specific cause. These organizations, whose
very mission is to advocate and communicate on specific issues,
may have an inherent advantage over development and relief orga-
nizations and for-profit companies in brand positioning and brand
communication. Advocacy organizations are both focused and
relentless in their communications, whereas humanitarian organi-
zations tend to kick in when there is a crisis requiring a public
donor response.

Trust is critical for nonproﬁts and may give their brands a head
start in building their brand images with the general public. The lack
of stock ownership means that the managers of nonproﬁts have no
reason not to do the right thing, resulting in greater public trust. The
lack of stock ownership, however, has also been blamed for the inad-
equacy of incentives for many nonprofit managers to be efficient
(Speckbacher, 2003).

Many brand-building fundamentals apply equally to both non-
profits and for-profits, but nurturing a strong global nonprofit
brand requires patience, consensus building, and the ability to
manage  a  greater  degree  of  complexity.  Table  3  highlights  the
similarities and differences between nonprofits and for-profits in
brand building.

Table 3. Brand-Building Similarities and Differences 
Between Nonproﬁts and For-Proﬁts

Similarities

Differences

High levels of brand competition
Brand values help guide the
development of a brand essence,
which ﬂows into brand 
positioning and communication
Simple brand names work best
Global marketing consistency is key
Power of single brands
Rise of brand alliances and
partnerships
Need for brand revitalization
Importance of brand valuation

Broad mission in nonproﬁts risks
brand dilution and confusion
Complex stakeholder mix and
multiple brand roles suggest that 
the nonproﬁt brand must be
multifaceted, yet internally 
consistent
The decentralized, consensus-
building culture of nonproﬁts 
can make brand implementation
harder
Resistance to and skepticism 
of investing in brand-building 
activities
Ability to link brand and cause to
provide brand communication
advantages
Nonproﬁts operate in trust markets,
giving their brands a head start

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

265

Brand Building and Brand Valuation
Brand valuation is the determination of the financial worth of an
organization’s brand as an intangible asset. Initially used in the 1980s
to help with ascertaining a company’s value for merger and acquisi-
tion negotiations, “the value of acquired brands can now be put
on the balance sheets of acquiring companies in the UK, France,
Australia, New Zealand and to a lesser extent, companies in the
U.S.A.” (Lindemann, 2004, pp. 30–31).

More recently, brand valuation has been applied to a number
of major nonprofit brands such as the United Way, the American
Cancer Society, and PBS. This focus on nonprofit brand valuation,
and the surprisingly high resulting valuations, have increased
attention to the brand-building efforts of major nonprofit organi-
zations. Although several of the organizations we studied expressed
interest in brand valuation, at the time of the study only one orga-
nization, Habitat for Humanity International, had conducted a full
brand valuation. This valuation, conducted by Interbrand, had
resulted in a brand value estimate in 2001 of $1.8 billion, the same
valuation at the time as Starbucks Coffee (Quelch, Austin, and
Laidler-Kylander, 2004).

A number of different brand valuation approaches for companies
exist, but the most widely used ones are based on a prediction of the
future cash ﬂows generated by, and directly attributable to, a speciﬁc
brand. Interbrand has modiﬁed this approach to develop a method-
ology for the valuation of nonproﬁt brands based on the future value
of funds raised less expenses, discounted to reflect brand strength
(Doyle, 2000). Specifically, revenues, including cash and in-kind
donations, are forecast for the future (typically for ﬁve or ten years
out). The administrative costs associated with raising the funds and
managing the programs are deducted, resulting in the funds that
“pass through to beneﬁciaries.” The percentage of these pass-through
funds that are attributable to the brand, based on the extent to which
different business drivers are dependent on the brand, is then calcu-
lated. Finally, a discount rate reﬂective of brand strength and based
on seven specific criteria developed by Interbrand is applied to the
projected ﬂows attributable to the brand to arrive at a current brand
value. These seven criteria are market (growth), stability (customer
loyalty), leadership (market share), internationality (worldwide
appeal), trend (consistent growth), support (consistent marketing
support), and protection (trademarks).

A nonproﬁt can beneﬁt from knowing the value of its brand by
extracting greater value from corporate partners, creating alliances,
and advocating with conﬁdence. In the case of Habitat for Human-
ity International, the high value of the brand came as a surprise that
both increased management commitment to building equity for the
brand and improved partner quality, exclusivity, and continuity.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

266

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Although many
nonproﬁt leaders
believe that
people are their
organization’s
most valuable
asset, we would
argue that 
for many
international
nonproﬁts, their
brand is the most
valuable asset
they possess.

Other  benefits  of  undergoing  a  brand  valuation  include
increased respect and resources for brand-building activities as well
as the ability to require greater brand logo and slogan discipline
throughout the international organization. The brand valuation
process itself highlights key brand value drivers, enabling a non-
profit to focus future brand-building efforts by providing informa-
tion about a speciﬁc brand’s strengths and weaknesses. Regular and
successive brand valuations can serve to monitor and measure the
impact of marketing and brand-building activities over time. Brands
with high values can help attract employees and increase employee
pride and retention, as well as donor and volunteer motivation.
Although  many  nonprofit  leaders  believe  that  people  are  their
organization’s most valuable asset, we would argue that for many
international nonproﬁts, their brand is the most valuable asset they
possess. Knowledge of this value can help create leverage with
policymakers, but also places extra responsibility on the nonprofit
CEO as brand steward.

We also believe that in the future, brands will commonly be
valued and carried on the balance sheets of nonproﬁt organizations
in the United States, as suggested by Lindemann (2004). In this case,
the intangible asset that the brand represents could be used as col-
lateral for loans. Brand value rankings are common in the for-proﬁt
sector and generate considerable interest and excitement. Brand value
rankings for nonproﬁts would be one way to compare and grade dis-
parate nonprofit organizations where comparables such as prof-
itability and share price do not currently exist.

Public knowledge of a high nonprofit brand value, however,
could result in donor and volunteer demotivation. Small donors
might no longer believe that their contributions are either needed or
likely to make a difference. This, we were told, was the main reason
that the American Cancer Society does not disclose Interbrand’s
assessment of the value of its brand. Some are concerned that using
a high brand value to exploit corporate partnerships may increase a
nonproﬁt’s dependency on corporate funding, at the expense of indi-
vidual donors. Others worry that an “obsession” with brand value
will distract a nonproﬁt from its mission and issues of mission link-
age. Mason (1992), for example, is concerned that “such activities
may commercialize nonprofits and divert their energies from their
primary mission” (p. 30).

Brand valuation for nonprofits is a reality and will continue to
gain momentum as the seduction of a single financial number by
which nonproﬁts can be ranked takes hold. However, many concerns
and outstanding questions exist. The linkages between brand trust,
specific brand-building activities, and brand value require further
research. The possibility of behavior that does not further the mis-
sion stemming from a focus on brand and brand values is a valid con-
cern. Finally, in transferring brand valuation techniques from the

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

267

for-proﬁt world, we need to determine which aspects of the existing
method are appropriate and which are not. It appears that new brand
valuation models are needed for nonproﬁt organizations.

Many concerns exist with both the Interbrand methodology for
valuing nonproﬁt brands and the concept and use of brand valuation
itself. Interbrand’s current methodology does not take into account
the value of volunteer time and therefore underestimates the value
of a brand that attracts volunteer commitments. As a result, “Northern”
NGOs  might  appear  erroneously  as  even  more  valuable  than
“Southern” NGOs. In addition, measuring the percentage of revenues
passed through to beneﬁciaries does not measure the efﬁciency with
which nonproﬁts implement their missions, nor does it capture the
impact or value that they provide.

Table 4 summarizes the potential beneﬁts and possible concerns
of brand valuation for nonprofit brands. The relationship between
brand building and brand valuation is direct, codependent, and
mutually reinforcing. Arozian (2003) argues that “branding is a way
to establish a strategic perception of a nonprofit’s value among a
range of constituencies” (p. 9). A strong, consistent brand-building
effort that results in a clear, well-positioned, and highly trusted and
recognized brand will also generate a high brand valuation over
time. A detailed brand valuation can reveal clear priorities and
actions for future brand-building activities. Successive brand valu-
ations can help monitor and assess brand-building efforts, thereby
helping to ﬁne-tune or validate a nonproﬁt’s speciﬁc brand-building
activities.

Table 4. Potential Beneﬁts and Concerns of Brand Valuation 
for Nonproﬁt Brands

Beneﬁts

Concerns

Greater value from corporate 
partners, alliances, and policymakers
Increased respect and resources for 
brand-building activities
Greater logo and slogan discipline
Elucidation of key brand value 
drivers and future brand-building 
activities
Monitoring and impact measurement
of brand-building activities
Recruitment of employees, increasing
employee pride and retention
Motivation of donors and volunteers
Increase in leverage with policymakers

Value of volunteer time not
accounted for
Brand valuation does not measure
efﬁciency or impact
Public knowledge of brand values
may demotivate donors and 
volunteers
Increased dependency on corporate
funding
Maintain bias toward established
Northern NGOs
Distraction from the core mission
No single, standardized method 
accepted

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

A detailed brand
valuation can
reveal clear
priorities and
actions for future
brand-building
activities.

268

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

For advocacy
organizations in
the nonproﬁt
sector, brand
ownership lies
principally in the
hands of its own
members.

Relief and Development Organizations and
Advocacy Organizations: Implications for 
Brand Building
Our research also highlights some fundamental differences between
nonproﬁt organizations focused on relief and those focused on advo-
cacy. In a brainstorming session with ecumenical leaders in 2003, key
characteristics and descriptors for these two types of organizations
were developed (see Table 5). These fundamental differences have
an important impact on the brand-building characteristics of these
two groups of organizations.

Advocacy organizations such as Amnesty International and the
World Wildlife Fund tend to be membership organizations, relying
heavily on their own members’ ﬁnancial contributions through mem-
bership dues and active participation as volunteers. They prefer to
be independent of government or corporate funding to ensure that
they can carry out their advocacy roles objectively and credibly.
Advocacy group members are the primary consumers and tend to be
highly involved in their organizations, viewing their role as one of
participating in a club. The decision to become a member is often
planned and scheduled over time. Organizational success is measured
through the ability to generate change (often political) and, increas-
ingly, the ability to effectively network with other organizations to
do so (Lindenberg and Bryant, 2001). The basis of consumer trust
stems from the organization’s perceived purity and impartiality as
well as the worthiness of the cause and mission in the eyes of the
consumer. Brands are “owned by the consumer in that they only exist
in the minds of the consumers themselves” (Temporal, 2002, p. 14).
For advocacy organizations in the nonproﬁt sector, brand ownership
lies principally in the hands of its own members.

Table 5. Key Characteristics of Relief and Development
Organizations and Advocacy Organizations

Relief and Development

Charity
Reactive
One-off
Emotional
Worthy
Older
Government funds
Operations focused
Decentralized
Easier to manage
Easier to like and support

Advocacy

Movement
Proactive
Sustainable
Cerebral
Edgy
Younger
Individual donors
Strategy and operations
Centralized
Harder to manage
Higher reputation risk

Note: This table was developed with the help of participants of an executive education
program for ecumenical leaders hosted by the Harvard Divinity School in June 2003.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

269

For relief and development organizations such as the Interna-
tional Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Médecins
Sans Frontières, Unicef, and CARE, periodic donors (rather than
members) are considerably less involved in the organization on a
continuous basis. Their donations are infrequent and more likely
to be impulse driven, often in reaction to a humanitarian crisis or
advertised need. Organizational success is measured by program
performance, and consumer (donor) trust depends mainly on the
organization’s global reputation to spend resources wisely and effec-
tively. Brand ownership lies in the hands of both individual and insti-
tutional donors, although the role of the individual donor for most
international nonprofits is increasing as institutional funding from
government organizations becomes more limited. Based on the above
observations drawn from our ﬁeld work, Table 6 summarizes brand-
building characteristics for relief and development organizations and
advocacy organizations.

Many of the traditional relief and development organizations we
studied have moved, or have at least started moving, into advocacy
work. They need a greater fundraising focus on individual donors to
ensure their independence and impartiality and will have to increase
donor involvement and target clearly different donor segments. We
believe that a brand that has a proactive strategy, rather than simply
reacting to crisis, will have a better chance of attracting new, more
involved donors. Organizational success and continued funding will
require impact measures and the ability to generate sustainable
change. In order to reduce financial dependence on humanitarian
crises to trigger donations, a concerted effort to move donors to
membership status is required. BRAC stands out as an organization
attempting to gain financial independence by moving into profit-
generating activities linked to its development projects. As such, it
is unique in its ability to increase the effectiveness of advocacy work.

Table 6. Brand-Building Characteristics for Relief and 
Development Organizations and Advocacy Organizations

Relief and Development

Advocacy

Consumer 
characteristics

Donor is the customer
Lower involvement

Infrequent, impulsive

Member is the customer
Participation in a club
Higher involvement
Planned, time-released

Donations
(purchase decision)
Criteria for 
organizational 
success and brand 
trust
Principal brand 
owners

Program performance
Nonproﬁt halo
Global reputation

Political performance
and network 
Purity and impartiality

Individual and 
institutional donors

Members

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

270

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Figure 2. Moving the Relief and Development Brand 
Toward an Advocacy Brand

Relief/development
brand

Increase number of
individual donors and
their involvement

Increase planned
donations
by memberships

Develop a proactive
rather than reactive
brand strategy

Protect and
nurture the
brand’s reputation

Advocacy brand

Finally, since purity and impartiality are critical to brand trust
for advocacy brands, an even greater emphasis on protecting the
brand’s reputation is necessary. Figure 2 summarizes suggested
actions for migrating relief and development brands into advocacy
brands.

Global Brands
Aaker and Joachimsthaler (1999) advance four fundamental princi-
ples for effective global brand leadership in the corporate world:
(1) stimulate  the  sharing  of  best  practices  and  insights  across
countries, (2) support a common global brand-planning process,
(3) assign  managerial  responsibility  to  generate  cross-country
synergies and to reduce local bias, and (4) execute brilliant brand-
building strategies.

Our study endorses these criteria in the world of nonprofits.
(See Figure 3 for a mapping of the case studies on a national to global
scale.) The ﬁrst principle, the sharing of best practices and manage-
rial insights, falls under the more general theme of the learning
organization (see Marquardt, 1996; Swieringa and Wierdsma, 1992).
The learning organization requires an organizational culture that both
encourages the codifying and sharing of knowledge and does not
reject experimentation for fear of failure. The International Federa-
tion of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies recently implemented
the National Society Self-Assessment program to monitor and provide
support to its national members in achieving a set of organizational
best practices defined as the “characteristics of a well-functioning
national  society.”  Self-assessment  coupled  with  peer  review  by
other national  societies  ensures  that  all  members  focus  on  the
governance and self-monitoring standards that will strengthen and
protect the movement’s overall brand throughout the International

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

271

Figure 3. Case Study Organizations Mapped by Extent of Global
and Advocacy Characteristics

Global

National

1

4

3

5

Relief

2

6

7

8

10

9

Advocacy

Note: Circle size indicates relative organization size as reﬂected by revenues.
1, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies; 2, CARE; 3,
ACCION; 4, Habitat for Humanity International; 5, Peacewinds; 6, BRAC; 7, Unicef; 8,
Médicins Sans Frontières; 9, World Wildlife Fund; 10, Amnesty International

Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies network. BRAC
has been referred to as a quintessential learning organization with an
organizational culture that promotes risk taking and experimenta-
tion. The organization has reﬁned the use of pilot projects to iron out
difficulties and accelerate learning, before scaling up development
programs to spectacularly successful effect. Finally, the World Wildlife
Fund often acts in a consulting capacity, monitoring and enhancing
the environmental efforts of partner companies and sharing best
practices across organizations.

Initiating and institutionalizing a common global brand-planning
process, the second principle, presents a major challenge for inter-
national nonproﬁts, given the scope of activities and the number and
location of relevant stakeholders. The first time such a planning
exercise was undertaken systematically in both the CARE and Unicef
organizations, it had both a traumatic and therapeutic effect. The
trauma arose from realizing how complex and unfocused the overall
organization had become, particularly with respect to its branding
activities and positioning. Fears of change and resentment surfaced
with the advent of more professional management of marketing activ-
ities. When CARE initiated its brand identity and strategy formula-
tion program, for instance, brand was considered a dirty word by
many in the organization. In addition to these two examples, five
other organizations had started to think about global branding as an
organizationwide issue and had spent time and effort attempting to
harmonize their brands.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

272

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

We believe that
rebranding sends
a strong signal
about the need
for cohesiveness
and integration
throughout the
organization.

We believe that rebranding sends a strong signal about the need
for cohesiveness and integration throughout the organization. It can
stimulate paranoia: an anticipated and generalizable loss of auton-
omy by country ofﬁces and a takeover of control by headquarters. If
the leadership can stay the course through this period of doubt, the
process itself of launching a global brand-building program can be
of great therapeutic value to the organization. It can show, often for
the first time, that the organization can function as a whole, as
opposed to acting like a collection of parts or competing interests; it
can bring a sense of unity and self-identity to an amorphous network
of country ofﬁces and afﬁliates; and it can set an important precedent
for other organizationwide initiatives by demonstrating that the
collective input is operational and worthy.

The third principle pertains to conﬁguring global brand responsi-
bilities. Who should be responsible for building and nurturing the
brand? In practice, the simple truth is that those who run the organiza-
tion are also responsible for the brand. Without a global brand strategy
and a concerted effort to implement it, many of the organizations we
studied showed signs of brand degeneration and dissonant positioning.
When everyone (and therefore no one) owns the brand, the result is
brand cacophony, if not chaos: numerous visual identities (ofﬁcial and
unofﬁcial), variations, stylizations, colors of texts, names, acronyms,
logos, and other proprietary symbols and associations. Organizations in
the study that suffered from some level of dissonance with different
visual identities in different countries included CARE, Médecins Sans
Frontières, Unicef, the World Wildlife Fund, and, to a lesser extent,
Amnesty International and Habitat for Humanity International. As these
organizations transform themselves and commit to a global brand strat-
egy, the necessary participatory process of brand building that engages
the entire worldwide organization cannot mask a new reality: the emer-
gence of an epicenter of brand-building activities typically located in the
head ofﬁce of the nonproﬁt. The degree to which cross-country syner-
gies can be attained and unnecessary local biases minimized rests on a
ﬁne line between coordination and power struggle between headquar-
ters and country ofﬁces. This power struggle was encountered in three
of the organizations studied (the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, Unicef, and, to a lesser extent, Amnesty
International). Head office control was substantial for Habitat for
Humanity International and the World Wildlife Fund, while for CARE
and Médecins Sans Frontières, we found that headquarters was inten-
tionally weak, with country ofﬁces maintaining power.

Finally, the fourth principle, crafting inspired brand-building
strategies and delivering brilliant executions, has become a key imper-
ative for international nonproﬁts. Amateurish, wishful-thinking cam-
paigns are relics of the past. Today international nonproﬁts operate in
a highly competitive environment, facing the same communication
challenges, media clutter, and overexposed, skeptical target audiences
as commercial enterprises. Successful global branding calls for keen

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

273

expertise, creativity, and resourcefulness. Many of the international
nonprofits we studied were able to access such scarce and valuable
resources by securing pro bono services from the best marketing
services in the profession. For instance, CARE beneﬁted from the ser-
vices of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, Habitat for Humanity Inter-
national from the help of Interbrand, Unicef from the services of
TBWA,  and  the  International  Federation  of  Red  Cross  and  Red
Crescent Societies from the services of Young & Rubicam. Nonproﬁts
must be skillful and imaginative in their use of the full repertoire of
communication vehicles, from the use of traditional advertising media
to the staging of publicity-generating events, sponsorship arrange-
ments, use of spokespersons, and direct marketing activities, through
the Internet as well as the mail. The standards of excellence in non-
proﬁt brand leadership have gone up; today, the executions of some
of these global brand-building strategies are award-winning ads and
communication programs. Of the ten organizations studied, we found
that seven had effectively used professional media advertising.

In their recent study on global brands, Holt, Quelch, and Taylor
(2004) suggest that consumers across twelve countries pay special
attention to global brands because of three main characteristics: a sig-
nal of quality, a connection to the global consumer, and a sense of
social responsibility. These dimensions are equally pertinent to global
nonprofit brands. Our fieldwork suggests that the globalness of
the nonproﬁt organizations afforded them a special status, one of a
reliable, scaled, and experienced human service provider (quality sig-
nal), and of a neutral, objective, dignified, and universal promise
keeper (global village). While certain inefﬁciencies and bureaucratic
traits are still associated with some large nonprofits, it is also reas-
suring that globalness and global reach convey beneﬁts that can be
exploited in brand-building activities. Strong global brands have a
significant presence across all or most regions of the world, and
a consistent brand positioning. Strong global brands address similar
consumer needs worldwide, operate with the same brand and logo,
and are focused on a single product category or purpose. Two com-
mon pitfalls occur when managing global brands: the urge to stan-
dardize the entire brand strategy kit worldwide and ignoring markets
at different stages of development (Quelch and Hoff, 1986).

While the literature lacks consensus on performance outcomes
of  standardized  marketing  programs,  recent  empirical  work
(Ozsomer and Simonin, 2004) has shown that disentangling the
effects of product-related from those of non-product-related decisions
is important. Two simultaneous and opposite effects are at work:
centralization of product-related decisions tends to enhance overall
performance, while centralization of non-product-related decisions
tends  to  decrease  performance.  Successful  global  brands  tend
to “think global, act local.” They standardize the more strategic
elements (brand name and positioning) and adapt the latter compo-
nents (copy platform and execution) to local markets.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

Of the ten
organizations
studied, we 
found that seven
had effectively
used professional
media
advertising.

274

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

Globalness
without market
sensitivity is a
recipe for failure.

Successful international nonprofits adhere to these branding
principles and also understand when to adapt them. These organi-
zations know how to push the envelope of global harmonization and
efﬁciencies in the face of reticence and opposition from ﬁeld ofﬁces,
and, more important, they know when to allow customization or
back off. This starts with active listening and engaging in dialogue
with all stakeholders. CARE headquarters, for instance, as part of its
fundamental brand overhaul, thought that the new tagline, “Where
the end of poverty begins,” best captured its core mission and brand
essence in a way that would inspire others to support and act on it.
But at the same time, many of CARE’s European members and ﬁeld
staff felt strongly that the tagline lacked humility and would put off
partners in the field. The ensuing debate was resolved by allowing
country  offices  to  adopt  a  modified,  more  integrative  tagline:
“Together, where the end of poverty begins.”

The second pitfall of global brand management, ignoring markets
at different stages of development, is a matter of lack of acuity in
branding strategy, one of farsightedness: globalness over readiness.
Globalness without market sensitivity is a recipe for failure, as it
implies an artiﬁcially common denominator solution on stakehold-
ers lacking commonality. Barron and Hollingshead (2004) further
contend that multinationals tend to struggle with global branding
because of a fundamental ﬂaw: “They attempt to analyze their brand
from a global perspective without ﬁrst analyzing their consumers from
a global perspective” (p. 9). The underlying premise that across
countries there must be consumers who share a common set of
beliefs and motivations that the brand can target is rarely veriﬁed by
consumer research, though clusters of consumers crossing national
boundaries can sometimes be uncovered. In the world of nonproﬁts,
the problem is compounded by signiﬁcant differences in an organi-
zation’s path to internationalization, its history and presence in
different countries, and varying levels of brand awareness and brand
meaning. Sean Barrett, senior director of communications at Amnesty
International, describes Amnesty’s brand strategy in different markets
as follows: “While, in the developed countries or ‘North,’ Amnesty
International is an established, well-known brand in its mid-life, in
the developing world or ‘South,’ it is a very young, fairly unknown
brand.” Although a globally recognized brand, Amnesty International
must be managed effectively in different parts of the world. Interna-
tional nonprofits must tailor their branding efforts to the brand’s 
life-cycle stage in each region or country.

Conclusion
Brands play multiple, critical roles for nonprofit organizations and
speak to a variety of stakeholders. A strong brand is essential for
fundraising, enabling nonprofit organizations to implement their
missions successfully. By building trust with consumers and donors,

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

275

and addressing the user-purchaser disconnect, strong global brands
can provide the organizational glue to bind together fragmented
international nonproﬁt organizations.

The roles brands play and the stakeholders they address vary
depending on the characteristics of the organizations themselves.
Brand ownership, brand trust, and brand “purchase” characteristics
differed among those organizations focused on relief and develop-
ment and those focused on advocacy. Since an increasing number of
nonprofit organizations are including advocacy in their key activi-
ties, it is important for nonproﬁt leaders and managers to understand
these differences. Nonprofits excel at leveraging public trust and
brand communication through free public relations and celebrity
endorsements. Advocacy organizations in particular have a clear
advantage over for-profits in their ability to link their brands with
important social causes for maximum impact.

Brand-building activities have the potential to trigger virtuous
cycles in international nonprofits. The concerted and participatory
nature of a global branding initiative can successfully demonstrate,
often for the ﬁrst time, the desirability and viability of involving the
entire network of country ofﬁces and afﬁliates. A frequent by-product
of the effort is the creation of a sense of unity and belonging, with
the organization learning how to operate on a truly global basis. The
decision-making process can create a successful precedent and teach
lessons for more complex or “messier” global initiatives. Although
brands are intangible assets, the importance of their role for nonproﬁt
organizations and the surprisingly high level of consumer trust that
they command make them very valuable. Brand valuation presents
both beneﬁts and potential concerns; the opportunity to measure a
brand’s worth and potentially rank nonproﬁts on this basis is seduc-
tive. For nonproﬁt leaders and managers, knowing the value of the
brand asset can ensure that it is measured and protected, and lever-
aged in funds raised through corporate partnerships and in advocacy
power with policymakers. As the temporary stewards of their orga-
nizations, nonproﬁt managers and leaders are uniquely responsible
for strengthening their brand assets and for successfully positioning
their organizations for the future.

NATHALIE LAIDLER-KYLANDER is a doctoral candidate at the Fletcher
School, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.

JOHN A. QUELCH is the Lincoln Filene Professor of Business Administra-
tion at Harvard Business School, Boston.

BERNARD L. SIMONIN is associate professor of marketing and international
business at the Fletcher School, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

276

L A I D L E R -K Y L A N D E R , Q U E L C H , S I M O N I N

References

Aaker, D. Building Strong Brands. New York: Free Press, 1996.
Aaker, D., and Joachimsthaler, E. “The Lure of Global Brands.” Har-

vard Business Review, 1999, 77(6), 137–144.

Aaker, D., and Joachimsthaler, E. Brand Leadership. New York: Free

Press, 2000.

Andreasen, A., and Kotler, P. Strategic Marketing for Nonproﬁt Orga-
nizations. (6th ed.) Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2002.
Arnold, D. The Handbook of Brand Management. London: Century,

1992.

Arozian, M. “Branding for Nonproﬁts.” Public Manager, 2003, 32(2), 9.
Austin,  J.  “Strategic  Collaboration  Between  Nonprofits  and
Businesses.” Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 2000a, 29(1),
69–97.

Austin, J. The Collaboration Challenge: How Nonproﬁts and Businesses
Succeed Through Strategic Alliances. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
2000b.

Baker, T. “Brandraising While Fundraising: Making Your Charity the
One Supporters Think of First.” Retrieved Aug. 20, 2004, from
http://www.imakenews.com/ephilanthropy/e_article000161867.cfm.
Barron, J., and Hollingshead, J. “Brand Globally, Market Locally.”

Journal of Business Strategy, 2004, 24(1), 9–14.

Birkin, M. “Non-Profit Brands: Let the Word Go Forth.” Retrieved
July 3, 2003, from http://www.onphilanthropy.com/site/News2?
page=NewsArticle&id=6288.

Bonoma, T. “Case Research in Marketing: Opportunities, Problems and
a Process.” Journal of Marketing Research, 1985, 22(2), 199–208.
Bosc, J. “Brands: They Need to Work Just as Hard as You Do!” Non-

proﬁt World, 2002, 20(1), 29–30.

Brunham,  K.  “What  Skills  Will  Nonprofit  Leaders  Need  in  the

Future?” Nonproﬁt World, 2002, 20(3), 33–35.

Doyle, P. Value Based Marketing. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2000.
Eizenstat, S. “Nongovernmental Organizations as the Fifth Estate.”
Seton Hall Journal of Diplomacy and International Relations, 2004,
5(2), 15–28.

Grønbjerg, K., and Child, C. Illinois Nonproﬁts: A Proﬁle of Charities
and Advocacy Organizations. Chicago: Donors Forum of Chicago,
Dec. 2003.

Holt, D., Quelch, J., and Taylor, E. “How Global Brands Compete.”

Harvard Business Review, 2004, 82(9), 68–75.

Keller, K. “The Brand Report Card.” Harvard Business Review, 2000,

78(1), 147–155.

Kotler, P. Marketing Management. (11th ed.) Upper Saddle River, N.J.:

Prentice Hall, 2003.

Letts, C., Ryan, W., and Grossman, A. High Performance Nonprofit
Organizations: Managing Upstream for Greater Impact. Hoboken,
N.J.: Wiley, 1998.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml

B U I L D I N G A N D VA L U I N G G L O B A L B R A N D S I N T H E N O N P R O F I T S E C T O R

277

Lindemann, J. “Brand Valuation.” In R. Clifton and J. Simmons
(eds.), The  Economist  Book:  Brands  and  Branding. New  York:
Bloomberg Press, 2004.

Lindenberg, M., and Bryant, C. Going Global: Transforming Relief and
Development NGOs. Bloomﬁeld, Conn.: Kumarian Press, 2001.
Marquardt,  M.  Building  the  Learning  Organization. New  York:

McGraw-Hill, 1996.

Mason, D. “Invasion of the Soul Snatchers: Aliens in Our Midst

(Part 5).” Nonproﬁt World, 1992, 10(6), 27–30.

Murley, K. “Success Starts with Your Name.” Nonproﬁt World, 2004,

22(2), 21–24.

Oster, S. Strategic Management for Nonproﬁt Organizations. New York:

Oxford University Press, 1995.

Ozsomer, A., and Simonin, B. “Marketing Program Standardization:
A Cross-Country Exploration.” International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 2004, 21(4), 397–419.

Quelch, J., Austin, J., and Laidler-Kylander, N. “Mining for Gold in

Nonproﬁts.” Harvard Business Review, 2004, 82(4), 24.

Quelch, J., and Hoff, E. “Customizing Global Marketing.” Harvard

Business Review, 1986, 64(3), 59–68.

Quelch, J. A., and Laidler-Kylander, N. The New Global Brands:
Managing Non-Governmental Organizations in the 21st Century.
Belmont, Calif.: Thomson South-Western, 2005.

Richie, R., Swami, S., and Weinberg, C. “A Brand New World for
Nonproﬁts.” International Journal of Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 1999, 4(1), 26–42.

Speckbacher, G. “The Economics of Performance Management in
Nonprofit Organizations.” Nonprofit Management and Leadership,
2003, 13(3), 267–281.

Swieringa, J., and Wierdsma, A. Becoming a Learning Organization.

Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1992.

Temporal, P. Advanced Brand Management. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley,

2002.

Wootliff, J., and Deri, C. “NGOs: The New Super Brands.” Corporate

Reputation Review, 2001, 4(2), 157–164.

Wymer, W., and Samu, S. “Dimensions of Business and Nonprofit
Collaborative Relationships.” Journal of Nonproﬁt and Public Sector
Marketing, 2003, 11(1), 3–22.

Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership

DOI: 10.1002/nml