Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/wnon20

Social Value of Marketing: A Bibliometric Analysis
Atílio Peixoto Soares Júnior, Cintia Araujo Espanhol, Emerson Wagner
Mainardes & Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri
To cite this article: Atílio Peixoto Soares Júnior, Cintia Araujo Espanhol, Emerson
Wagner Mainardes & Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri (15 May 2024): Social Value of
Marketing: A Bibliometric Analysis, Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, DOI:
10.1080/10495142.2024.2353382
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2024.2353382

Published online: 15 May 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 73

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wnon20

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING
https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2024.2353382

Social Value of Marketing: A Bibliometric Analysis
Atílio Peixoto Soares Júnior, Cintia Araujo Espanhol,
Emerson Wagner Mainardes , and Lara Mendes Christ Bonella Sepulcri
Management, FUCAPE Business School, Vitória, Brazil
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

The objective of this study was to analyze studies that
researched the social value of marketing, identifying the main
research and the understanding of the theme. We performed
a systematic literature review using the Web of Science data­
base to select and analyze articles that investigated the social
value of marketing. After the initial search with filters and exclu­
sion criteria, the final sample consisted of 142 articles submitted
to bibliometric analysis. The analysis of the literature revealed
advances in the understanding of the social value of marketing.
We made the connection between the four groupings of key­
words and the five themes of the bibliographic coupling. This
result revealed the various nuances of how the social value of
marketing is addressed in the literature. The study proposes an
agenda for future research, with topics such as social enterprise
marketing, social value and consumers’ perception, charity,
cause-related marketing, ethical consumption. This study
reveals the connections between marketing and social issues,
indicating that the social value of marketing tends to be the
result of a combination of resources, capabilities, and behaviors
that link marketing and the market to social value and society.

Co-creation; social
enterprises marketing; social
entrepreneurship; social
value; social value of
marketing

Introduction

As society evolves, it is possible to notice growth in the number of people who
demonstrate concerns and behaviors aimed at the collective (Razmerita et al.,
2016). People with this profile usually attach importance to social value
(Thielmann et al., 2020) and tend to differ from people with an individualistic
profile (Sinkovics et al., 2015). This behavior was amplified by the pandemic
arising from COVID-19, which led society and organizations (companies,
governments, and institutions) to an important process of adaptation
(Sharma, 2021). This is in line with social marketing, which deals with market
beliefs and values (Kotler & Zaltman, 1971) and society, and with the premise
of behavioral change (Dibb & Carrigan, 2013).
In this direction, many companies still insist on a narrow value proposition
approach with a short-term vision. However, the path seems to involve creat­
ing economic, environmental, and social value at the same time (Porter &
CONTACT Emerson Wagner Mainardes
emerson@fucape.br
Fernando Ferrari Avenue Boa Vista, Vitória, ES 29.075-505, Brazil
© 2024 Taylor & Francis

Management, FUCAPE Business School, 1358

2

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Kramer, 2019). Social value can be considered as a value proposition for
society (Bonar & Karlsson, 2019). It focuses on initiatives centered on people’s
well-being (Gopaldas, 2015), promoting the development of society. Such
initiatives may be linked to ethical, social, and environmental issues (Bagnoli
& Megali, 2011; Grieco et al., 2015).
At the same time, despite the lack of consensus in marketing studies
regarding value and value proposition (Haase, 2021), marketing is evolving.
Actions aimed at promoting social value have been considered functions of
marketing (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019) and can positively influence the
behavior of consumers, investors, and other stakeholders, who become willing
to support organizations that are committed to the well-being of society (Liu
et al., 2018; A. Mitchell et al., 2015). In this way, this theme has gained
prominence in studies that demonstrate the relationship between marketing
and social value (Gao, 2020; Ghods, 2019; Gopaldas, 2015; Kipp & Hawkins,
2019; Sipilä et al., 2022; Yeoh, 2021).
However, few studies directly linked to the social value of marketing are
present in the literature (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019), which justifies the
investigation of the subject for academic advancement and, consequently, the
understanding of its importance for the market and society. Understanding
the social value of marketing can allow a better understanding of the effects of
social practices and ethical and environmental values, which are developed by
companies in search of customers or new partners (Nascimento et al., 2021;
Pomering, 2017; Roundy, 2017). Therefore, the question is: what are the main
concepts of the social value of marketing that are present in the literature?
From this question, this work aims to analyze studies that have researched the
social value of marketing, identifying the main research and the understanding
of the theme. For this, we carried out a systematic literature review, with
subsequent bibliometric analysis, of studies published on the Web of Science
(WOS) that address the social value of marketing.
The theoretical justification of the study is related to the understanding of
the social value of marketing considering the view that social marketing is
definitely different from traditional marketing (Kotler & Zaltman, 1971). In
addition, it provides knowledge about the social value of marketing, taking
into account the focus of marketing from a logic of intangible resources
(Alhashem et al., 2020). A further justification for the study is that it expands
the perception of the social value of marketing as an innovative approach
aimed at social change (Dibb & Carrigan, 2013).
Still from a theoretical perspective, the study consolidates the literature on
the subject by distinguishing itself from others that have researched specific
topics, such as responsible marketing (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2020; Eng et al.,
2020; Ghods, 2019) and social enterprise marketing (Bandyopadhyay & Ray,
2019; Bonar & Karlsson, 2019), as well as the marketing of sustainable devel­
opment and the well-being of society (Chang & Chuang, 2021), marketing for

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

3

social innovation (Silva et al., 2020), green consumption (Dilotsotlhe & Duh,
2021), cause-related marketing (Gao, 2020), and positive marketing
(Gopaldas, 2015).
As managerial and practical justifications, the study offers information that
goes beyond the value proposition communication process (Ghods, 2019),
addressing the relationship between marketing and social value and its impact
on the market and society. With this, it is possible to expand the knowledge of
managers and market professionals, envisioning the improvement of decision
making. In addition, this study can provide important information for man­
agers who wish to use marketing to raise funds for the development of social
value for society and companies (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2020), for example,
by improving working conditions and employing stigmatized workers
(Gopaldas, 2015). Thus, this understanding is relevant, as it can contribute
to the development of effective strategies that can encourage the practice of
social value (Haase, 2021).
Literature review

Among the various marketing concepts, value is considered an important
influencer of the actions of organizations and individuals (Eng et al., 2020;
Haase, 2021; Karababa & Kjeldgaard, 2014; Leroi-Werelds, 2019; Porter &
Kramer, 2019; Severo et al., 2019). From a practical perspective, different
markets have different needs, bringing the challenge of achieving adequate
positioning of the value proposition for the target audience (N. R. Lee &
Kotler, 2011). Thus, there is a constant effort by organizations and entrepre­
neurs to strategically understand ways to propose value, both for customers
and for society (Eng et al., 2020; Liang & Renneboog, 2017; Mitnick et al.,
2020; A. Singh et al., 2015).
By recognizing the needs of individuals, marketing develops practices that
make it possible to propose value, such as social value, which has been
demanded by society (Liang & Renneboog, 2017), especially since the
COVID-19 pandemic (Ratten, 2020). Marketing with social purposes, in
turn, has presented new approaches and demands directed at consumers
(Dibb & Carrigan, 2013) and society. In this sense, this study seeks to under­
stand the literature on the social value of marketing over time.
Social value

Companies and their businesses have been identified as causing economic,
environmental, and social problems (Porter & Kramer, 2006, 2019). In addi­
tion, the increase in the world population, combined with climate change, has
aggravated social problems and intensified the scarcity of resources (Herbst,
2019). At the same time, regulations, reputation, and consumers’ perceptions

4

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

of social aspects have led many companies to also direct efforts toward social
value, thus developing competitive advantage (Mitnick et al., 2020; Porter &
Kramer, 2006). With the COVID-19 pandemic, the relevance of shared value,
that is, economic value and social value, became even more evident for
companies (Lichtenthaler, 2021).
Despite the emphasis on social aspects arising from the pandemic, social
value continues to be penalized in the trade-off with capturing economic value
(Cavazos-Arroyo, 2020). In the field of marketing, value has been understood
in different ways (Alhashem et al., 2020; Haase, 2021). Different notions of
value have been used in marketing, such as exchange, functional, perceived,
economic, emotional, hedonic, or social values (Karababa & Kjeldgaard,
2014). Among the values mentioned, the social value has been investigated
by several researchers (e.g., Gao, 2020; Ghods, 2019; Gopaldas, 2015; Haase,
2021; Kipp & Hawkins, 2019), who seek to understand its main contributions
and challenges to organizations and society (Eng et al., 2020).
Within organizations, social value can be understood as positive initiatives
centered on people (Gopaldas, 2015; Karababa & Kjeldgaard, 2014; Pimentel
et al., 2023). It refers to the benefits an organization brings to individual and
collective well-being (Bonar & Karlsson, 2019; Bublitz et al., 2021). These are
actions aimed at improving working conditions, contracting stigmatized
workers (Gopaldas, 2015), personal and professional development (Lou &
Xie, 2021), growth of the local economy (Reese & Fasenfest, 1997), and
encouraging conscious consumption (Pepper et al., 2009), among others.
Porter and Kramer (2011) expanded the definition of social value by stating
that what is good for the community is good for business; that is, for the
authors, it seems feasible to develop economic value from social value.
In this way, by developing social value, it is possible to make a connection
between business success and social progress (Porter & Kramer, 2019). Social
value can be proposed through innovation strategies that contemplate the
arrangement of resources and the search for opportunities to encourage social
change (Cavazos-Arroyo, 2020). Expanding the findings by A. Singh et al.
(2015), social value is linked to the proposition of social impact, taking into
account the increased awareness of communities, the development of socio­
economic benefits, and changes in behavior.
In following the social evolution in which consumers have demanded
positive returns for society (Liang & Renneboog, 2017), marketing has evolved
its focus toward intangible resources, co-creation of value, and relationships,
making the service essential to the economy (Vargo & Lusch, 2004) and for
business. These relationships were identified by Alhashem et al. (2020) in
prosumers (a neologism derived from the union of “producer” and “consu­
mer”), who develop social value by promoting social relationships and meth­
ods to produce, share, collaborate, and co-create with each other. Eng et al.
(2020), in their research on international social entrepreneurs, stated that they

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

5

develop innovative marketing solutions to social problems through entrepre­
neurial activity, stimulating economic growth. Thus, marketing has invested in
practices that propose benefits to society and individuals, which contributes to
the construction of the concept of social value in marketing.
Social value in marketing

Faced with a scenario of changes and concern for the well-being of society,
social value has gained ground in marketing discussions (Gao, 2020; Ghods,
2019; Gopaldas, 2015; Kaur & Singh, 2023; Kipp & Hawkins, 2019), since it is
an area inserted in the context of social, environmental, and ethical responsi­
bilities (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019). As a strategic mechanism that con­
tributes to business development, marketing has been seen as a continuous
solution, not a one-time solution (Ghods, 2019). Muñoz and Kimmitt (2019)
argued that marketing would be a reflection of an organization’s activities with
regard to the process of understanding and learning about the needs and
demands of its customers, as well as in responding to changes in the business
environment. This perspective aligned with the social value reflects the shared
value, defined by Porter and Kramer (2011) as practices and policies that
increase the competitiveness of a company and contribute to the social and
environmental agenda in which the company operates.
In this sense, social value has been addressed by various areas of marketing,
such as cause-related marketing, where it links consumer purchases to corpo­
rate philanthropy (S. Singh & Dhir, 2019). This approach can also be seen in
positive marketing, which encourages managers to propose social value
through effective services. Likewise, social marketing makes use of its tools
for the common good (Gopaldas, 2015). And yet, macrosocial marketing
recognizes the need for interventions in social problems through the execution
of its fundamentals (Hamby et al., 2017).
As a result of this diversity, research related to social value in marketing is
expanding, for example through studies focused on the marketing of social
enterprises (Bonar & Karlsson, 2019; Ghods, 2019; Hati & Idris, 2019;
Huybrechts et al., 2017; A. Mitchell et al., 2015; Okano et al., 2021). In this
context, the application of marketing concepts and tools allows these compa­
nies to become more effective and achieve greater success (Chang & Chuang,
2021; Grant & Palakshappa, 2018; Hati & Idris, 2019; Liu et al., 2018). In
addition, it enables the creation of new strategic positions and opportunities to
expand existing positions (Porter & Kramer, 2011).
In addition to studies focused on marketing for social purposes, it is also
possible to notice a relevant flow of research on social marketing (CavazosArroyo, 2020; Ghods, 2019; Haase, 2021; Hamby et al., 2017; Kotler &
Zaltman, 1971; N. R. Lee & Kotler, 2011; A. Singh et al., 2015). This type of
marketing can be defined as the use of marketing skills and tools aimed at

6

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

social action, with an effective impact on the desired audience (Kotler &
Zaltman, 1971). According to the International Social Marketing Association
(2022), social marketing seeks to develop and integrate marketing concepts
with other approaches, with the intent of influencing behavior to benefit
individuals and communities for the greater social good. N. R. Lee and
Kotler (2011) addressed social marketing as a process that uses marketing
techniques and precepts with the aim of changing the behaviors, whether
society or the individual (Ghods, 2019; Hamby et al., 2017).
Other marketing approaches also consider the social value. For example,
responsible marketing stands out in building social value, as it points the way
to justice, honesty, transparency, and incentives for the responsible use of
products (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019), inspiring ethical consumers, and
awakening moral perspectives (Chang & Chuang, 2021). Similarly, fair trade
relates to social value in marketing, as it is recognized as a strategy to guarantee
a fair price that preserves the dignity of human work (Grant & Palakshappa,
2018; Huybrechts et al., 2017).
Therefore, one can see the diversity of studies in the field of marketing
related to social value (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019). However, the literature
is presented in a dispersed and disconnected way, which highlights the impor­
tance of developing a bibliometric analysis of the literature that contributes to
the systematic understanding of the various studies on the subject. It also
makes it possible to understand the connections between studies, to group
knowledge into themes or categories, and to propose a future research agenda.
Methods

To carry out this study, we used two methodological approaches. Initially, we
performed a systematic literature review (SLR) using the WOS as a source. This
source was chosen because it is composed of publications from several scientific
journals recognized for publishing high-quality research, being identified as an
appropriate database for several scientific areas, including the area of business
management (Arrigo, 2018; Mongeon & Hus, 2016). The available information
and refined search capability make WOS a suitable tool for bibliometric
analysis, with possibilities for comparisons of studies (Mongeon & Hus, 2016;
Saracevic & Schlegelmilch, 2021). Thus, the SLR allowed the identification and
construction of a list of studies that were later submitted to a bibliometric
analysis through bibliographic coupling techniques (Kessler, 1963) and key­
word co-occurrence analysis (Callon et al., 1983).
Systematic literature review

To identify the articles analyzed in this study, we first performed searches on
the WOS considered an important source of scientific data (Mongeon & Hus,

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

7

2016). We entered the following terms in the search engine of the database:
“marketing” combined using the Boolean operator AND with the terms:
“social value,” “social value creation,” “social entrepreneurship,” “social inno­
vation,” “social enterprise,” “nonprofit” and “b corps” combined with each
other using the Boolean operator OR. It is important to highlight that we
considered different forms of spelling like “nonprofit,” “non-profit” and “not
for profit.” In WOS, we chose the topic field, which refers to the set: title,
abstract, author keywords, and plus keywords. Then, we selected the following
filters: document type (article and review), category (business and manage­
ment), and language (English). We did not apply the publication year filter.
This action resulted in 389 WOS articles. Next, we performed an initial
analysis of the articles. We looked at the titles, abstracts, and introductions and
applied the following exclusion criteria:
(1) Unavailability of technical information about the article, such as
authors, year of publication, and abstract;
(2) Problems downloading the manuscript.
(3) Lack of relationship with the marketing theme;
(4) Absence of the social value theme practiced by marketing.
After this evaluation, we excluded 247 articles that met at least one of the
exclusion criteria, with 142 articles remaining that made up the final sample
for carrying out the bibliometric analysis. The process was systematized in
Figure 1.
Bibliometry

With the technical information of these 142 articles, we performed the biblio­
metric analysis with the aid of the software VOSviewer version 1.6.20 (Van
Eck & Waltman, 2010; Waltman et al., 2010). For this purpose, we performed
the keywords co-occurrence analysis technique according to Callon et al.
(1983) and bibliographic coupling according to Kessler (1963). The keyword
co-occurrence analysis technique considers terms that are found in the same
networks and are conceptually close to each other (Mariani et al., 2022). In this
way, we grouped the terms by keywords according to their degree of associa­
tion, making it possible to identify which terms were used most. We empha­
size that the keywords initially used in the WOS search engine were not
considered in this procedure. In addition, when using the software, we verified
the existence of words with the same meaning but written differently, unifying
them in the same term.
The bibliographic coupling technique measures the degree of similarity
between articles by reading the number of shared references (Kessler, 1963;
Mariani et al., 2022). That is, if two or more articles refer to another article, it

8

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Figure 1. Systematic process. Source: Own elaboration

means that they are bibliographically linked through the latter. Therefore, the
more references that articles share, the more similar these articles are to each
other (Kessler, 1963). Thus, through shared references, similar articles form
clusters, which are identified by color, indicating research paths to be studied
(Jarneving, 2005).
To present the result of applying these techniques, we used network maps
(H. Li et al., 2016). The maps are calculated by measuring the strength of
interaction between the terms, which, in turn, takes into account the number
of links between them (Van Eck & Waltman, 2010; Waltman et al., 2010).
Carrying out a graphical analysis, the nodes, connected by lines, represent
articles or keywords, depending on the technique used. The larger the node,
the more relevant the term compared to smaller nodes. And the closer the
nodes are to each other, the greater their relationship is to each other.
Results of bibliometric analysis
Co-occurrency keywords

To identify the main concepts of the social value of marketing present in the
literature, first, we applied the co-occurrence technique to all the keywords
found in the 142 studies, with fractional counting, finding 940 keywords in all.
Next, we verified the possibility of synonyms between the terms, finding 90
synonymous words. Then, the criterion of at least 5 occurrences was

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

9

established, which resulted in 65 items, all related to the theme of the social
value of marketing. Next, we removed the keywords “marketing,”
“social value,” “social entrepreneurship,” “social enterprise,” “b corps” and
“nonprofit” as they were initially used by the search engine. Thus, there
remained 60 keywords representing the main subjects investigated in WOS
studies referring to the social value of marketing. From there, the program
provided four sets of keywords, as shown in Figure 2. One point to highlight is
that just a few papers explicitly related with B corps have been found (Bianchi
et al., 2020; Lepkowska-White et al., 2022), which suggest this as an emerging
theme.
We formed Group 1 from the terms “entrepreneurship,” “co-creation,”
“sustainability” “business” and “value creation.” Studies connected to these
subjects are tied to the context in which organizations structure their strate­
gies. These strategies aim to simultaneously attract consumers while addres­
sing social issues, thereby creating economic and social value for the business
(Lichy et al., 2023; Purohit & Gupta, 2023; Seleznоva et al., 2020). Bublitz et al.
(2019) sought to identify key marketing practices that increase enterprises’
success in the local and community context. In this way, social value can be
observed through a co-creation approach, linking different players to discuss
and interpret market concepts (Sigala, 2019). Going further, such studies are

Figure 2. Grouping by keywords. Source: Research data.

10

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

linked to the effect of the co-creation of value on consumer behavior (F. Xu
et al., 2021), which can affect, as a consequence, the business model and the
economic value. In addition, tackling poverty and its consequent problems can
be enhanced through initiatives such as social entrepreneurship, generating
social impact (Bloom, 2009). Understanding co-creation helps to understand
how social enterprises co-create to simultaneously address social and eco­
nomic issues (Silva et al., 2020). It is interesting to note that the keyword
“consumer behavior” belongs to this group but is positioned in the middle of
Figure 2, connecting with other groups. It can suggest that researchers are
interested in observing changes in consumer behavior to understand how the
consumer is becoming more sustainable and how sectors can address these
sustainable values (Essiz & Senyuz, 2023; Gadeikiene & Svarcaite, 2021).
Moving forward, the keywords constituting Group 2 were “attitude,” “beha­
vior” “perceived value” “engagement,” “determinants,” and “green.”
A common point connecting these keywords is the focus on studies that
explore the determinants influencing intentions, attitudes, and behaviors
related to supporting social causes or consumer engagement in practices that
benefit society and the environment (Achabou et al., 2020; Lithopoulos et al.,
2018; Ravi et al., 2022; Suki et al., 2022). For example, studies investigate the
antecedents of food donation (Habib et al., 2023), buycott behavior
(Mizukoshi, 2023), re-engagement in sharing economy practices (S. Y. Li
et al., 2024) and purchase intention of social enterprises (Tsai & Lu, 2023).
The terms forming Group 3 are “nonprofit organization,” “social market­
ing,” “cause-related marketing,” “corporate social responsibility” and “dona­
tion.” The link between these terms can be explained by the alignment of
research that addresses social practices in the adoption of cause marketing
strategies, to promote social impact and influence the change/transformation
of consumer behavior toward responsible actions (e.g., Kipp & Hawkins, 2019;
Purdy, 2020). Through corporate social responsibility (CSR), traditional busi­
nesses and entrepreneurs can also benefit from understanding how social
enterprises develop sustainable market opportunities and provoke behavioral
changes (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019; McWilliams et al., 2011).
Understanding cause-related marketing can also enable nonprofit organiza­
tions to employ more effective strategies to incentivize customers to donate or
purchase their products in support of the cause (D. Li & Atkinson, 2020; Rego
et al., 2021).
Finally, Group 4 was composed of the word “identity,” “altruism,” “fun­
draising,” “prosocial behavior,” and “empathy.” The keywords in this cluster
connect articles that explore the influence of emotions in contribute with
nonprofit or social organizations (Merchant et al., 2011; Small & Verrochi,
2009; Sudhir et al., 2016). In this way, Allred and Amos (2018) showed the
difference of disgust and nondisgust images to evoke empathy or donation
intentions in advertising campaigns. Septianto et al. (2019) highlight the

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

11

importance of personalized campaigns in achieving donations and prosocial
behavior. The authors explain how combined characteristics of individuals,
such as moral emotion, moral judgment, moral identity, and demographic
factors, can influence the intention to donate time and money, thus under­
scoring the significance of this understanding for the success of marketing
strategies. It is interesting to note that most of the research involving emotions
concentrate on advertising campaigns.
The map formed (Figure 2) indicates the relationship between the closest
terms and the emergence of a network linked by them. Looking to the middle
of the Figure 2, it is possible to observe the nodes that connect the sets of
terms: “social marketing,” “consumer behavior,” “determinants,” “impact,”
“responses” and “promotion.” All these terms that are somehow associated
with the antecedents and outcomes of social value of marketing and how
consumers are responding to this company’s practices and policies. This
interconnection contributes to the analysis of the main concern of this subject.
Bibliographic coupling

We applied the technique of bibliographic coupling by documents with frac­
tional counting and at least one citation, in order to identify the interactions
between the studies based on the similarities of subjects between the references
(Perianes-Rodriguez et al., 2016). In this way, the VOSviewer software gener­
ated a map that illustrates the five clusters, which were identified as having
similar subjects, as can be seen in Figure 3.
Cluster 1 presents studies related to social enterprise marketing, a topic that
discusses how social entrepreneurs use marketing to influence consumers
(Bublitz et al., 2021; Muñoz & Kimmitt, 2019). This can be seen in the study
by Bublitz et al. (2021), which presented a structure focused on identifying
marketing practices for the success of social enterprises. The growth of social
enterprises has been a social, cultural, and economic trend, and social market­
ing is part of the strategies of these enterprises (A. Mitchell et al., 2016). In this
sense, the arrival of innovative social enterprises demonstrates an alternative
way to achieve social change through a focus on creating shared value (A.
Mitchell et al., 2015). Furthermore, Muñoz and Kimmitt (2019) addressed
how social purpose can have a strategic influence on the development of the
economic element of the business. On the other hand, Toledano and Riches
(2014) explored how nonprofit and for-profit brands can collaborate in an
event for social causes. Besides the alignment can contribute to the success of
the campaign this strategy can come with potential risks to not compromise
the nonprofit goals with commercial interests.
Cluster 2, in turn, gathered studies that discussed the social value
influence on consumers’ perception. Bianchi et al. (2020) investigated the
motivations for purchasing from B corps, identifying social and

12

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Figure 3. Bibliographic coupling by article. Source: Research data.

environmental values as the main causes. Besides, according to Suki et al.
(2022), social value is also considered by consumers of organic food.
Recently, Lou and Xie (2021) demonstrated the different impacts of social
value on the consumer experience of YouTube channel videos, depending
on the involvement level with products. Even with restrictions, service cocreation was also able to deliver social value during the COVID-19 pan­
demic (Sharma, 2021).
Cluster 3 considers matters related to charity. The articles investigate
how emotions appeal (Small & Verrochi, 2009), political orientation (Y.
Lee et al., 2020), financial behavior, pandemic, public policy (Van
Steenburg et al., 2022), engagement in a creative activity (L. Xu et al.,
2022) and pregiving incentives (Yin et al., 2020) affects donor behavior.
Jaw et al. (2023) investigates prosocial behavior and conclude that both,
nonprofit and for-profit organizations, can benefit from mitigating the
effects of participation costs by increasing the self -benefit/other -benefit
incentives. Also, storytelling can be a powerful strategy to nonprofits
communicating with the target audience and achieved their strategic
purposes (S. L. Mitchell & Clark, 2021).
Cluster 4 presents studies mainly discussing cause-related marketing
(CRM). To succeed in this kind of strategy, it is important to observe
some characteristics as the fit between the sponsor brand and the cause
(Pracejus & Olsen, 2004; Rego et al., 2021), the donation amount, and
the company’s reputation (Koschate-Fischer et al., 2016). In terms of
international marketing, CRM can even be a way of increasing

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

13

recognition, and brand trust, and leveraging product evaluation (S.
Singh & Duque, 2020). However, depending on how applied, CRM can
decrease donations and consumers’ happiness as it can be perceived as
more selfish than direct donations (Krishna, 2011).
Finally, Cluster 5, which is the smaller cluster, contemplates the
discussion of ethical consumption and consumerism. According to
O’Shaughnessy and O’Shaughnessy (2007), marketing does not neces­
sarily originate consumerism, but it can certainly encourage it. In this
context, the authors advocate for an ethical debate that aligns with
consumer satisfaction – a viewpoint that resonates with Varey’s (2010)
proposal for welfare-centric marketing practices. In this way, three
main strategies were identified regarding the use of CRM to respon­
sible consumers: personalizing the cause, using founders’ stories to
authorize consumer action, and creating a market for responsible
“development consumers” (Kipp & Hawkins, 2019). To understand
consumer psychology and the motivations of consumption, some
researchers exploring the effects of personality traits on CRM partici­
pation intention (Patel et al., 2023) and intention to donate money
(Thomas & Jadeja, 2021).
In addition to the map with the demarcations of the clusters with their
respective studies, we created Table 1 to demonstrate the studies that were
most cited within each cluster. This table shows the authors, the main theme,
the cluster, the number of citations of each study, and the number of citations
per year.

Table 1. Bibliographic coupling by cluster.
Authors
Muñoz and Kimmitt (2019)
Bhatt and Altinay (2013)
Davies and Doherty (2019)
Nicholls (2010)
Andrews et al. (2007)
Lou and Xie (2021)
Prior (2013)
Bianchi et al. (2020)
White and Peloza (2009)
Small and Verrochi (2009)
Webb et al. (2000)
Winterich and Barone (2011)
McWilliams et al. (2011)
Krishna (2011)
Pracejus and Olsen (2004)
Koschate-Fischer et al. (2016)
Varey (2010)
Kipp and Hawkins (2019)
Thomas and Jadeja (2021)
O’Shaughnessy and O’Shaughnessy
(2007)
Source: Research data.

Subjects
Social Enterprise Marketing

Social Value and Consumers’
Perception
Charity

Cause-Related Marketing

Ethical Consumption

Cluster Citations
1
76
60
58
52
2
68
49
39
30
3
351
341
209
152
4
547
361
270
191
5
111
25
24
11

Citations/
year
15.20
5.45
11.60
3.71
4.00
16.33
3.55
7.50
23.40
22.73
8.71
11.69
42.08
27.77
13.50
15.92
7.93
5.00
8.00
0.65

14

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Relationship between analyses

By observing the co-occurrence and bibliographic coupling analyses, it is
possible to notice a convergence. Group 1 (keywords “entrepreneurship,” “cocreation,” “sustainability” “business” and “value creation”) integrated into the
“social enterprise marketing” and “social value and consumers’ perception”
cluster. This is evidenced by A. Mitchell et al. (2015, 2016). who discuss
marketing strategies in the context of social marketing within social enter­
prises. Roy and Goswami (2020) advocated an integrated model of social
enterprise and social marketing. Nascimento et al. (2021) developed a model
adopting three approaches to marketing strategies for social enterprises: com­
mercial, social, and corporate.
Besides these, Bandyopadhyay and Ray (2020), for example, brought argu­
ments related to the appropriation of marketing strategies in social companies,
that is, social businesses, aiming at social change. Also, Prior (2013) high­
lighted the consumer’s perception of value in relation to social solutions using
ethnographies to find the results. Sharma (2021), in turn, combined the
perspective of the customer and the company in the context of services to
address value creation and co-creation and stated that the result of the cocreation of services is found in the social, economic, and experiential values
created. Common studies indicate the use of entrepreneurship and social
responsibility in the context of low-income countries or communities, moving
toward social entrepreneurship, aiming at generating positive externalities,
such as Bhatt and Altinay (2013), Bublitz et al. (2019), Bublitz et al. (2021), and
Muñoz and Kimmitt (2019).
When analyzing Group 2 (keywords: “attitude,” “behavior” “perceived
value” “engagement,” “determinants,” and “green”) the keywords are partially
explicated to cluster “social value and consumers’ perception” as Ravi et al.
(2022), for example, explain the importance of emotional values to enhance
the acceptance of social enterprise products. However, this keyword group is
also related with cause-related marketing cluster, as it encompasses papers that
explore consumers responses to different Caused-Related Marketing (CRM)
strategies (Ndasi et al., 2022). Even if the keyword “caused-related marketing”
belongs to Group 3, is possible to note that the keyword groups 2 and 3 have
interactions as they share boarders. Also, some studies are related in the
frontier of keywords Group 3, discussing CSR strategy. For example, Gao
(2020) and Kopalle et al. (2022) showed that the influence of cause related
marketing as one of the CSR strategies effectively adopted by companies,
benefiting for-profit firms and larger donations.
Group 3 (keywords: “nonprofit organization,” “social marketing,” “causerelated marketing,” “corporate social responsibility” and “donation”) indi­
cated that it was integrated into the “charity” cluster, as this keyword also
belongs to this group. This cluster strong explore donors’ behaviors which is

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

15

close related with nonprofit organizations (for example: Van Steenburg et al.,
2022; L. Xu et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2020). Also here, in parts, the articles in this
cluster can be related in the frontier with keywords Group 4 (keywords:
“identity,” “altruism,” “fundraising,” “prosocial behavior,” and “empathy”),
as an examples of White and Peloza (2009) discussed effective ways to posi­
tioning certain appeals according to type on donor support, integrate in this
way keywords as “charity” and “altruism,” thus, the emotional aspect is also
explored (Small & Verrochi, 2009).
However, in the middle of keywords’ Group 3 we can see “cause-related
marketing” keyword, which link this group with “cause-related marketing”
cluster, relating with studies that explore, for example, how CRM affects
advertising (Ndasi et al., 2022), brand attitudes and purchase intention
(Rego et al., 2021), and brand trust (S. Singh & Duque, 2020). Another
connection for Group 3 is ethical consumption cluster, as this cluster is in
the middle of Caused-Related Marketing cluster and Charity cluster (Figure 3).
In this way, ethical consumption gather keywords as “cause-related market­
ing,” but also “trust” (Thomas & Jadeja, 2021; Thomas et al., 2023); ethical
consumption (Kipp & Hawkins, 2019) and “marketing ethics” (O’Shaughnessy
& O’Shaughnessy, 2007).
In addition, marketing in social enterprises emerges in different situations
from traditional marketing (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2020), because the lack of
resources and capabilities impel the search for the improvement of social
entrepreneurship and CSR. On the other hand, in times of crisis, the social
economy is considered as the option that delivers the best response, and,
therefore, social enterprises play a fundamental role in the pursuit of sustain­
able growth (Palacios-Marqués et al., 2019).
This is because the social issue, closely related to improving social wellbeing, contemplates social change (Nascimento et al., 2021). Social change, in
turn, happens through social entrepreneurship (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2020;
Bublitz et al., 2021), CSR (e.g., Gao, 2020), and the birth of new business
models (e.g., Akinboade et al., 2023). And these new business models consti­
tute a primary logic of enterprises for the creation of value (Nascimento et al.,
2021; Silva et al., 2020).
Discussion

With the evolution of the social theme in marketing research, it was possible to
advance our understanding of the social value of marketing. Going further, the
connections and understandings developed in this systematic review resulted
in associations that help to develop the social value of marketing. An example
is the connection between Group 1 (“entrepreneurship,” “co-creation,” “sus­
tainability,” “business” and “value creation”) to Cluster 1 (social enterprise
marketing). This cluster aggregates twenty-nine studies from 2015 to 2023.

16

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Akinboade et al. (2023), Bublitz et al. (2021), Davies and Doherty (2019), and
Muñoz and Kimmitt (2019) addresses challenges of value creation to social,
nonprofit or hybrid enterprises and the strategies needed to manage between
economic, social and environmental value. Group 1 is also associated with
Cluster 2 (social value and consumers’ perception). This cluster is formed by
twenty-five studies that discuss different ways of proposing value to custo­
mers, suppliers, and society. The studies were published between 2013 and
2024, demonstrating the novelty of the subjects.
In this cluster, studies by Gadeikiene and Svarcaite (2021) and S. Y. Li et al.
(2024) highlighted the consumers’ perception of value in relation to sharing
economy. Li et al. concludes that it is important to align sharing economy
practices and sustainability to attract more conscious consumers. Suki et al.
(2022) and Essiz and Senyuz (2023), based on Theory of Consumption Values,
explored the impact on value perceptions on consumers’ purchase intention of
organic food and luxury products, respectively. Sharma (2021) approached cocreation as the focus of their studies, in which the participation of consumers
in the construction of value was analyzed. Furthermore, connection, trust, and
commitment are dimensions of co-creation (F. Xu et al., 2021) that can impact
the value proposition, the business model, and, consequently, the economic
value, in order to influence the understanding of the social value of marketing.
Briefly, these studies point to marketing practices that are used for the success
of social enterprises (Bublitz et al., 2019; Palacios-Marqués et al., 2019).
Another understanding of the social value of marketing can be observed in
the connection of Group 2 (“attitude,” “behavior” “perceived value” “engage­
ment,” “determinants,” and “green”) with Clusters 2 (social value and con­
sumers’ perception) and 4 (cause-related marketing). The Cluster 4 consisted
of 25 studies from 2004 to 2022. From both clusters discussions related to
social value studies bring reflections on how communicate it (Becker et al.,
2022) as well as their influence on purchase intention, green consumption, and
brand loyalty (Dilotsotlhe & Duh, 2021; Lou & Xie, 2021; Ravi et al., 2022; Suki
et al., 2022). Through these studies, it is possible to perceive that social wellbeing is also developed by social companies that have as a business priority the
achievement of social goals, aiming at solving a social problem (Silva et al.,
2020). Going further, improved social welfare is a consequence of social
change (Woodside, 2018), and such change, at the macro level and in the
long term, happens through alliances between social enterprises and other
organizations (Srivetbodee et al., 2017). In this context, the social value of
marketing manifests itself through social enterprise marketing, contributing to
the promotion of services and/or products aligned with the interests of society
(Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019; Ghods, 2019).
When analyzing Group 3 (“nonprofit organization,” “social marketing,”
“cause-related marketing,” “charity,” “corporate social responsibility” and
“donation”), we see studies mainly on Cluster 3 (charity). This cluster gather

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

17

30 studies from 2000 to 2022, showing that third sector is well explore in terms
of generate social value. The studies discussed ways to nonprofits differentiate
and get funding to apply in diverse causes (Y. Lee et al., 2020; Van Steenburg
et al., 2022; White & Peloza, 2009; L. Xu et al., 2022). This discussion and how
donor behavior is changing have been catching the attention of researchers
over time.
On the other hand, social value, which is recognized as benefits developed
for people and society (Bonar & Karlsson, 2019; Bublitz et al., 2021), is part of
the construction of CSR (Hemingway, 2005). From the CSR perspective, social
entrepreneurship sees social problems as opportunities, developing processes
that generate profits for the company and, at the same time, create social value
for society (Tasavori et al., 2016), reducing poverty, for example, and generat­
ing social impact. In this context, papers on Cluster 4 explores CRM and
nonprofit organizations (Du et al., 2008; Koschate-Fischer et al., 2016; S. Singh
& Duque, 2020). In this way, cause-related marketing has been used to
promote companies that act with social responsibility (Gao, 2020), in addition
to making it possible to reach donors willing to invest in social well-being (Eng
et al., 2020). All these discussions contribute to the understanding of the social
value of marketing.
Advancing in the understanding of the social value of marketing, we also
observe the result of the association of Group 3 with Cluster 5 (ethical
consumption) which explores, for example, how social value is create based
on reflections of ethical consumption through CRM (Kipp & Hawkins, 2019;
O’Shaughnessy & O’Shaughnessy, 2007). This is the smallest cluster composed
of 8 studies from 2007 to 2023. The other studies point out influences of trust
and psychological process on CRM (Patel et al., 2023; Thomas & Jadeja, 2021;
Thomas et al., 2023) and at least, Varey (2010) proposed an agenda discussing
CSR and how marketing can support a transaction from consumerism to
a more responsible and sustainable society. The author suggested that the
adoption of social responsibility in marketing concepts and practices would be
a breakthrough in this theme. Thus, the interdependence between marketing
and sustainability through the social value of marketing goes beyond and
brings benefits to the economy, generating jobs and developing regions and
countries (Tasavori et al., 2016; Tudu, 2020).
Social enterprises seek to fulfill society’s desire to generate positive extern­
alities, such as reducing poverty and violence and improving health and
education. Often these results are achieved through entrepreneurial strategies
to create social value, being related to social entrepreneurship (Smith et al.,
2012; Tasavori et al., 2016) Varey (2010) suggested that the adoption of social
responsibility in marketing concepts and practices would be a breakthrough in
this theme. So, considering that large companies have expanded their activities
in social matters (Porter & Kramer, 2011) and, at the same time, social
enterprises are using marketing in an innovative and responsible way

18

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

(Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019; Pomering, 2017), it is understood that the social
value of marketing emerges from that, impacting individuals and their beha­
viors toward the amplification of shared value and social welfare.
Therefore, the social value of marketing results from the combination of
resources, capabilities, and behaviors that link marketing and the market to
social value and society, such as the use of alliances and networks, long-term
vision, capabilities to transform and reconfigure business models and compa­
nies, innovation, and co-creation. All this brings together and interconnects
marketing with sustainability. After analyzing 142 articles on topics related to
the social value of marketing through different methods, it was possible to
verify the importance of the emergence of business models arising from the
changes provided by social entrepreneurship and CSR, strengthening aspects
of value creation.
The main beneficiaries of these changes are the vulnerable populations of
low-income and undeveloped countries (Jagadale & Santos, 2022; Wu et al.,
2021). It is worth highlighting here the benefits brought toward the well-being
of these populations. The interdependence between marketing and sustain­
ability through the social value of marketing goes beyond and brings benefits
to the economy, generating jobs and developing regions and countries
(Tasavori et al., 2016; Tudu, 2020).
Research agenda

The purpose of this study was to analyze studies on the social value of
marketing, identifying concepts, understandings, and research related to the
theme. One of the arguments was that the understanding of the social value of
marketing can open ways to understand the effects of social and environ­
mental practices in the companies’ search for consumers or partners
(Nascimento et al., 2021). For this reason, there are several opportunities for
future research involving the social value of marketing. Thus, this systematic
review of the literature revealed the interdependence of different themes
connected with marketing, social value, and the social value of marketing.
Moving forward with suggestions for future research, Table 2 shows possibi­
lities for future research by subject and by cluster according to bibliographic
coupling.
When analyzing Table 2, the main suggestions that were proposed in
the most recent articles (since 2019) analyzed in this study are detailed.
We noticed that, among the studies that formed cluster 1 (Social
Enterprise Marketing), the main research suggestions are related to the
business model, social transformation, organizational performance, and
emerging countries. Cluster 2 (Social Value and Consumers’ Perception)
has suggestions that are linked to responsible behavior, positive market­
ing, environmental concern, loyalty, perceived value and sharing

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

19

Table 2. Suggestions for future research.
Cluster
Social Enterprise
Marketing

Social Value and
Consumers’
Perception

Subject
Business model

Research suggestions
Studying commercial enterprises that use complex adaptive
business model approaches to create sustainable competitive
advantages (Akinboade et al., 2023).
Developing quantitative studies that test the financial and/or
social success of social enterprises that apply complex adaptive
business model strategies (Akinboade et al., 2023).
Developing interdisciplinary research, such as marketing and
education, investigating the impact of educational policies and
curricula on social entrepreneurship literacy (Bublitz et al.,
2021).
Understanding how hybrid organizations manage social and
commercial objectives (Davies & Doherty, 2019)
Social Transformation Investigating the role and impact of market capabilities on value
co-creation, measuring the short- and long-term impacts and
results of social value co-creation (Sigala, 2019).
Identifying the contextual factors and actors that determine the
development and impact of market capitalization skills on the
co-creation of social value (Sigala, 2019).
Investigate mechanisms that facilitates co-creation between
social enterprises and its partners across economic pyramid
(Silva et al., 2020)
Organizational
Analyzing the relationship between marketing capabilities and
performance
strategic marketing approaches, developing and validating
tools to measure performance and social impact (Nascimento
et al., 2021).
Analyzing how each strategic marketing approach can effectively
innovate the business model of compensatory/transformative
social ventures (Nascimento et al., 2021).
Analyzng the barriers and enablers for transformative services
initiatives (Kabadayi et al., 2023)
Exploring the impacts of different governance structures and
strategies on hybrid organizations and their ability to capture
value (Davies & Doherty, 2019)
Exploring the specific use of social marketing within social
enterprises and extending research into marketing and social
marketing practices used by social enterprises in various parts
of the world (A. Mitchell et al., 2015).
Emerging countries
Exploring the differences between strategic conditions in
emerging countries (Muñoz & Kimmitt, 2019)
Responsible behavior Exploring how the integration of innovative and eco-friendly
materials can be accepted by the target audience (Achabou
et al., 2020).
Exploring antecedents of sustainable luxury consumption in
different demographic and cultural context (Essiz & Senyuz,
2023)
Exploring Consumer styles inventory (CSI) in different context
and industries (Lichy et al., 2023)
Positive marketing
Investigating marketing strategies for b corps considering the
consumers motivations to purchase (Bianchi et al., 2020)
Exploring how different variables such as prior donation
experience influences attitudes and intentions to support
social enterprises (Becker et al., 2022)
Including sociodemographic variables to further understand
consumer ethical decision-making toward sustainable
development (Chang & Chuang, 2021).
Environmental
Investigating factors that influence the choice of green products
concern
by middle-class black consumers (Dilotsotlhe & Duh, 2021).
Loyalty
Investigating the role of social value in brand building when
content marketing is targeted at members of a distinct affinity
group or consumer club (Lou & Xie, 2021).
Exploring the long term impact loyalty on CSR (Wu et al., 2022)

(Continued)

20

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Table 2. (Continued).
Cluster

Subject
Perceived Value

Sharing Economy
Charity

Donotations
diversification
Fundraising

Consumer behavior

Cause-Related
Marketing

Price
Regulator context
Effectiviness

Ethical Consumption

Responsible
consumption

CRM

Source: Own elaboration.

Research suggestions
Examining communities of prosumers, online or offline,
dedicated to particular interests such as sewing, cooking, or car
maintenance (Alhashem et al., 2020).
Discovering and examining in more detail the different types of
prosumers, including the types of values they generate and
what they can mean for the continued evolution of marketing
and consumer culture (Alhashem et al., 2020).
Investigating how a company can measure value results from the
co-creation process considering the company and other
stakeholders (Sharma, 2021).
Pointing out how a company can evaluate and reward customer
participation in winning new customers through reviews,
service support, and sharing ideas for new service projects
(Sharma, 2021).
Exploring sharing practices, as C2C, and the long-term effects of
consumer reflexivity on behavior in this kind of consumption
(S. Y. Li et al., 2024)
Exploring potential impacts of creative activities in different
forms of donation, such as time or goods (L. Xu et al., 2022).
Understanding the application of pregiving incentives on digital
fundraising strategies (Yin et al., 2020)
Testing the conceptual framework that adapted marketing and
fundraising strategies post COVID-19 (Van Steenburg et al.,
2022)
Exploring the long-term effects of storytelling on behavior of
consumers and volunteers (Mitchell & Clark, 2021)
Understanding the role storytelling strategies on digital media,
comparing across different nonprofit sectors (Mitchell & Clark,
2021)
Exploring factors that might affect consumers perception of price
fairness in CRM context (Koschate-Fischer et al., 2016).
Understanding the effects of he regulator on strategic decisions
of charitable donations (Kopalle et al., 2022)
Exploring the impact of digital marketing strategies on donor
behavior and charity support (Krishna, 2011).
Exploring moderation variables such as perceived sincerity and
cause involvement on internet CRM effectiveness (Ndasi et al.,
2022)
Understanding the impact of CR and sponsorship ads on
companies versus nonprofit organization websites (Ndasi et al.,
2022)
Studying the impact of supply chain structure on the
effectiveness of pure philanthropic corporate initiatives or
other types of CSR activities (Gao, 2020).
Exploring he effects of variables such as brand familiarity, spatial
distance and product type’s influence on the effectiveness of
CRM campaigns (S. Singh & Duque, 2020).
Investigating the trend toward “new development
responsibilities,” particularly as it relates to neoliberal
consumerism (Kipp & Hawkins, 2019).
Understanding alternatives that more effectively engage
communities in the Global South (Kipp & Hawkins, 2019)
Exploring additional factors influencing donation behavior in the
CRM context (Thomas et al., 2023).
Exploring moderator factors between trust in CRM campaigns
and donation intention (Thomas & Jadeja, 2021)
Exploring moderator factors between personality traits and CRM
participation intention (Patel et al., 2023)

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

21

economy. Regarding Cluster 3 (Charity), the studies presented suggestions
on donation, on social cause, social change, and social initiatives. Cluster
4 (Cause-related Marketing) had studies with the main suggestions based
on CRM and price, regulator context, or effectiveness. And finally, Cluster
5 (Ethical Consumption) was formed by studies that, for the most part,
suggest more research that deals with responsible consumption and CRM.
Briefly, the suggestions that appear in the studies are linked to environmental
and social issues. These are suggestions of themes that can influence the wellbeing of society, such as social initiatives and responsible and environmentally
friendly behavior. We suggest investigations of marketing practices that can
benefit organizations focused on these causes. These research possibilities are
aligned with topics such as sustainability and the ESG agenda in organizations,
enhancing the interconnection of research in these different areas of knowledge.
Conclusion

To meet the objective of this study, themes related to the social value of
marketing were explored with the formation of connections and discussions
that allowed the analysis of this concept. As a theoretical contribution, the study
demonstrated that the theme of social value in marketing has its basis in social
enterprise marketing, social value and consumers’ perceptions, charity, CRM
and ethical consumption. Each of these topics was investigated separately,
resulting in a future research agenda. In addition, this study broadened the
perspective of marketing through an intangible resources’ perspective (social
value, co-creation, etc.), as suggested by Alhashem et al. (2020), from the
systematization of knowledge about the social value of marketing.
As a practical implication, this study contributes to the gathering of infor­
mation, pointing out studies on the use of marketing by social enterprises
(Herbst, 2019; Nascimento et al., 2021; Roy & Goswami, 2020) and the
development of social entrepreneurship (Bandyopadhyay & Ray, 2019;
Bublitz et al., 2021). It also presents studies that investigate the participation
of customers in the construction of value (S. Y. Li et al., 2024; Seleznоva et al.,
2020; Sharma, 2021) as well as studies that discuss the importance of creating
alliances and networks to transform and reconfigure business models
(Akinboade et al., 2023; Bublitz et al. 2021; Davies & Doherty, 2019; Muñoz
& Kimmitt, 2019). In this way, this study gathers research data related to the
social value of marketing that can contribute to the decision making of
managers and marketing professionals (Dibb & Carrigan, 2013; Varey,
2010), in addition to providing conceptual, methodological, and thematic
guidance for those interested in the topic.
Despite the theoretical and practical contributions, this study has some
limitations. As this review used only studies from the WOS database, some
surveys may not have been considered, such as studies available only on the

22

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Scopus database. Another limitation was the high concentration of studies on
social entrepreneurship, which may have influenced the formation of connec­
tions and groupings resulting from the analyses. Also, when using the term
“marketing” in the search part of the database used, searches were limited to
this area only. However, when advancing the understanding of the social value
of marketing, this study highlighted the various nuances of the theme, con­
tributing so that companies, social enterprises, researchers, managers, and
professionals can develop strategies to reduce poverty and increase social
value through marketing.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Funding
This research was supported by Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development (CNPq/Brazil), project 307202/2021-6, by Foundation for Research Support of
Espírito Santo (FAPES/Brazil), projects 2022-687ZR (644/2022), 2022-31G9Q (1010/2022) and
2022-1RJWJ (323/2023), by Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT/Portugal) through NECE
(Núcleo de Estudos em Ciências Empresariais), project UID/GES/04630/2020, and by IFTS
(Instituto Fucape de Tecnologias Sociais), project 2014-2027.

ORCID
Emerson Wagner Mainardes

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2525-275X

References
Achabou, M. A., Dekhili, S., & Codini, A. P. (2020). Consumer preferences towards
animal-friendly fashion products: An application to the Italian market. Journal of
Consumer Marketing, 37(6), 661–673. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCM-10-2018-2908
Akinboade, O. O. A., Taft, T., Weber, J. F., Manoko, O. B., & Molobi, V. S. (2023). How the social
entrepreneurship business model designs in South Africa create value: A complex adaptive
systems approach. Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies, 15(1), 70–95.
Alhashem, M., Moraes, C., & Szmigin, I. T. (2020). Use and social value in peer-to-peer
prosumption communities. European Journal of Marketing, 55(1), 193–218. https://doi.
org/10.1108/EJM-03-2019-0235
Allred, A. T., & Amos, C. (2018). Disgust images and nonprofit children’s causes. Journal of
Social Marketing, 8(1), 120–140. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-01-2017-0003
Andrews, L., Kiel, G., Drennan, J., Boyle, M. V., & Weerawardena, J. (2007). Gendered
perceptions of experiential value in using web‐based retail channels. European Journal of
Marketing, 41(5/6), 640–658.
Arrigo, E. (2018). Social media marketing in luxury brands: A systematic literature review and
implications for management research. Management Research Review, 41(6), 657–679.
https://doi.org/10.1108/MRR-04-2017-0134

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

23

Bagnoli, L., & Megali, C. (2011). Measuring performance in social enterprises. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(1), 149–165. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764009351111
Bandyopadhyay, C., & Ray, S. (2019). Responsible marketing: Can social enterprises show the
way? Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 31(2), 164–183. https://doi.org/10.
1080/10495142.2018.1526738
Bandyopadhyay, C., & Ray, S. (2020). Social enterprise marketing: Review of literature and
future research agenda. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 38(1), 121–135. https://doi.org/
10.1108/MIP-02-2019-0079
Becker, M. G., Martin, F., & Walter, A. (2022). The power of ESG transparency: The effect of
the new SFDR sustainability labels on mutual funds and individual investors. Finance
Research Letters, 47, 102708.
Bhatt, P., & Altinay, L. (2013). How social capital is leveraged in social innovations under
resource constraints? Management Decision, 51(9), 1772–1792. https://doi.org/10.1108/MD01-2013-0041
Bianchi, C., Reyes, V., & Devenin, V. (2020). Consumer motivations to purchase from benefit
corporations (B Corps). Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 27
(3), 1445–1453. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.1897
Bloom, P. N. (2009). Overcoming consumption constraints through social entrepreneurship.
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 28(1), 128–134. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.28.1.128
Bonar, I., & Karlsson, P. S. (2019). Marketing Scottish social enterprises using a label? Social
Enterprise Journal, 15(3), 339–357. https://doi.org/10.1108/SEJ-08-2018-0056
Bublitz, M. G., Chaplin, L. N., Peracchio, L. A., Cermin, A. D., Dida, M., Escalas, J. E.,
Eilert, M., Gloukhovtsev, A., & Miller, E. G. (2021). Rise up: Understanding youth social
entrepreneurs and their ecosystems. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 40(2), 206–225.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0743915620937702
Bublitz, M. G., Peracchio, L. A., Dadzie, C. A., Escalas, J. E., Hansen, J., Hutton, M., & Tangari,
A. H. (2019). Food access for all: Empowering innovative local infrastructure. Journal of
Business Research, 100, 354–365.
Callon, M., Courtial, J. P., Turner, W. A., & Bauin, S. (1983). From translations to problematic
networks: An introduction to co-word analysis. Social Science Information, 22(2), 191–235.
https://doi.org/10.1177/053901883022002003
Cavazos-Arroyo, J. (2020). An exploration of some effects of social innovation capability in
social enterprises in Mexico. Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, 15(4), 63–70.
https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-27242020000400063
Chang, H. H., & Chuang, W. J. (2021). Encourage stakeholder engagement in sustainable
development: Drivers of consumers themselves benefits and society welfares. Corporate
Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 28(2), 748–762. https://doi.org/10.
1002/csr.2085
Davies, I. A., & Doherty, B. (2019). Balancing a hybrid business model: The search for
equilibrium at Cafédirect. Journal of Business Ethics, 157, 1043–1066.
Dibb, S., & Carrigan, M. (2013). Social marketing transformed: Kotler, Polonsky and Hasting
reflect on social marketing in a period of social change. European Journal of Marketing, 47
(9), 1376–1398. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM-05-2013-0248
Dilotsotlhe, N., & Duh, H. I. (2021). Drivers of middle-class consumers’ green appliance
attitude and purchase behavior: A multi-theory application. Social Marketing Quarterly,
27(2), 150–171. https://doi.org/10.1177/15245004211013737
Du, L., Hou, J., & Huang, Y. (2008). Mechanisms of power and action for cause‐related
marketing: Perspectives of enterprise and non‐profit organizations. Baltic Journal of
Management, 3(1), 92–104. https://doi.org/10.1108/17465260810844284

24

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Eng, T. Y., Ozdemir, S., Gupta, S., & Kanungo, R. P. (2020). International social entrepreneur­
ship and social value creation in cause-related marketing through personal relationships and
accountability. International Marketing Review, 37(5), 945–976. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IMR-12-2018-0360
Essiz, O., & Senyuz, A. (2023). Predicting the value‐based determinants of sustainable luxury
consumption: A multi‐analytical approach and pathway to sustainable development in the
luxury industry. Business Strategy and the Environment, 33(3), 1721–1758. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bse.3569
Gadeikiene, A., & Svarcaite, A. (2021). Impact of consumer environmental consciousness on
consumer perceived value from sharing economy. Engineering Economics, 32(4), 350–361.
https://doi.org/10.5755/j01.ee.32.4.28431
Gao, F. (2020). Cause marketing: Product pricing, design, and distribution. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management, 22(4), 775–791. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2019.0772
Ghods, M. A. (2019). Entrepreneurial marketing: The missing link in social enterprise studies.
Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research, 9(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40497019-0163-5
Gopaldas, A. (2015). Creating firm, customer, and societal value: Toward a theory of positive
marketing. Journal of Business Research, 68(12), 2446–2451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2015.06.031
Grant, S., & Palakshappa, N. (2018). Social enterprise push or corporate social responsibility
pull? The mainstreaming of fair trade. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, 23(4), e1625. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1625
Grieco, C., Michelini, L., & Iasevoli, G. (2015). Measuring value creation in social enterprises:
A cluster analysis of social impact assessment models. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly, 44(6), 1173–1193. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764014555986
Haase, M. (2021). Social value cocreation: A mode of value cocreation. Social Enterprise
Journal, 17(4), 493–512. https://doi.org/10.1108/SEJ-04-2020-0023
Habib, M. D., Filimonau, V., Coşkun, A., Wang, L. E., & Ermolaev, V. A. (2023). Altruistic and
collectivistic values as the antecedents of surplus food donation intention. Socio-Economic
Planning Sciences, 90, 101729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2023.101729
Hamby, A., Pierce, M., & Brinberg, D. (2017). Solving complex problems: Enduring solutions
through social entrepreneurship, community action, and social marketing. Journal of
Macromarketing, 37(4), 369–380. https://doi.org/10.1177/0276146716663797
Hati, S. R. H., & Idris, A. (2019). The role of leader vs organisational credibility in Islamic social
enterprise marketing communication. Journal of Islamic Marketing, 10(4), 1128–1150.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JIMA-02-2017-0018
Hemingway, C. A. (2005). Personal values as a catalyst for corporate social entrepreneurship.
Journal of Business Ethics, 60(3), 233–249. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-005-0132-5
Herbst, J. M. (2019). Harnessing sustainable development from niche marketing and coopeti­
tion in social enterprises. Business Strategy & Development, 2(3), 152–165. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bsd2.49
Huybrechts, B., Nicholls, A., & Edinger, K. (2017). Sacred alliance or pact with the devil? How
and why social enterprises collaborate with mainstream businesses in the fair trade sector.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 29(7–8), 586–608. https://doi.org/10.1080/
08985626.2017.1328905
International Social Marketing Association. (2022). https://isocialmarketing.org/
Jagadale, S. R., & Santos, N. J. (2022). Constructively engaging exploitive waste management in
India: The case of Paryavaran Mitra and its justice motivated effort at empowering
rag-picking women. Journal of Macromarketing, 42(2), 191–213. https://doi.org/10.1177/
02761467211061344

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

25

Jarneving, B. (2005). A comparison of two bibliometric methods for mapping of the research
front. Scientometrics, 65(2), 245–263. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-005-0270-7
Jaw, C., Chi, K. J., & Li, G. J. (2023). Is kindness invaluable? The impact of benefit and cost on
prosocial behavior intentions. Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing & Logistics, 35(5),
1245–1261. https://doi.org/10.1108/APJML-02-2022-0125
Kabadayi, S., Livne-Tarandach, R., & Pirson, M. (2023). A dignity-vulnerability approach
framework to maximize well-being outcomes by transformative service initiatives (TSIs).
The Journal of Services Marketing, 37(9), 1151–1166.
Karababa, E., & Kjeldgaard, D. (2014). Value in marketing: Toward sociocultural perspectives.
Marketing Theory, 14(1), 119–127. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593113500385
Kaur, R., & Singh, J. (2023). Social marketing framework for anti-littering behavior: An
integrated serial mediation model. Journal of Social Marketing, 13(4), 528–553. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JSOCM-06-2022-0133
Kessler, M. M. (1963). Bibliographic coupling between scientific papers. American
Documentation, 14(1), 10–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.5090140103
Kipp, A., & Hawkins, R. (2019). The responsibilization of “development consumers” through
cause-related marketing campaigns. Consumption Markets & Culture, 22(1), 1–16. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10253866.2018.1431221
Kopalle, P. K., Krishna, A., Rajan, U., & Wang, Y. (2022). How does regulatory monitoring of
cause marketing affect firm behavior and donations to charity? International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 39(3), 947–966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2022.01.003
Koschate-Fischer, N., Huber, I. V., & Hoyer, W. D. (2016). When will price increases associated
with company donations to charity be perceived as fair? Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 44(5), 608–626. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-015-0454-5
Kotler, P., & Zaltman, G. (1971). Social marketing: An approach to planned social change.
Journal of Marketing, 35(3), 3–12. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224297103500302
Krishna, A. (2011). Can supporting a cause decrease donations and happiness? The cause
marketing paradox. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(3), 338–345. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jcps.2011.02.001
Lee, N. R., & Kotler, P. (2011). Social marketing: Influencing behaviors for good. Sage.
Lee, Y., Seo, J. Y., & Yoon, S. (2020). Charity advertising: Congruence between political
orientation and cause of need. International Journal of Advertising, 39(7), 943–962.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02650487.2019.1710972
Lepkowska-White, E., Parsons, A. L., Wong, B., & White, A. M. (2022). Building a socially
responsible global community? Communicating B corps on social media. Corporate
Communications: An International Journal, 28(1), 86–102. https://doi.org/10.1108/CCIJ01-2022-0005
Leroi-Werelds, S. (2019). An update on customer value: State of the art, revised typology, and
research agenda. Journal of Service Management, 30(5), 650–680. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JOSM-03-2019-0074
Liang, H., & Renneboog, L. (2017). On the foundations of corporate social responsibility. The
Journal of Finance, 72(2), 853–910. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12487
Li, H., An, H., Wang, Y., Huang, J., & Gao, X. (2016). Evolutionary features of academic articles
co-keyword network and keywords co-occurrence network: Based on two-mode affiliation
network. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences Elsevier BV, 450, 657–669. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.physa.2016.01.017
Li, D., & Atkinson, L. (2020). Effect of emotional victim images in prosocial advertising: The
moderating role of helping mode. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 25(4), e1676. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1676

26

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Lichtenthaler, U. (2021). Data management efficiency: Major opportunities for shared value
innovation. Management Research Review, 45(2), 156–172. https://doi.org/10.1108/MRR10-2020-0639
Lichy, J., Ryding, D., Rudawska, E., & Vignali, G. (2023). Resale as sustainable social innova­
tion: Understanding shifts in consumer decision-making and shopping orientations for
high-end secondhand clothing. Social Enterprise Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/SEJ-012023-0016
Li, S. Y., Graul, A. R., & Zhu, J. J. (2024). Investigating the disruptiveness of the sharing
economy at the individual consumer level: How consumer reflexivity drives re-engagement
in sharing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 52(1), 164–195. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11747-023-00926-6
Lithopoulos, A., Dacin, P. A., Berry, T. R., Faulkner, G., O’Reilly, N., Rhodes, R. E.,
Spence, J. C., Tremblay, M. S., Vanderloo, L. M., & Latimer-Cheung, A. E. (2018).
Examining the ParticipACTION brand using the brand equity pyramid. Journal of Social
Marketing, 8(4), 378–396. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-11-2017-0071
Liu, G., Ko, W. W., & Chapleo, C. (2018). How and when socially entrepreneurial nonprofit
organizations benefit from adopting social alliance management routines to manage social
alliances? Journal of Business Ethics, 151(2), 497–516. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-0163231-6
Lou, C., & Xie, Q. (2021). Something social, something entertaining? How digital content
marketing augments consumer experience and brand loyalty. International Journal of
Advertising, 40(3), 376–402. https://doi.org/10.1080/02650487.2020.1788311
Mariani, M. M., Perez‐Vega, R., & Wirtz, J. (2022). AI in marketing, consumer research and
psychology: A systematic literature review and research agenda. Psychology & Marketing, 39
(4), 755–776. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21619
McWilliams, A., Siegel, D. S., Barney, J. B., Ketchen, D. J., & Wright, M. (2011). Creating and
capturing value: Strategic corporate social responsibility, resource-based theory, and sus­
tainable competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 37(5), 1480–1495. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0149206310385696
Merchant, A., Ford, J. B., & Rose, G. (2011). How personal nostalgia influences giving to
charity. Journal of Business Research, 64(6), 610–616. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2010.
06.013
Mitchell, S. L., & Clark, M. (2021). Telling a different story: How nonprofit organizations reveal
strategic purpose through storytelling. Psychology & Marketing, 38(1), 142–158. https://doi.
org/10.1002/mar.21429
Mitchell, S. L., & Clark, M. (2021). Volunteer choice of nonprofit organisation: An integrated
framework. European Journal of Marketing, 55(1), 63–94.
Mitchell, A., Madill, J., & Chreim, S. (2016). Social enterprise dualities: Implications for social
marketing. Journal of Social Marketing, 6(2), 169–192. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-062015-0043
Mitchell, A., Madill, J., Chreim, S., & Michael Basil, D. (2015). Marketing and social enter­
prises: Implications for social marketing. Journal of Social Marketing, 5(4), 285–306. https://
doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-09-2014-0068
Mitnick, B. M., Windsor, D., & Wood, D. (2020). CSR: Undertheorized or essentially
contested? Academy of Management Review, 46(3), 623–629. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.
2020.0239
Mizukoshi, K. (2023). The impact of materialism and well-being on buycotts. Journal of
Creating Value, 9(1), 46–62. https://doi.org/10.1177/23949643231171004

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

27

Mongeon, P., & Hus, A. P. (2016). The journal coverage of web of science and Scopus:
A comparative analysis. Scientometrics, 106(1), 213–228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192015-1765-5
Muñoz, P., & Kimmitt, J. (2019). Social mission as competitive advantage: A configurational
analysis of the strategic conditions of social entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Research,
101, 854–861. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.11.044
Nascimento, L. S., da Costa Júnior, J. C., Salazar, V. S., & Chim-Miki, A. F. (2021). Coopetition
in social entrepreneurship: A strategy for social value devolution. International Journal of
Emerging Markets, 18(9), 2176–2197. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOEM-09-2020-1062
Ndasi, W., Bolat, E., & Roushan, G. (2022). A comparative impact of cause-related marketing
and sponsorship leveraged internet display advertising. International Journal of Internet
Marketing and Advertising, 16(1–2), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJIMA.2022.120970
Nicholls, A. (2010). The legitimacy of social entrepreneurship: Reflexive isomorphism in a pre–
paradigmatic field. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34(4), 611–633.
Okano, M., Langhi, C., & Ribeiro, R. (2021). Measuring the benefits of ICTs in social
enterprises: An exploratory study. Brazilian Business Review, 18(3), 317–333. https://doi.
org/10.15728/bbr.2021.18.3.5
O’Shaughnessy, J., & O’Shaughnessy, N. J. (2007). Reply to criticisms of marketing, the
consumer society and hedonism. European Journal of Marketing, 41(1/2), 7–16. https://
doi.org/10.1108/03090560710718076
Palacios-Marqués, D., García, M. G., Sánchez, M. M., & Mari, M. P. A. (2019). Social
entrepreneurship and organizational performance: A study of the mediating role of dis­
tinctive competencies in marketing. Journal of Business Research, 101, 426–432.
Patel, R., Bhatt, V., Thomas, S., Trivedi, T., & Pandey, S. (2023). Predicting the cause-related
marketing participation intention by examining big-five personality traits and moderating
role of subjective happiness. International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 21(1),
1–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12208-023-00371-9
Pepper, M., Jackson, T., & Uzzell, D. (2009). An examination of the values that motivate
socially conscious and frugal consumer behaviours. International Journal of Consumer
Studies, 33(2), 126–136. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1470-6431.2009.00753.x
Perianes-Rodriguez, A., Waltman, L., & Van Eck, N. J. (2016). Constructing bibliometric
networks: A comparison between full and fractional counting. Journal of Informetrics, 10
(4), 1178–1195.
Pimentel, P. C., Gomes, P. M. L., & Didonet, S. R. (2023). Dealing with integrated marketing
communications’ paradoxes in social ventures. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing, 35(4), 354–390. https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2021.1954130
Pomering, A. (2017). Marketing for sustainability: Extending the conceptualisation of the
marketing mix to drive value for individuals and society at large. Australasian Marketing
Journal, 25(2), 157–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ausmj.2017.04.011
Porter, M. E., & Kramer, M. R. (2006). The link between competitive advantage and corporate
social responsibility. Harvard Business Review, 84(12), 78–92.
Porter, M. E., & Kramer, M. R. (2011). Creating shared value: Redefining capitalism and the
role of the corporation in society. Harvard Business Review, 89(1/2), 62–77.
Porter, M. E., & Kramer, M. R. (2019). Creating shared value. In Managing sustainable business
(pp. 323–346). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-024-1144-7_16
Pracejus, J. W., & Olsen, G. D. (2004). The role of brand/cause fit in the effectiveness of
cause-related marketing campaigns. Journal of Business Research, 57(6), 635–640. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(02)00306-5

28

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Prior, D. D. (2013). Supplier representative activities and customer perceived value in complex
industrial solutions. Industrial Marketing Management, 42(8), 1192–1201. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.indmarman.2013.03.015
Purdy, C. (2020). How one social marketing organization is transitioning from charity to social
enterprise. Social Marketing Quarterly, 26(2), 71–79. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1524500420918703
Purohit, S., & Gupta, S. (2023). Sustainable social enterprise built by empowering women
artisans: A case of Gramshree, India. Asian Journal of Management Cases, 20(2), 157–173.
https://doi.org/10.1177/09728201231180764
Ratten, V. (2020). Coronavirus (covid-19) and social value co-creation. International Journal of
Sociology and Social Policy, 42(3/4), 222–231. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSSP-06-2020-0237
Ravi, N., Subramoniam, S., Hareendrakumar, V. R., & Chinta, R. (2022). Consumer purchase
intention of social enterprise products: Mediating role of emotional value. Social Enterprise
Journal, 18(4), 691–710. https://doi.org/10.1108/SEJ-02-2022-0019
Razmerita, L., Kirchner, K., & Nielsen, P. (2016). What factors influence knowledge sharing in
organizations? A social dilemma perspective of social media communication. Journal of
Knowledge Management, 20(6), 1225–1246. https://doi.org/10.1108/JKM-03-2016-0112
Reese, L. A., & Fasenfest, D. (1997). What works best? Values and the evaluation of local
economic development policy. Economic Development Quarterly, 11(3), 195–207. https://
doi.org/10.1177/089124249701100301
Rego, M. M., Hamilton, M. A., & Rogers, D. (2021). Measuring the impact of cause-related
marketing: A meta-analysis of nonprofit and for-profit alliance campaigns. Journal of
Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 33(4), 434–456. https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.
2020.1726253
Roundy, P. T. (2017). “Doing good” while serving customers: Charting the social entrepreneur­
ship and marketing interface. Journal of Research in Marketing and Entrepreneurship, 19(2),
105–124. https://doi.org/10.1108/JRME-03-2017-0009
Roy, P. S., & Goswami, P. (2020). Integrating social enterprise and social marketing with
shadow framework: A case for peacebuilding. Journal of Social Marketing, 10(2), 153–178.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JSOCM-08-2018-0088
Saracevic, S., & Schlegelmilch, B. B. (2021). The impact of social norms on pro-environmental
behavior: A systematic literature review of the role of culture and self-construal.
Sustainability, 13(9), 5156. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13095156
Seleznоva, O., Boiko, O., & Bondar, V. (2020). Theoretical means for social entrepreneurship
research in context of marketing 3.0. Economics Ecology Socium, 4(2), 24–31. https://doi.org/
10.31520/2616-7107/2020.4.2-3
Septianto, F., An, J., & Soegianto, B. (2019). Personalized giving: Configurational approach in
examining demographics, morality, and prosocial intentions. Journal of Global Scholars of
Marketing Science, 29(3), 330–342. https://doi.org/10.1080/21639159.2019.1622433
Severo, E. A., Guimarães, J. C. F., Dellarmelin, M. L., & Ribeiro, R. P. (2019). The influence of
social networks on environmental awareness and the social responsibility of generations.
Brazilian Business Review, 16(5), 500–518. https://doi.org/10.15728/bbr.2019.16.5.5
Sharma, P. (2021). Customer co-creation, COVID-19 and sustainable service outcomes.
Benchmarking: An International Journal, 28(7), 2232–2258. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-102020-0541
Sigala, M. (2019). A market approach to social value co-creation: Findings and implications
from “mageires” the social restaurant. Marketing Theory, 19(1), 27–45. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1470593118772208

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

29

Silva, M., Khan, Z., Vorley, T., & Zeng, J. (2020). Transcending the pyramid: Opportunity
co-creation for social innovation. Industrial Marketing Management, 89, 471–486. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.12.001
Singh, S., & Dhir, S. (2019). Structured review using TCCM and bibliometric analysis of
international cause-related marketing, social marketing, and innovation of the firm.
International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 16(2), 335–347. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12208-019-00233-3
Singh, S., & Duque, L. C. (2020). Familiarity and format: Cause-related marketing promotions
in international markets. International Marketing Review, 37(5), 901–921. https://doi.org/10.
1108/IMR-10-2018-0307
Singh, A., Saini, G. K., & Majumdar, S. (2015). Application of social marketing in social
entrepreneurship: Evidence from India. Social Marketing Quarterly, 21(3), 152–172.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1524500415595208
Sinkovics, N., Sinkovics, R. R., Hoque, S. F., Czaban, L., Yamin, M., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2015).
A reconceptualisation of social value creation as social constraint alleviation. Critical
Perspectives on International Business, 11(3/4), 340–363. https://doi.org/10.1108/cpoib-062014-0036
Sipilä, J., Alavi, S., Edinger‐Schons, L. M., Müller, U., & Habel, J. (2022). Corporate social
responsibility and perceived fairness of price increases. Psychology & Marketing, 39(7),
1370–1384. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21656
Small, D. A., & Verrochi, N. M. (2009). The face of need: Facial emotion expression on charity
advertisements. Journal of Marketing Research, 46(6), 777–787. https://doi.org/10.1509/
jmkr.46.6.777
Smith, B. R., Cronley, M. L., & Barr, T. F. (2012). Funding implications of social enterprise: The
role of mission consistency, entrepreneurial competence, and attitude toward social enter­
prise on donor behavior. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 31(1), 142–157. https://doi.
org/10.1509/jppm.11.033
Srivetbodee, S., Igel, B., & Kraisornsuthasinee, S. (2017). Creating social value through social
enterprise marketing: Case studies from thailand’s food-focused social entrepreneurs.
Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 8(2), 201–224.
Sudhir, K., Roy, S., & Cherian, M. (2016). Do sympathy biases induce charitable giving? The
effects of advertising content. Marketing Science, 35(6), 849–869. https://doi.org/10.1287/
mksc.2016.0989
Suki, N. M., Majeed, A., & Mohd Suki, N. (2022). Impact of consumption values on consumers’
purchase of organic food and green environmental concerns. Social Responsibility Journal,
18(6), 1128–1141. https://doi.org/10.1108/SRJ-01-2021-0026
Tasavori, M., Ghauri, P. N., Zaefarian, R., Ghauri Byung Il Park, N., & Chang Hoon Oh, P.
(2016). Entering the base of the pyramid market in India: A corporate social entrepreneur­
ship perspective. International Marketing Review, 33(4), 555–579. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IMR-03-2014-0085
Thielmann, I., Spadaro, G., & Balliet, D. (2020). Personality and prosocial behavior:
A theoretical framework and meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 146(1), 30–90. https://
doi.org/10.1037/bul0000217
Thomas, S., & Jadeja, A. (2021). Psychological antecedents of consumer trust in CRM cam­
paigns and donation intentions: The moderating role of creativity. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, 61, 102589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2021.102589
Thomas, S., Patel, R., & Bhatt, V. (2023). Private-label grocery buyers’ donation intentions and
trust in CRM campaigns: An empirical analysis by employing social identity theory. Society
and Business Review, 18(3), 401–421. https://doi.org/10.1108/SBR-12-2021-0247

30

A. P. SOARES JÚNIOR ET AL.

Toledano, M., & Riches, M. (2014). Brand alliance and event management for social causes:
Evidence from New Zealand. Public Relations Review, 40(5), 807–814. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pubrev.2014.09.001
Tsai, J. M., & Lu, T. E. (2023). Is brand reputation a banner for social marketing? A social
enterprise product consumption perspective. Psychology & Marketing, 40(10), 2041–2059.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21870
Tudu, P. N. (2020). Saathi sanitary pads: Eco‐friendly pads which will make you go bananas!
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 25(1), e1667. https://doi.
org/10.1002/nvsm.1667
Van Eck, N., & Waltman, L. (2010). Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for biblio­
metric mapping. Scientometrics, 84(2), 523–538. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3
Van Steenburg, E., Anaza, N. A., Ashhar, A., Barrios, A., Deutsch, A. R., Gardner, M. P., Priya, P.,
Roy, A., Sivaraman, A., & Taylor, K. A. (2022). The new world of philanthropy: How changing
financial behavior, public policies, and COVID-19 affect nonprofit fundraising and marketing.
Journal of Consumer Affairs, 56(3), 1079–1105. https://doi.org/10.1111/joca.12461
Varey, R. J. (2010). Marketing means and ends for a sustainable society: A welfare agenda for
transformative change. Journal of Macromarketing, 30(2), 112–126. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0276146710361931
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2004). Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. Journal of
Marketing, 68(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.68.1.1.24036
Waltman, L., Van Eck, N. J., & Noyons, E. C. (2010). A unified approach to mapping and
clustering of bibliometric networks. Journal of Informetrics, 4(4), 629–635. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.joi.2010.07.002
Webb, D. J. Green, C. L. & Brashear, T. G. (2000). Development and validation of scales to
measure attitudes influencing monetary donations to charitable organizations. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 28(2), 299–309.
White, K., & Peloza, J. (2009). Self-benefit versus other-benefit marketing appeals: Their
effectiveness in generating charitable support. Journal of Marketing, 73(4), 109–124.
https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.73.4.109
Winterich, K. P., & Barone, M. J. (2011). Warm glow or cold, hard cash? Social identity effects
on consumer choice for donation versus discount promotions. Journal of Marketing
Research, 48(5), 855–868.
Woodside, S. J. (2018). Dominant logics: US WISEs and the tendency to favor a marketdominant or social mission-dominant approach. Social Enterprise Journal, 14(1), 39–59.
Wu, H. L., Chen, T. Y., & Chen, B. H. (2021). Driving forces of repurchasing social enterprise
products. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 37(2), 447–460. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JBIM-08-2020-0381
Xu, L., Mehta, R., & Dahl, D. W. (2022). Leveraging creativity in charity marketing: The impact
of engaging in creative activities on subsequent donation behavior. Journal of Marketing, 86
(5), 79–94. https://doi.org/10.1177/00222429211037587
Xu, F., Tan, J., Lu, L., Li, S., & Qin, L. (2021). How does value co-creation behavior affect
destination loyalty? A role switching perspective. Journal of Theoretical & Applied Electronic
Commerce Research, 16(5), 1805–1826. https://doi.org/10.3390/jtaer16050101
Yeoh, P. L. (2021). Determinants of participation and outcomes in a cause marketing event:
A laddering approach. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 35(5), 1–29. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2021.1961652
Yin, B., Li, Y. J., & Singh, S. (2020). Coins are cold and cards are caring: The effect of pregiving
incentives on charity perceptions, relationship norms, and donation behavior. Journal of
Marketing, 84(6), 57–73. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022242920931451

