Voluntas, 3-.3, 267-309 

Lester  M.  S a l a m o n  a  a n d   H e l m u t   K.  A n h e i e r  b 

In  search  of  the  non-profit  sector 
Ih  The  problem  of  classification* 

Abstract 

Building  on  a  previous  Voluntas  article  (Salamon and  Anheier,  1992b), 
which  formulated  a  systematic  approach  to  defining  the  non-profit 
sector  for  purposes  of  comparative  research,  this  article  takes  on  the 
complementary task  of  formulating  a  classification  system  that  can  be 
used to differentiate systematically the types of non-profit organisations 
that  exist  at  the  global  level.  To  do  so,  the  article  first  assesses  a 
number  of  existing  classification  systems,  such  as  the  International 
Standard Industrial Classification and the National Taxonomy of Exempt 
Entities.  Finding  these  systems  inadequate,  the  article  then  introduces 
an  alternative  system,  which  we  term  the  International  Classification 
of  Nonprofit  Organizations  (ICNPO).  The  ICNPO  classifies  non-profit 
establishments  into  12  major  groups  based  on  their  primary  economic 
activity,  and  then  further  sub-divides  these  into  24  sub-groups.  The 
result  is  a  system  that  scores  high  in  terms  of  five  key  evaluation 
criteria:  economy, significance, rigour,  organising  power,  and  richness. 
What  is  more,  initial  tests  of  the  ICNPO  in  a  set  of  countries  show 
that  it  performs  well  in  coming  to  terms  with  the  diverse  types  of 
non-profit  institutions  that  exist  around  the  world. 

Introduction 

In  a  previous  article  (Salamon  and  Anheier,  1992b),  we  argued  that 
the  lack  of  attention  that  has  historically  been  given  to  the  non-profit 
sector  around  the  world  has  been  due  to  factors  that  are  as  much 
conceptual  as  empirical.  The  non-profit  sector  is  poorly  understood, 
not  so  much  because  the  data  on  it  are  limited,  rather  because  the 
concepts  used  to  depict  its  boundaries  are  so  murky  and  imprecise. 

268 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

To  correct  this  problem,  we  reviewed  several  alternative  ways  of 
defining  this  sector  and  ultimately  settled  on  what  we  termed  the 
'structural/operational  definition'.  The  heart  of this  definition  is  a  set 
of  five  core  struchzral  or  operational  features  that  distinguish  the 
organisations  that  comprise  the  non-profit  sector  from  other  types  of 
soci'al  institutions.  So  defined, the  non-profit  sector  is  a  set  of organis- 
ations  that  are 

•  formally constituted; 

•  non-governmental  in  basic  structure; 

•  self-governing; 

• . non-profit-distributing;  and 

•  voluntary  to  some  meaningful  extent. 
This  definition  recommended itself because  it  ranked  highest  in  terms 
of  five  key  criteria  that  are  often  used  to  evaluate  analytical  models 
(Deutsch, 1963;  see below). In particular, it seemed to  enjoy the greatest 
economy, significance,  rigour,  combinatorial  richness  and  explanatory 
power  (ability  to  apply  to  varied  circumstances). 

The  need for  a  classification system 

Important  as  the  task  of defining  the  non-profit  sector  and  identifying 
its  common  characteristics  is,  however,  it  represents  only  half  of  the 
conceptual  challenge  involved  in  coming  to  terms  with  this  sector.  At 
least  as  important  is  a  second  crucial  taslc  the  task  of  classification, 
of identifying the systematic differences among  the organisations in 
the  sector  and  an  appropriate  basis  for  grouping  them.  Definition  and 
classification  are,  in  a  sense,  two  parts  of  a  related  process.  The  first 
specifies  what  the  entities  in  a  group  have  in  common;  the  second 
spells  out  the  ways  in  which  they  nevertheless  differ. 

Such  differentiation  is  absolutely  essential  for  serious  analysis,  and 
even  casual  description.  As  a  recent  United  Nations  document  puts 
it: 

all  economic  processes  that  are  to  be  described  in  the  form  of  statistics 
require systematic classification.  Classifications  are,  so  to  speak,  the  system 
of languages  used  in  communication about  ...  phenomena"  (1990, p.6). 

This  general  need  for  a  classification  system  is  particularly  applicable 
to  the  non-profit  sector.  Because  of  the  diversity  of  this  sector,  com- 
parisons  at  the  level of the  sector  as  a  whole can be  at  best  incomplete 
and at worst seriously misleading. Countries that have major differences 
in  the  overall  scale  and  character  of  their  non-profit  sectors  can 
nevertheless  have  significant  commonalities  with  respect  to  particular 

Classifying  the non-profit  sector 

269 

types  of  organisations.  Without  some  systematic  basis  for  grouping 
information 
in  terms  of  the  component  parts  of  this  sector,  little 
progress  can  be  made  in  describing  the  sector,  let  alone  conducting 
serious  cross-national  research  on  it. 

The  challenges  of  classification 

While  classification  is  essential,  however,  it  is  also  very  difficult.  No 
single  classification  system  is  perfect  for  all  possible  purposes.  In  a 
sense,  the  ultimate  value  of  a  classification  system  is  dictated  by  the 
use  to  which  it  will  be  put.  For  some  uses,  it  is  sufficient  to  group 
all  organisations  that  are  part  of  a  class  simply  by  size.  For  others, 
more  complex  classifications  are  necessary. 

Broadly  speaking,  two  basic  issues  have  to  be  settled  in  the  design 
of  any  classification  system.  The  first  of  these  is  the  unit  of  analysis 
to  be  used;  the  second  is  the  basis  of  the  classification, 
the  central 
variable,  or  variables,  in  terms  of which  entities  are  to be  differentiated 
from  each  other. 

Unit  of  analysis.  So  far  as  the  unit  of  analysis  is  concerned,  the  task 
is  to  find  the  unit  that  is  both  most  homogenous  in  terms  of  the 
classification  factor  of  interest  (so  that  entities  can  really  be  grouped 
• in  terms  of  this  factor)  and  also  available  as  a  unit  about  which 
relevant  information  is  collected.  For  example,  a  complex  organisation 
such  as  Caritas,  the  Catholic  service  agency  in  Germany  may  operate 
several  hospitals,  a  number  of  day  care  centres,  and  a  variety  of 
family  service  agencies.  If  the  organisation 
is  the  unit  of  analysis, 
therefore,  Caritas  would  likely  be  classified  as  a  health  provider  since 
that  is  probably  the  activity  that  accounts  for  the  largest  share  of  its 
expenditures.  In  the  process,  however,  the  classification  system  would 
obscure  the  probably  more  numerous  family  agencies  that  the  Caritas 
organisation  also  encompasses.  While  it  may  be  more  precise  to  focus 
on  the  individual  establishments  or  service  units,  however,  Caritas 

• may  not  keep  its  data  in  this  form. 

Basis of classification.  Even  when  the  unit  of analysis  can  be  established, 
important  questions  remain  about  the  basis  to  use  for  classification. 
The  possibilities  here  are  almost  endless:  size,  legal  form,  clientele, 
type  of  activity,  product.  All  of  these  are  reasonable  possibilities,  but 
that 
each  yields  a  different  result.  Thus  a  non-profit  organisation 
conducts research  on health  matters  could  logically be grouped  together 
with  other  research  organisations  or  with  other  health  organisations 
depending  on  whether  the  activity  (research)  or  the  product  (health 
services)  is  used  as  the  basis  of  the  classification.  Unless  these  matters 

270 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

are  dearly  understood  and  systematised,  serious~ problems  can  arise 
in  trying  to  interpret  the  basic  parameters  of  the  sector,  especially  in 
cross-national  settings. 

Existing  systems 

Fortunately, a wide variety of systems for classifying non-profit organis- 
ations  are  in  existence, and  they  offer some insights  into  how  to  settle 
these  issues.  While  these  systems  differ  in  many  respects,  there  is 
some  consensus  that  the  appropriate  unit  of  analysis  is  the  individual 
establishment  and  that  the  appropriate  basis  for  classification, at  least 
for  assessing  the  economic  character  of  the  sector,  is  the  economic 
activity that  the establishment carries  out: that is, the product or service 
it  generates. 1  This  is  the  basis  for  the  national  income  data  used  to 
generate  estimates  of  national  economic  activity  around  the  world, 
and  it  is  also  the  basis  for  many  of  the  more  numerous  national 
systems  within  which  non-profit  organisations  are  classified. 

To  say  that  there  are  some  basic  commonalities  among  a  number 
of  classification  systems  now  in  use  for  the  non-profit  sector  is  not 
yet  to  say  that  the  existing systems  are  the  same.  Most  of the  existing 
systems are built around national legal codes and embody an essentially 
legal  definition  of  the  non-profit  sector.  A  system  developed  by  the 
Internal Revenue Service in the United States some years  ago to classify 
non-profit  organisations,  for  example,  identifies  over  400  types  of 
organisations,  most  of  them  sub-sets  of  the  26  different  provisions  of 
the  Internal  Revenue  Code  under  which  organisations  can  claim  tax- 
exempt  status.  The  Nomenclature  des  domaines  d'action  associations used 
by  the  French  Statistical  Office  (INSEE,  1990), by  contrast,  utilizes  an 
entirely different grouping consisting of ten general domains of activity, 
which are  sub-divided into 64 sub-domains. Many of these are peculiar 
to  French  national  circumstances,  however,  such  as  the  distinction 
between  university-based  sport  activities  and  other sport  clubs,  or  the 
inclusion  of  the  domain  of  'transport  and  communication'. 

Fortunately, however, a number of more general classification schemes 
are  also  available  for  differentiating  the  types  of  organisations  that 
comprise  the  non-profit  sector.  These  include  the  UN  International 
Standard  Industrial  Classification  (ISIC)  of  all  economic activities,  the 
General  Industrial  Cla.~sification  of Economic Activities (NACE)  devel- 
oped  by  the  European  Statistical  Office,  and  the  National  Taxonomy 
of  Exempt  Entities  (NTEE)  developed  by  the  National  Center  for 
Charitable  Statistics  in  the  United  States. 

In  the  balance  of  this  article,  we  assess  the  relative  utility  of  these 
different  clarification  systems  and  then  suggest  a  modified  system 
that  we  argue  is  more  suitable  than  the  existing  alternatives  for 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

27I 

comparative  international  work  in  this  field.  We  call  this  the  Inter- 
national  Classification  of  Nonprofit  Organizations  (ICNPO).  In  order 
to  explain  w h y   this  alternative  system  is  superior,  however,  we  must 
first  explore  what  the  criteria  are  for  choosing  among  classification 
schemes  in  this  field. 

Evaluation  criteria 

Since  the  utility  of  a  classification  scheme  is  determined  in  important 
part  by  the  use  to  which  it  will  be  put,  great  care  must  be  taken  in 
declaring  one  system  superior  to  another.  For  the  present  purposes, 
however,  the  evaluation  criteria  formulated  by  Karl  Deutsch  to  choose 
among  analytical models  in  the  social  sciences and  used  in  our  earlier 
article  (Salamon  and  Anheier,  1992b)  to  choose  among  alternative 
definitions  of  the  non-profit  sector,  also  provide  an  objective basis  for 
choosing  one  classification  scheme  over  another.  In  these  terms,  the 
best  classification  system,  like  the  best  definition,  is  the  one  that 
achieves  the  optimum  combination  of  economy,  significance,  rigour, 
combinatorial  richness  and  explanatory  power.  Let  us  examine  each 
of  these  in  turn. 

Economy.  The  temptation  with  any  ¢la.~sification  system is  to  multiply 
the  number  of  categories  so  that  it  comes  close  to  the  number  of 
separate  organisations.  So  elaborated,  a  classification  system  loses  its 
value  as  a  way  to  simplify  reality.  What  is  more,  it  can  make  the 
system unworkable by requiring information that is not easily available. 
As  with  a  definition,  therefore, a  classification  system to  be  effective 
must  have  a  reasonable  degree  of  economy.  That  is,  it  must  group 
the  welter  of  organisations  that  comprise  the  sector  into  a  reasonable 
number  of  groupings,  and  it  must  do  so  with  reference  to  only  a 
limited  set  of  crucial  factors. 

Significance. Economy, however,  is  only  one factor in  judging  a  classifi- 
cation  system.  Equally  important  is  the  preservation  of  distinctions 
that  highlight  the  truly  significant  differences  in  the  phenomenon 
u n d e r   study.  A  classification  scheme  which  is  simple  and  economical 
but  which  permits  comparison  only  in  terms  of factors  that  are  trivial 
or  unimportant  is  not  the  one  that  should  command  support.  The 
clarification must focus attention on differences that are truly mean.ing- 
hal  and  significant. 

Rigour.  Classification  systems  must  also  be  rigorous,  or  reliable  in 
terms  of  measurement.  Criteria  must  be  defined  in  such  a  way  that 
organisations  that  end  u p   in  one  category  in  one  country  would  be 

272 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

likely  to  end  up  in  the  same  category  in  another  country.  What  is 
more,  the  classification  should  not  depend  on  special  information 
known to only a  small number of people. The basis for the classification 
should  be  capable  of  being  made  sufficiently  clear  to  ensure  that 
different  people  would  group  the  same  agencies  the  same  way  most 
of  the  time. 

Combinatorial richness.  A  fourth  crucial  criterion  of  an  effective classifi- 
cation system is  the  "combinatorial richness"  it  achieves.  Combinatorial 
richness is  the measure of the  productivity of the classification system, 
the extent to  which it brings  to  the  surface a  wide  range  of interesting 
relationships,  comparisons  and  contrasts.  Combinatorial  richness  and 
economy are therefore partly  in  opposition  to  each  other,  since  greater 
combinatorial  richness  can  often  be  achieved  only  at  the  expense  of 
a  loss of economy and  vice versa.  But  these two  criteria  are  not  simply 
opposite  sides  o f   the  same  coin.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  possible  to 
have  a  classification system that  lacks  both economy and  combinatorial 
richness  because  it  uses  complex  criteria  of  differentiation  that  are 
nevertheless  not  very  rich  and  suggestive. 

Organising power. The final test of a classification system is its 'organising 
power':  its  abiI.ity  to  fit  circumstances  other  than  the  one  it  was 
originally  developed  to  fit.  This  is  obviously  especiaI.ly  important  in 
international comparative work. A classification system with the greatest 
organising power  is  the  one  that  can  most  comfortably encompass  the 
circumstances  of the  largest  number  of  different countries  or  types  of 
national  situations. 

Summary.  Clearly,  no  classification  system  can  score  equally  high  on 
all  of  these  criteria,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  national  circum- 
stances  do  differ  considerably.  A  system  that  is  precise  enough  to 
demarcate  the  organisations  in  a  particular  country  with  great  rigour 
is  therefore  likely  to  lack  the  organising  power  to  apply  to  another 
country  very  easily.  Complex  trade-offs  therefore  exist  among  the 
various  criteria,  and  systems  that  may  be  ideal  for  particlflar  national 
circumstances  m a y   consequently  not  work  well  for  international, 
comparative  work.  Since  our  objective  here  is  to  find  a  classification 
system  that  will  work  best  comparatively,  we  necessarily  put  slightly 
more  emphasis  on  some  criteria  (for  example,  'organising  power'  and 
'economy') than  others. The discussion  of various  classification systems 
below  must  consequently  not  be  taken  to  suggest  that  the  various 
systems may not  have  great value  in particular national  circumstances. 
Rather,  our  question  is  different.  How  well  do  these  systems  work 
for  the  task  of classifying  the  non-profit  sector  for  comparative  inter- 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

273 

national  work?  The  answer,  we  suggest,  is  not  very  well,  leading  us 
to  develop  an  alternative  system.  Let  us  examine,  then,  what  factors 
led us to this conclusion and what the components of our recommended 
system are. 

Existing  classification  systems:  an  assessment 

Broadly speaking, three fairly comprehensive classification systems are 
available  for  differentiating the  non-profit  sector  at  the  international 
level:  first,  the  UN's  International  Standard  Industrial  Classification 
(ISIC)  (United  Nations,  1990);  the  European  Community's  General 
Industrial Classification of Economic Activities (NACE)  (Eurostat, 1985); 
and  the  National  Taxonomy of Exempt Entities  (NTEE)  developed by 
the National Council of Charitable  Statistics  in  the  United  States.  How 
well  do  these  systems  stack  up  in  terms  of  the  criteria  identified 
above? 

The  UN  International  Standard  Industrial  Classification  System  (ISIC) 

The UN ISIC system was  formulated to provide a  basis  for developing 
consistent economic statistics  among the  countries  of  the  world.  MOd- 
eUed on  the  standard  industrial classification  system developed  in  the 
United  States,  it  was  adopted  at  the  international  level  in  1948 and 
provides the most comprehensive and  widely-used system for classify- 
ing  economic  activity in  the  world. 

Now  in  its  third  revision,  the  ISIC system  essentially  differentiates 
the  many  types  of  "establishments'  in  any  national  economy in  terms 
of  their  principal  "economic  activity'.  Altogether,  the  ISIC  groups 
establishments into 17 broad  'sections'  (for example, Agriculture, Hunt- 
ing  and  Forestry; Manufacturing), sub-divides  these into  60  "divisions" 
(for example, manufacture of textiles,  manufacture of tobacco products, 
manufacture of rubber  and  plastics  products),  and  further sub-divides 
these 60 into up  to nine 'groups'  each (for example, "spinning, weaving 
and finishing of textiles',  "manufacture of knitted  and  crocheted fabrics 
and  articles"  and  so  on). 

Like  its  cousin,  the  "economic  definition  of  the  non-profit  sector' 
described  in  Salamon and  Anheier (1992b),  the  International Standard 
Industrial Classification  system has  a  great deal  of economy,  rigour  and 
organising  power. The  system  has  evolved  over  more  than  40  years 
through  the  active involvement of  statisticians  from  countries  around 
the world.  Although certainly not  without its  complexities, it  provides 
a  rather  efficient way  to  sort  an  immense  amount  of  economic  data 
on  virtually  every  country,  and  has  acquired,  through  extensive 

274 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

communication among  statistical  officials,  a  high  degree  of  precision 
cross-nationally.  What  is  more,  it  is  a  system  that  is  already  in  place 
in  the  economic  data  systems  of  a  wide  array  of  countries,  making 
it a very practical system for gathering economic data on the non-profit 
sector. 

Despite  its  considerable  strengths,  however,  the  ISIC  system  also 
has significant drawbacks as a mechanism for classifying the non-profit 
sector.  In  the  first  place,  as  we  have  argued  elsewhere  (Salamon  and 
Anheier, 1992b; Anheier et al., 1992), the ISIC system utiiises a definition 
of  the  non-profit  sector  that  excludes  organisations  that  receive  haLf 
or  more  of  their  income  from  fees  or  government  support. 2  Perhaps 
b e c a u s e   of  this,  the  types  of  non-profit  organisations  that  are 
differentiated  in  the  ISIC  classification  are  rather  limited.  Almost  all 
the organisations meeting our definition for inclusion in  the non-profit 
sector  would  fall  into  one  of  only  three  broad  classes  identified  in 
the  ISIC:  Education  (M),  Health  and  social  work  (N),  and  Other 
community, social  and  personal  activities  (O)  (see  Table  1).  Although 
the  education category is  usefully split  into  meaningful categories, the 
others  are  not.  This  is  particularly  true  of  "health  and  social  work', 
which groups a broad range of social welfare activities from counsalling 
to  adoption  assistance  to  rehab'llitation  assistance  under  the  broad 
catch-all  "social work  activities'.  What  is  more,  the  'Other  community, 
social and  personal activities'  category also contains an immense range 
of different types, from trade unions to libraries, museums and religious 
congregations.  The  result  is  such  a  broad  set  of  catch-all  categories 
that  it  is  difficult to  use  the  scheme  to  make  meaning~l  comparisons 
among  countries  at  the  level  of  sub-sectors  of  the  non-profit  sector. 
In the terms  we  introduced  earlier,  the  classification system thus  lacks 
significance  and  combinatorial richness  so  far  as  the  non-profit  sector  is 
concerned. 

Not  only  does  it  lack  combinatorial richness,  however,  but  also  the 
ISIC  system  as  currently  constituted  lacks  organising  power.  This  is  so 
because  the  system  fails  to  give  sufficient  prominence  to  a  type  of 
non-profit organisation that has become increasingly important in m a n y  
developing  nations:  the  so-called  non-governmental  organisation,  or 
NGO.  These  are  combinations  of  housing,  community  development, 
economic  development  and  community  empowerment  organisations. 
During  the  past  20  years  they  have  grown  increasingly  important  in 
the life of many  developing societies, yet they do  not find a convenient 
or  prominent  home  in  the  ISIC  system.  Developed  for  a  different 
purpose,  the  ISIC  does  not  seem  able  to  accommodate this  significant 
new  phenomenon. 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

275 

Eurostat  General Industrial  Classification of Economic Activities  (NACE) 

As  originally formulated, the General Industrial Classification  of Econ- 
omic  Activities  (NACE)  developed  by  the  European  Statistical  Office 
provided some useful improvements on the basic ISIC system (Eurostat, 
1979, pp.25-6,  1985). As  reflected in  Table  1,  the  NACE  system added 
two major categories to the ISIC system: (1) "Research and development'; 
and  (2)  "Recreation and  culture' (included as part  of "Other community 
services"  under  ISIC).  This  usefully  tightened  the  'Other  community, 
social  and  personal  services"  category  and  highlights  the  role  of 
non-profit  research  bodies. 

Despite  these  improvements, however,  the  1970 NACE  system still 
suffered  from  many  of  the  same  problems  as  the  ISIC system  on 
which  it  rests.  Thus,  for  example,  it  still  failed  to  differentiate  the 
many  types  of  'social  work'  and  related  social  welfare  activities, 
grouping  these under  two  rather broad  categories -  'social  work"  and 
"social homes'. Nor did  the 1970 NACE  system depart from the overall 
definitional limitation  of the  ISIC system, its  focus  only  on  "donative' 
non-profits  and  its  exclusion  of  organisations  that  receive  significant 
income  from  government  or  fees.  In  fact,  the  NACE  is  even  more 
restrictive  than  the  basic  ISIC scheme.  This  is  so  because  it  restricts 
non-profit  organisations  by  definition  to  certain  categories  of  se.-vice. ~ 
that  it  a  priori treats  as  "non-market'.  Included  in  such  non-mark~ 
services are administration of cemeteries, social work, religious activity 
and  tourist  information.  Other  services  can  be  considered  non-profit 
but only if the producer receives most of its  resources from non-market 
sources  (for example, charitable contributions).  As  a  consequence, this 
system  leaves  out  many  important  types  of  non-profit  activity  and 
organisations, robbing the classification system of a considerable portion 
of  its  significance. 

Finally,  the  NACE  system  also  fails  to  leave  adequate  room  for 
NGOs  in  the  developing  world.  Such  organisations  are  buried  in  the 
'other  community services'  category  rather  than  being  highlighted  as 
a  distinctive type  of  organisation.  While  it  makes  some  improvement, 
therefore, the NACE  system thus  still  has  serious defidencies in  terms 
of  significance, combinatorial richness and  organising power. 3 

The  National  Taxonomy  of Exempt  Entities 

A  far  more  complete classification  system  for  the  non-profit  sector  is 
available  in  the  National  Taxonomy of  Exempt  Entities  developed  by 
the National  Center for Charitable Statistics,  a  division of Independent 
Sector  in  the  United  States  (Hodgkinson,  1990).  Originally  conceived 
as  a  way  to  get  beyond  the  cumbersome classification system then  in 

o 
.~ 

~ 
,., 
~  ~ ' ~  

o 
,.~ 

. 

~ . ~  

8 

~ 

" 

0 

~:  ~  ~ 

~ ' -  

o - ~  
"~ ° = ~ . ' - "  

~ 

0 
• = 

~ 
,"  ._~ 

~ 

~.0 
. =  

E 

8 _ ~ . ~ - ~  

~ 

- 

~.  =._~ 

~ o ~ ~ o  

~ < o  

~ - -  

~=-~ 

~~ 

. 

O  r . ` ,  

~ c n c , n ~  

[-, 

~  ~ 

u':, 

~''~  ~ 

~ - r ' ~  

~ = ~  

~ : : <  

: : > ~  

~ - ~  

~--r-o3 

._~ 

~ - ~   ~ s ~  

e- 

~,.~  >, 

P= 

e- 

2 = 

g g  

~'~ 

,.,.= 

.o  ~  $  o 
~=~  ~.~. 

, 

o  ~ " "  

- - -  

~  ='~'~= 

. . . ~  

~ ,  

~ r ~  

• '~  N..=_  o  > 

, , ~  
~ , .  

= g  

- 

~ 
" ~ u o  

~ 

- - -  

" a g ~ =  °  = = = ' ~ ~ ~ - ~  
~-~  ~  ~  =,. 

= . _ _ =  

~,.-  ~-~ 

E 
~_-=  ~s  ~=~ 

~..- 

o ~  

.~  ~  o 

J:  ~ 

~ 

- ~   ~  o 

~ 

~  ~ z :  

-~..o  ~.:~_~  ~o°_._ 

. . . .  

~  ~ 

_  ~ 

"~=  ~ 

278 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

use by the internal Revenue  Service to classify charitable, non-profit 
organisations in  the United  States,  the NTEE  system has  elements that 
recommend it for comparative international use as well. Most significant 
is  the  system's  comprehensiveness and  considerable  combinatorial rich- 
7'/esS. 

Where  the  ISIC  system  allocates  only  three  broad  classes  to  the 
economic activities  in  which  non-profits  are  active,  the  NTEE  system 
provides  for  26  'major  groups'  which  are  combined  into  ten  broad 
'functional  categories'.  Thus,  for  example,  the  functional  category 
"Human services'  includes such major  groups  as  'Crime,  legal-relate~l', 
'Employment, job-related',  "Food,  agriculture,  nutrition'  (see  Table "1). 
Each  o f  the  major  groups  is  then  further  divided  into  17  'common 
activities"  and  up  to  80  additional  activities  specific  to  the  groups. 
The common activities include such things as 'management and technical 
assistance',  'research"  and  'hand-raising  a n d / o r   hand  distribution'.  The 
add~'onal  activities  then  spell  out  the  particular  functions  in  more 
specific terms.  Thus  the  major  group  "Education"  is  further  divided  to 
differentiate  such  activities  as  'adult  basic  education,  compensatory 
learning'  (B60) from  'continuing  education,  lifelong  learning'  (B64). 

The  NTEE  system  is  thus  an  immensely  rich  classification  system. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  non-profit  sector,  it  is  in  some  sense 
the opposite extreme from the ISIC system: where the ISIC was  skimpy 
in the categories it set aside for the activities of non-profit organisations, 
the NTEE  system is  lush  with distinctions, in  the  terms  we  introduced 
earlier,  it  thus  has  great  combinatorial richness. 

Despite  this,  however,  the  NTEE  system has  some  significantdraw- 
backs  from the point of view of comparative analysis  of  the  non-profit 
sector,  in  the  first  place,  as  is  always  the  case,  its  combinatorial 
richness  is  purchased  a t  a  considerable price  in  terms  of  economy.  The 
differentiation of organisational types is so fine that it becomes difficult 
to  make  the  distinctions  called  for.  in  fact,  the  NTEE  system  actually 
reserves  some  codes  for  certain  named  organisations  rather  than  for 
certain  types of organisations. Thus, Boy Scouts  of America  is  assigned 
Class  O41,  Big Brothers,  Big Sisters  class  O31,  the  Urban  League  class 
P22  and  so  on.  Clearly,  a  classification  scheme  that  gets  d o w n   to  the 
level  of  actual  organisations  can  become  exceedingly  complex  and  of 
questionable  value  in  comparative  work.  in  fact,  taken  to  extremes, 
this  is  the  opposite  of  a  classification  system:  it  comes  close  to  a 
listing  of  agencies.  While  the  NTEE  stops  far  short  of  this,  many  of 
the  categories  do  not  line  up  well  with  the  economic data  within  the 
Standard  Industrial Classification System. As  a  consequence,  the  prac- 
ticality  of  the  system  is  open  to  serious  question  because  in  many 
countries  the  only  realistic  body of  meaningful data  on  the  establish- 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

. 

279 ~ 

merits  in  this  sector  is  that  embodied  in  the  national  income  data 
systems,  and  these  are  categorised  in  terms  of  the  ISIC. 

A  further  complication  with  the  NTEE  system  arises  from  the 
comprehensive  list  of  'common  activity  codes'  it  includes.  In  a  sense, 
organisations  are  categorised  on  two  bases  at  once:  first,  in  terms  of 
their  'economic  activity"  as  defined  in  the  ISIC  system  (that  is,  the 
product  or  field  in  which  the  entity  is  engaged);  and  second,  in  terms 
of  what  they  do  in  that  field.  While  this  can  be  useh~l,  it  can  also 
create  difficulties.  For  one  thing,  the  information  needed  to  specify 
the  activity  may  not  be  available.  Thus,  it  may  not  be  possible  to 
determine,  for  example,  whether  a  particular  health-oriented  organis- 
ation  was  engaged  in  providing  health  services,  or  raising  funds  for 
health  services,  or  advocating  for  health  services.  Even  where  such 
information  is  readily  at  hand,  however,  other  problems  arise.  For 
example,  foundations  and  other  fund-raising  organisations  focusing 
primarily on the education field are classified as education organisations, 
whereas  other  foundations  and  fund-raising  organisations  with  more 
general purposes  are classified in major group T  ('Philanthropy, volunt- 
arism  and  grant-making foundations'). Summary statistics  on  the scope 
of  grant-making  activities  can  thus  inadvertently  leave  out  significant 
fund-raising  entities  that  are  grouped  in  other  activity  areas.  Perhaps 
even  more  seriously,  this  arrangement  creates  great  opportunities  for 
double-counting  since  the  grants  made  by  an  education  foundation  to 
other  education  organisations  can  end  up  being  counted  twice  -  once 
as  an  expenditure  of  the  foundation  and  once  as  the  expenditure  of 
the  organisation  to  which  the  foundation  made  a  grant. 

These  difficulties  limit  the  organising  power  of  the  NTEE  system, 
making  it  difficult  to  apply  the  system  in  other  settings  where  the 
requisite  level  of  detail  is  not  available.  It  also  limits  the  rigour  of  the 
system,  particularly  in  cross-national  settings.  For  example,  NTEE 
places  federated  fund-raising  organisations  such  as  United  Way  into 
a  category  called  'Community  improvement,  capacity  building'  rather 
than  the  group  which  is  for  "philanthropy,  voluntarism  and  grant- 
making  foundations'.  Observers  from  other  countries  applying  this 
scheme  objectively would  likely  have  a  hard  time  understanding  this 
peculiar  usage  since  the  principal  activity  of  United  Way  and  other 
federated  funding  organisations  is  to  raise  funds  for  the  organisations 
affiliated  with  them.  Placing  these  organisations  in  the  "Community 
improvement, capacity building" category is thus likely to be misleading. 
F'maUy,  the  NTEE  system  also  encounters  other  organising  power 
problems  with  respect  to  certain  key  components  of  the  non-profit 
sector  elsewhere.  Like  the  ISIC  and  NACE  systems,  it  does  not  give 
much  prominence  to  the  types  of  non-profit  organisations  that  are 
most  prominent  and  important  in  developing  countries  -  namely,  the 

280 

l.ester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

so-called 'NGOs"  and grass-roots development  organisations involved 
in community  mobilisation, village renewal and small-scale economic 
development. The NTEE  scheme does have a special code for organis- 
ations  engaged  in  'Development  and  relief  services',  but  only  under 
"International activities'. In other words, it provides a definitive category 
only  for  the  international  development  organisations  but  not  for  the 
indigenous development organisations active in many developing coun- 
tries. While some of these could be classified in major group 'Community 
improvement, capacity  building',  many  others  would  fall  into  a  great 
number  of  other  possible  categories  in  the  NTEE  system. 

The proposed  International  Classification  of Nonprofit 
O~ganizations  (ICNPO): an  alternative  approach 

If the ISIC and  MACE systems are too limited and  lacking in combinat- 
orial  richness  and  significance, and  the  NTEE  system too complex and 
lacking  in  economy and  rigour,  is  it  possible  to  fashion  an  alternative 
approach that combines some of the advantages of each without falling 
into  their  respective  pitfalls?  What  is  more,  is  it  possible  to  do  so  in 
a  way  that  corrects  the  shortcomings of  both  of these models in  terms 
of  organising  power  so  far  as  the  developing  world  is  concerned  so 
that  a  truly  international  system  can  be  devised? 

We  believe the  answer  to  these questions is  yes  and  have  developed 
an  alternative  classification  system  for  non-profit  organisations  at  the 
international level  that  we  call  the  International Classification of Non- 
profit  Organizations,  or  ICNPO.  We  emphasise  that  this  system  may 
not be ideal for particular national experiences since it may not capture 
the  full  range  of  non-profit  activity  in  particular  national  settings  as 
fully  as  would  a  purely  national  classification.  However,  we  believe 
it  provides a  useful compromise between the level of detail that  might 
be ideal for national work and  the level that  is feasible for comparative 
work,  and  that  it  does  so  while  achieving  a  significant  degree  of 
organising  power. 

This  classification  scheme  was  developed  through  a  collaborative 
process  involving the  team of scholars  working  on  the Johns  Hopkins 
Comparative  Nonprofit  Sector  Project,  which t h e   present  authors  co- 
direct  (for  a  fuller  description,  see  Salamon  and  Anheier,  1992a).  The 
system  took  shape  by  beginning  with  the  International  Standard 
Industrial  Classification  (ISIC) system,  and  elaborating  on it  as  needed 
to  capture  most  succinctly  the  reality  of  the  non-profit  sector  in  the 
12 different countries Involved in  this  project  (the  US,  the UK, France, 
Germany,  Italy,  Japan,  Hungary,  Brazil,  Ghana,  Egypt,  India  and 
Thailand).  Throughout,  an  effort  was  made  to  remain  as  dose  as 

Classifying  the non-profit  sector 

281 

possible  to  the  ISIC  system  so  that  the  existing  national  income  data 
systems  could  ultimately  be  used  to  develop  the  information  to  docu- 
ment  the  scope  of  the  organisations  portrayed  in  the  classification. 

Central  features 

Reflecting  this,  the  ICNPO  utilises  the  same  basic  approach  to  solving 
the  central  design  issues  of  economic  classification  as  the  Standard 
Industrial  Classification  system  developed  over  the  past  45  years  by 
the  United  Nations.  This  is  apparent  in  its  choice  of  the  basis  of 
classification  and  unit  of  analysis. 

Focus  on  economic  activities.  So  far  as  the  basis  of  classification  is 
concerned,  the  ICNPO  uses  the  "economic  activity'  of  the  unit  as  the 
key  to  sorting.  Units  are  thus  differentiated  according  to  the  types  of 
services  or  goods they provide  (for example, health, education,  environ- 
mental  protection).  Unlike  the  NTEE  system,  which  cross-cuts  this 
kind  of  activity  grouping  with  a  grouping  keyed  to  the  type  of service 
each  entity  provides  within  its  activity  area  (for  example,  fund-raising, 
advocacy,  research),  the  ICNPO  sticks  much  more  strictly  to  the  ISIC 
practice  of  assigning  dominance  to  the  activity  area  and  sorting  units 
according  to  their  area  of  primary  activity.  A  research  organisation 
that  specialises  in  health  research  would  consequently  be  treated  in 
the ICNPO  structure,  as  in the LSIC structure,  as a  research  organisation 
rather  than  a  health  organisation,  since research  is its  principal  activity. 

Unit  of analysis.  As  with  the  Standard  Industrial  Classification  system, 
the  key  to  making  such  an  'economic  activity'-based  system  work  is 
to  choose  a  unit  of  analysis  that  has  enough  homogeneity  to  avoid 
distorting  the  data.  For  this  reason,  the  standard  economic  statistics 
use  the 
'enterprise'  as  the  unit  of 
analysis  since  enterprises  are  frequently  made  up  of  many  establish- 
ments,  each  of  which  may  be  engaged  in  a  slightly  different  type  of 
economic  activity. 

'establishment"  rather  than  the 

We  have  followed this  practice in  our proposed ICNPO.  In particular, 
we  seek  to  make  the  'establishment'  rather  than  the  'organisation'  our 
principal  unit  of  analysis.  An  establishment  is  essentially  a  place  of 
operation  of  an  organisation.  In  other  words,  it  is  a  smaller  unit  than 
an  organisation.  An  organisation  may  consequently  run  a  number  of 
different  establishments,  each  of  which  may  have  its  own  economic 
activity.  In  the  case  of  the  German  Caritas  organisation  cited  earlier, 
for  example,  the  separate  hospitals,  family  counselling  centres  and 
related  agencies that comprise the Caritas  organisation would be treated 
as separate  'establishments',  each of which would be classified according 

282 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

to  its  principal  activity.  Fortunately,  this  is  also  the  format  used  by 
the German "census of workplaces', which focuses on the establishment, 
or  workplace,  as  the  unit  of  analysis. 

Basic structure  of  the  ICNPO 

As  reflected  in  Appendix A  (and  summarised in  Table  2),  the  ICNPO 
system  groups  the  non-profit  seaor  as  defined  earlier  into  12  major 
activity  groups, including  a  catch-all  "Not  elsewhere  classified'  group. 
These  12  major  activity  groups  are  in  turn  further  sub-divided  into 
24  sub-groups.  Each  of  the  sub-groups  has  in  turn  been  broken  into 
a  number  of  activities, but  the  ICNPO  system  as  currently  developed 
does not attempt to achieve standardisation at the level of the activities 
because  of  the  great  diversity  of  the  non-profit  sector  in  the  different 
locales.  The  activities  are  nevertheless  listed  in  the  full  specification 
of the  system provided in  Appendix A,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  kinds 
of organisations that fall into each sub-group. To facilitate comparisons, 
Appendix B provides examples for a  cross-walk between ICNPO major 
groups  and  sub-groups  and  those  of  the  ISIC,  NACE  and  NTEE 
systems, in addition to national classifications in  place in  France, Japan 
and  the US.  Finally,  Appendix C  offers  translations  of ICNPO  groups 
and  sub-groups  into  several  languages. 

Although  it  is  based  on  the  ISIC  system,  the  basic  activity  group 
structure of the ICNPO differs from the ISIC in a  number  of significant 
ways.  Most  fundamentally,  it  elaborates  on  the  basic  ISIC  structure 
to  take  better  account  of  the  components  of  the  non-profit  sector. 
Thus: 

•  The  Health  and  Social Work  'section"  of  the  ISIC  system  is  broken 
into  two  "major  activity  groups"  in  the  ICNPO  scheme:  Group 3, 
Health,  embracing  ~Hospitals  and  rehabilitation'  (3  100),  "Nursing 
homes"  (3  200), "Mental  health  and  crisis  intervention"  (3  300),  and 
"Other health services"  (3 400); and  Group 4, Social Services, embracing 
'Social  services"  (4  100),  'Emergency  and  refugees'  (4  200)  and 
"Income support  and  maintenance'  (4  300). 

•  The catch-aU "Other community social and personal service activities' 
section in the ISIC  system is broken into eight major activity groups 
in  the  ICNPO  system:  'Culture  and  recreation'  (Group  I ) ;   "En- 
vironment',  including  animal-related  activities  that  ISIC  classified 
under  'Health'  (Group  5);  Law,  Advocacy  and  Politics'  (Group  7); 
"Philanthropic  intermediaries  and  voluntarism  promotion"  (Group 
8); 'International activities" (Group 9); "Religion' (Group 10); "Business 
and  professional  associations  and  unions'  (Group  11);  and  'Other' 
(Group  12). 

Classifyingthe non-profit sector 

283 

Table 2.  The International  Classification of Nonprofit  Organizations 
(ICNPO): summary  table 

Group I:  Culture and  Recreation 
1  100  Culture  and  arts 
1  200  Recreation 
1  300  Service  clubs 

Primary  and  secondary  education 

Group 2:  Education and  Research 
2  100 
2  200  Higher education 
2  300  Other  education 
2  400  Research 

Group 3: Health 
3  100  Hospitals  and  rehabilitation 
3  200  Nursing  homes 
3  300  Mental  health  and  crisis 

intervention 
3  400  Other  health  services 

Group 4:  Social Services 
4  100 
Social services 
4  200  Emergency  and  refugees 
4  300 

Income  support  and  maintenance 

Group 5:  Environment 
5  100  Environment 
5  200  Animals 

Group 6:  Development and  Housing 
6  100  Economic,  social  and  community 

development 

6  200  Housing 
6  300  Employment and  training 

"Group 7:  law,  Advocacy and  Politics 
7  100  Civic  and  advocacy  organisations 
7  200  Law  and  legal  services 
7  300 

Political  organisations 

Group 8". Philanthropic Intermediaries and 
Voluntarism Promotion 

8  100  Philanthropic intermediaries 

Group 9:  International Activities 
International  activities 
9  100 

Group 10:  Religion 
10  100  Religious  congregations  and 

associations 

Group 11:  Business and  Professional 
Associations, Unions 
11  100  Business  and  professional 

associations,  unions 

Group 12:  Not  Elsewhere Classified 
12  100  Not  elsewhere  classified 

•  A  special-Development  and  housing  group  (Group  6)  is  created  for 
the  NGOs  that  have  taken  such  a  distinctive place in  the  non-profit 
sectors  of the developing countries. Included in  this  group  are  three 
sub-groups  of  organisations:  those  involved  in  'Economic,  social 
and  community  development"  (6  100); 'Housing'  (6  200)  and  'Em- 
ployment  and  training"  (6  300). 
While  relying  most  heavily  on  the  ISIC  structttre,  however,  the 
ICNPO  system  also  borrows  from  the  NTEE  system  discussed  above. 
This  is  most  dearly  apparent  in  the  indusion  of a  special  category  of 
"Philanthropic intermediary  and  voluntarism  promotion"  organisations 
(Group  8).  However,  the  ICNPO  system  would  put  all  organisations 
engaged  in  this  function  in  this  category  rather  than  grouping  some 
of  the  foundations  and  other  fund-distribution  organisations  with  the 
service  organisations  with  which  they  are  most  closely  affiliated  and 
others  in  an  ambiguous  'Community  improvement"  classification. 

284 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

Advantages and  disadvantages 

The  proposed  ICNPO  is  certainly  not  without  its  drawbacks.  Certain 
of  the  distinctions  proposed  may  be  difficult  to  make  in  practice. 
Numerous  environmental  organisations  are  principally  engaged  in 
advocacy  activities,  for  example.  Should  they  be  classified  according 
to  their  area  of  activity  or  the  nature  of  their  activity?  Similarly, 
German  trade  unions  are  often deeply  involved in  vocational training, 
adult  education  and  the  provision  of  social  services.  Should  they  be 
treated  as trade unions, educational facilities or social service agencies? 
Beyond  this,  the  nature  of  a  particular  type  of  organisation  may 
vary  depending  on  the  stage  of  political  and  economic  development 
in  a  country.  For  example,  associations  of  doctors  or  lawyers  that 
would  be  treated  as  member-serving trade  or  professional  associations 
in  most  developed  countries  often  function  as  significant  promoters 
of free speech and  human rights in developing societies. Unfortunately, 
the  ICNPO  system  does  not  take  this  into  account.  All  professional 
associations  are  grouped  together  despite  the  differences  that  may 
exist  among  them.  In  the  terms  introduced  earlier,  this  inevitably 
makes  the  classification  less  rigorous than  might  be  desired.  The  one 
saving  grace  is  that  most  other  classification  systems  suffer  from  a 
similar  shortcoming. 

Finally,  though  more  economical than  the  NTEE  system,  the  ICNPO 
system is  considerably  less  economical than  the  ISIC  approach,  which 
contains far fewer categories in terms of which to differentiate non-profit 
organisations.  This  will  naturally  make  the  ICNPO  system  harder  to 
•  use  than  the far  simpler ISIC  one. What  is more,  the ICNPO  categories 
do not line up  perfectly with  the often very different groupings spelled 
out  in  national  legal  sYstems. 

Fortunately,  however,  these  shortcomings  are  more  than  balanced 
by  a  number  of  advantages.  In  the  first  place,  though  it  triples  the 
number  of  major  groupings  allocated  to  the  non-profit  sector  in 
comparison  with  the  basic  ISIC  system,  the  proposed  ICNPO  system 
nevertheless  retains  considerable  economy.  The  entire  non-profit  sector 
is  embraced  within  12 major  activity  groups  and  24  sub-groups. What 
is  more,  it  stays  close  enough  to  the  ISIC  structure  to  give  some 
reasonable  hope  that  the  basic  national  income  data  systems  can  be 
used  to  generate  the  data  needed  to  analyse  this  sector  in  the  terms 
the  classification  suggests. 

In  the  second  place,  the  additional  complexity  that  the  ICNPO 
introduces is  done in order  to increase the significance  and  combinatorial 
richness  of  the  resulting  classification  structure.  The  ICN'PO  system 
makes  it  possible  for  the  first  time  to  differentiate  the  many  different 
types  of non-profit  organisations  that  have  emerged  in  recent  years  - 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

285 

environmental organisations, civil rights  organisations,  business  assoc- 
iations,  foundations  and  many  more.  Under  the  ISIC  system,  as  we 
have  seen,  these  were  all bundled  together in  a  large,  undifferentiated 
mass  of  'Other  community, social  and  personal  service  activities'. 

In  the  process,  the  ICNPO  makes  it  possible  to  group  and  regroup 
organisations  in  order  to  shed  light  on  a  number  of significant dimen- 
sions  of the  non-profit sector.  One  of the  more interesting distinctions 
found  in  the  literature,  for  example, is  that  between  primarily  "public- 
serving' and primarily "member-serving' organisations (see, for example, 
Salamon and  Abramson,  1982; Sumariwalla,  1983; Salamon,  1992). This 
distinction  is  crucial  in  American  law,  which  permits  tax  deductible 
gifts  only  to  the  former  category  of  organisations.  Under  the  ICNPO 
system, the member-serving organisations can be separated by focusing 
on  Group  11,  "Business and  professional associations and  unions', plus 
the  "Social,  recreational  and  sports  clubs'  classified  in  sub-group  1 200 
under  'Arts  and  culture'. 4 

The  ICNPO  system  also  easily  accommodates  two  other  crucial 
distinctions frequently drawn  among non-profit organisations:  the  first 
to  separate  essentially  partisan  political  organisations  from  those  that 
are  non-partisan;  and  the second to differentiate churches, synagogues, 
mosques and  other religious congregations from all other organisations. 
The  former  is  handled  by  a  separate  category  (7  300) set  aside  for 
political parties and other similar organisations whose principal purpose 
is  to  assist  particular  candidates  to  secure  political  office  (as  opposed 
to  promoting  a  particular  cause  or  policy  position).  The  latter  is 
handled  in  a  _,major group  (Group  10)  set  aside  especially for  religious 
congregations.  This  analytical  flexibility  is  a  crucial  advantage  of  the 
ICNPO  system.  In  the  terms  introduced  earlier,  it  demonstrates  the 
combinatorial  richness  of  the  scheme. 

Cross-national  application:  a  partial  test 

Ultimately, however, the real  test  of the ICNPO  system is its organising 
power  and  rigour, 
its  ability  to  be  applied  comparably  in  different 
countries  and  perform  well  in  coming  to  terms  with  the  realities  of 
different national  systems.  Although the  proof here  will be  some time 
in being developed, the early indications are quite promising. A  review 
of  the  fit  between  the  ICNPO  and  the  national  circumstances of  some 
of the countries included in  the Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit 
Sector Project  should  make  this  clear  (see  also  Appendix  B). 

France.  As  noted  in  Salamon  and  Anheier  (1992b),  the  French  notion 
of the non-profit sector, dconomie sociale, is  broader  than the structural/ 
operational definition that is the foundation for the ICNPO classification, 

286 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

since it  includes co-operatives and  mutuals  in  addition  to  associations. 
Within  the  world  of  'associations',  however,  the  ICNPO  provides  a 
useful  and  workable  system for differentiating organisational  types  in 
terms  that  permit  cross-national  comparisons.  As  such,  it  usefully 
bridges  a  number  of  peculiarities  of  French  law  and  practice. 

Under  French  law,  for  example,  there  are  four  major  types  of 
associations:  "declared  associations',  that  is,  organisations  that  are 
registered  under  the  French  Law  of  1901  and  active  in  a  variety  of 
social  and  economic fields; 'undeclared  associations',  that  is,  churches, 
some  political  parties  and  inform~  neighbourhood  groups;  "public 
utility  associations',  which  operate  in  the  fields  of  health  and  welfare 
and  enjoy  certain  fiscal  advantages  not  available  to  other  declared 
associations;  and  'foundations', which  are  typically operating  agencies 
with  the privilege of owning real estate and  other assets  (Archambault, 
1992). 

This legal structure provides only the most limited basis for different- 
iating  French  non-profit  organisations  in  terms  of  what  they  do, 
however.  The  only  system in  use  for  doing  this  is  the  French  version 
of  the  European  NACE  classification  scheme,  which  is  called  Nomen- 
clature  d'activitds  et produits,  or NAP. In French practice, every economic 
organisation  with  wage  earners  is  listed  on  a  formal  file  called  the 
SIRENE  file,  which  records,  in  addition  to  its  name,  address  and 
certain  economic data,  the legal status  of the organisation  and  its NAP 
code.  SIRENE  is  thus  potentially  an  immensely  valuable  tool  for 
gathering  information  about  French  non-profits.  Unfortunately,  how- 
ever,  the  NAP  system  suffers from  the  same  limitations  as  its  parent 
NACE  so far  as  the non-profit sector is  concerned. Although education 
and  health  and  social service activities  are  separately  identified  in  the 
classification system, the rest of what we have defined as the non-profit 
sector  is  lumped  into  a  catch-aU  category  called  "Other  collective 
non-market  services'. 

The ICNPO  system, by  contrast, would  divide these remaining types 
of non-profits into a number of major groups, including "Environment', 
"Law, advocacy and politics', 'Philanthropic intermediaries and voluntar- 
ism promotion', "International activities' and  'Religion'. It thus provides 
greater  combinatorial  richness  than  the  existing  French  classification 
scheme.  What  is  more,  it  does  so  while  accommodating some  of  the 
peculiar  French  types  of  non-profit  organisations.  For  example,  the 
so-called  comitds  d'entreprise,  or  'worker  councils',  which  operate  in 
every  enterprise  with  more  than  50  employees and  manage  canteens, 
day  care  and  holiday  centres,  cultural  activities,  and  other  personal 
or  family  social  services, would  fit  into  ICNPO  category  4  100,  'Social 
services'.  S'm~ilarly,  the  so-called  tourisme  populaire,  or  "social  tourism' 
organisations, which provide tourism, sport  and  cultural  opportunities 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

287 

for  working-class  families  on  a  sliding-fee  basis  geared  to  family 
income,  would  fall  into  Group  1  200,  "Recreation'.  In  the  terms  intro- 
duced  earlier,  the ICNPO  system thus  offers both combinatorial  richness 
and  a  considerable  degree  of  organising  power,  so  far  as  the  French 
system  is  concerned. 

But  is  the  system  workable?  Is  it  possible  to  gather  information 
about  French  non-profits  at  this  more  refined  level  of  aggregation? 
The  answer  to  date  appears  to  be  a  qualified  yes.  At  the  very  least, 
a  beginning  can  be  made  thanks  to  the  existence  of  a  number  of 
umbrella  or  'peak" associations  that  collect  some  information  on  key 
components  of  the  non-profit  sector.  Thus,  for  example,  UNIOPSS 
(Union  Nationale  InterprofessioneUe des  Oeuvres  Priv4es  Sanitaires  et 
Sociales),  a  coalition  of  some  7,000  non-profit  health  and  welfare 
associations,  gathers  important  information  on  the  employment  and 
activities of its member organisations. Similarly, UNAT gathers compar- 
able  data  on  popular recreation  and  tourism associations, CNOSF  (the 
Olympic  Committee)  on  other  sports  federations,  UNAF  (the  family 
associations'  national  union)  on  some  5,700  family  service  agencies, 
and  FONJEP  on  youth  and  popular  education  associations.  While  far 
from  adequate,  these  sources  provide  some  basis  for  applying  the 
ICN'PO in practice, at least until national income classification schemes 
are  modified  sufficiently  to  incorporate  the  ICNPO  more  fully. 

Japan.  A  similar situation exists in Japan, though here the legal structure 
provides  a  bit  more  detail  on  the  character  of  the  organisafions 
embraced  within  the  sector.  This  is  so  because Japanese  law  does  not 
provide  a  blanket  authority  to  form  non-profit  organisafions.  Rather, 
such  organisafions are  restricted  to  particular purposes,  each  of which 
is  governed by  a  separate legal provision. Thus,  for  example, Japanese 
law  separately  pem~ts  the  formation  of  koeki-hojin  (public  benefit 
corporations), shakaifu~shi-hojin  (social  welfare  corporations), irgo-hojin 
(medical corporations), shu~o-hojin  (religious organisafions) and  private 
school  corporations  (Amenomori,  1992). 

In  the  case  of  the  non-profit  organisations  established  by  special 
le~slafion  (for  example,  the  social  welfare  or  medical  corporations), 
the  legal  class  can  be  translated  into  the  ICNPO  categories  with  only 
limited  difficulty. The  situation  is  a  bit  more  complicated  in  the  case 
of  the  koek/hojin  category  because  it  embraces  a  wide  asso~hatent o f  
organisations spanning virtually all of the ICNPO categories. However, 
Japanese  tax law distinguishes 137 types of koeFlci hofin,  providing some 
basis  for sorting these organisations. More  difficult still is  the  situation 
with  'unincorporated  associations',  such  as  the  kudomokai  (children's 
associations),  the  se/nendan  (youth  dubs)  and  the  fichikai  (community 
self-help  bodies).  Even  here,  however,  the  ICNPO  has  a  place  to 

288 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

classify  these  organisations  and  thus  to  pick  up  some  of  the  special 
features  of  the  Japanese  non-profit  sector.  For  example, the  so-called 
jichikai  organisations,  which  are  local  community  organisations  that 
provide  certain  social  services  but  also  maintain  a  registry  of  citizens 
residing in a  community, would  seem to  fall into  ICNPO  major group 
7,  'Law,  advocacy  and  politics'.  In  other  words,  the  ICNPO  seems  to 
have considerable organising  power for coming to terms  with the special 
characteristics  of  the  Japanese  non-profit  sector  as  well. 

India.  The  ICNPO  also  seems  capable  of  embracing  the  rich  diversity 
of  non-profit  organisations  in  a  country  like  India,  which  contains  a 
variety of traditional associations representing caste, ethnic and religious 
communities;  various  missionary  societies  and  associations  related  to 
the  Ghandhian  movement;  Western-style  non-profit  organisations  in 
such  fields  as  social  services, recreation  and  health;  and  an  important 
set  of so-caUed  'non-governmental organisafions"  or  NGOs.  Under  the 
ICNPO system, for  example,  caste  and  ethnic organisations  would  fall 
under Group 7 100, 'Civic and  advocacy organisafions'; religious groups 
in 10 100, 'Religion', Gandhian  or religious-based development organis- 
afions  under  Group  6,  "Development  and  housing'. 

The  identification of a  separate  category -  major group  6,  "Develop- 
ment and housing' -  that can accommodate NGOs is a special advantage 
of the ICNPO  system for countries  like India. Such  organisations  have 
grown increasingly important  in  the  developing world  (Drabek,  1987). 
They  function  as  crucial  transmission  belts  for  development  activities, 
embracing  community  organising  and  local  economic  development. 
Despite  their  importance,  they  are  not  easily  accommodated  in  the 
existing national income classification systems. By providing a definable 
category for them,  the ICNPO  system achieves greater  organising  power 
and  combinatorial  richness. 

Conclusion 

Classification e_~orts of the sort discussed  in this  article often  get short 
shrift  in  the  development  of new  bodies  of knowledge. It  is,  after  all, 
somewhat  dry  work,  lacking  the  drama  of new  empirical  discoveries. 
Yet  the  importance  of  such  work  to  our  understanding  cannot  be 
over-emphasised.  Classification  is  the  crucial prerequisite  for  scientific 
progress  in  any  field  of  study.  The  development  of  clear  definitions 
and  classification  systems  is  fundamental  progress  in  the  technology 
of  thinking.  Abstract  words  like  the  "non-profit"  or  'voluntary"  sector 
have  no  real  meaning  without  it,  and  serious  empirical  work  cannot 
proceed  in  its  absence.  Regrettably,  the  development  of  this  kind  of 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

289 

conceptual  equipment  has  lagged  behind  badly  in  the  newly-emerging 
field  of  non-profit  sector  studies.  While  the  ICNPO  system  outlined 
here  may  not  be  the  last  word  on  this  topic,  it  is  our  hope  that  it 
will  at  least  get  the  topic  on  the  agenda,  and  perhaps  provide  a 
foundation  on  which  to  build. 

Appendix A. The International Classification of Nonprofit 
Organizations: explanatory notes 

In addition to the specific activities listed below,  each ICNPO  sub-group 
includes  three  general  types  of  activities: 

•  multipurpose  organisations; 

•  support  and  service  organisations,  auxiliaries,  councils,  standard- 

setting  and  governance  organisations;  and 

•  organisations  not  elsewhere  classified. 
For example, in  sub-group  1 100 Culture and  arts,  the general categories 
categorise  "multipurpose  culture  and  arts  organisations'  that  cannot  be 
easily  classified  under  "museum',  "visual  arts"  or  some  other  specific 
activity;  arts  councils  or  support  organisations  ('Friends  of  the  City 
Opera')  under  "support  and  services  organisations,  auxiliaries,  councils, 
standard-setting  and  governance  organisations',  and  culture  and  arts 
organisations  that  cannot  be  classified  elsewhere. 

Group  1:  Culture  and  recreation 

•  Organisations  and  activities  in  general  and  specialised  fields  of  culture 

and  recreation. 

1  100  Culture 

•  media  and  communications:  production and  dissemination of information 
and  communication;  includes  radio  and  TV  stations,  publishing  of 
books, journals,  newspapers  and  newsletters;  film production;  libraries. 

•  visual arts, architecture,  ceramic art: production, dissemination and display 
of  visual  arts  and  architecture; 
includes  sculpture,  photographic 
societies,  painting,  drawing,  design  centres  and  architectural  assoc- 
iations. 

•  performing  arts:  performing  arts  centres,  companies  and  associations; 
includes  theatres,  dance,  ballet,  opera,  orchestras,  chorals  and  music 
ensembles. 

290 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

•  historical,  literary  and  humanistic  societies: promotion  and  appreciation 
of  the  humanities,  preservation  of  historical  and  cultural  artifacts, 
commemoration of historical events; includes historical societies, poetry 
and  literary  societies,  language  associations,  reading  promotion,  war 
memorials,  commemorative funds  and  associations. 

•  museums:  general  and  specialised  museums  covering  art,  history, 

sciences,  technology,  culture 

•  zoos  and  aquariums 

1  200  Recreation 

•  sports  Clubs: provision  of amateur sports,  training,  physical  fitness  and 

sport  competition  services  and  events 

•  recreation and social clubs: provision of recreational facilities and  services 
to  individuals  and  communities;  includes  playground  associations, 
country  clubs,  men's  and  women's  clubs,  fitness  centres 

1  300  Service  dubs 

•  membership  organisations  providing  services to  members and  local  com- 

munities,  for  example;  Kiwanis,  Lions  or  Zonta  International 

Group  2:  Education  and  research 

•  organisafions  and  activities  administering,  providing,  promoting,  con- 

ducting,  supporting  and  servising  education  and  research 

2  100  Primary  and  secondary  education 

•  elementary,  primary  and  secondary education:  education  at  elementary, 
primary  and  secondary levels;  includes  pre-school  organisations  other 
than  day  care 

2  200  Higher  education 

•  higher  education  (university  level) 

•  higher learning,  providing  academic degrees; includes  universities, busi- 

ness  management  schools;  law  schools;  medical  schools. 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

291 

2  300  Other  education 

•  vocational/technical  schools:  technical  and  vocational  training  specifically 
geared  towards  gaining  employment;  includes  trade  schools;  paralegal 
training,  secretarial  schools 

•  adult~continuing  education:  institutions  engaged  in  providing  education 
and  training  in  addition  to  the  formal  educational  system;  includes 
schools  of  continuing  studies,  correspondence  schools,  night  schools, 
sponsored  literacy  and  reading  programmes. 

2  400  Research 

•  medical  research:  research  in  the  medical  field,  includes  research  on 

specific  diseases,  disorders,  or  medical  disciplines. 

•  science  and  technology',  research  in  the  physical  and  life  sciences,  engin- 

oaring  and  technology. 

•  social  sciences,  policy  studies:  research  and  analysis  in  the  social  sciences 

and  policy  area. 

Group  3:  Health 

•  Organisations  that  engage  in  health-related  activities,  providing  health 
care,  both  general  and  specialised  services,  administration  of  health 
care  services  and  health  support  services. 

3  100  Hospitals  and  rehabilitation 

•  hospitals:  primarily  inpatient  medical  care  and  treatment. 

•  rehabilitation:  inpatient  health  care and  rehabilitative  therapy  to  individ- 
uals  suffering  from  physical  impairments  due  to  injury,  genetic  defect 
or  disease  and  requiting  extensive  physiotherapy  or  similar  forms  of 
care. 

3  200  Nursing  homes 

•  nursing  homes:  inpatient  convalescent  care,  residential  care  as  well  as 
primary  health  care  services;  includes  homes  for  the  frail  elderly, 
nursing  homes  for  the  severely  handicapped. 

3  300  Mental  health  and  crisis  intervention 

•  psychiatric  hospitals:  inpatient  care  and  treatment  for the  mentally  ill. 

292 

Lester M.  Salamon and Helmut  K. Anheier 

•  mental  health  treatment:  outpatient  treatment  for  mentally  ill  patients; 

includes  community mental  health  centres  and  halfway  homes. 

•  crisis intervention:  outpatient services and counsel in acute mental health 
situations; includes suidde prevention and support to victims of assault 
and  abuse. 

3  400  Other  health  services 

•  public  health  and  wellness  education:  public  health  promoting  and  health 
education;  includes  sanitation  screening  for  potential  health  hazards, 
first  aid  training  and  services  and  family  planning  services. 

•  health  treatment, primarily outpatient:  organisations that provide primarily 
outpatient  health  services  -  for  example,  health  clinics,  vaccination 
centres. 

•  rehabilitative  medical services:  outpatient therapeutic care; includes nature 

cure  centres,  yoga  clinics,  physical  therapy  centres. 

•  emergency  medical  services:  services  to  persons  in  need  of  immediate 
care,  includes  ambulatory  services  and  paramedical  emergency  care, 
shock/trauma  programmes  and  lifeline  programmes;  ambulance  ser- 
vices. 

Group  4:  Social  services 

•  Organisations  and  institutions  providing  human  and  social  services  to 

a  community or  target  population. 

4  100  Social  services 

•  child  welfare,  child  services,  day  care:  services  to  children,  adoption 
services,  child  development  centres,  foster  care,  includes  infant  care 
centres  and  nurseries. 

•  youth  services  and  youth  welfare:, services  to  youth; includes  delinquency 
prevention  services,  teen  pregnancy  prevention,  drop-out  prevention, 
youth  centres  and  dubs,  job  programmes  for  youth;  includes  YMCA, 
YWCA,  Boy  Scouts,  Girl  Scouts,  Big  Brothers/Big  Sisters. 

• 

family services:  services to families, includes family life/parent education, 
single parent agencies and services, family violence shelters and services. 

•  services  for  the  handicapped:  services  for  the  handicapped;  includes 
homes,  other  than  nursing  homes;  transport  facilities,  recreation  and 
other  spedalised  services. 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

293 

•  services  far  the  elderly:  organisations  providing  geriatric  care;  includes 
in-home  services,  homemaker services,  transport  facilities,  recreation, 
meal  progranunes  and  other  services  geared  towards  senior  citizens. 
(Does  not  include  residential  nursing  homes.) 

• 

self-help  and  other  personal  social  services:  programmes  and  services  for 
self-help and  development; includes support  groups,  personal  counsel- 
ling,  credit  counselling/money management  services. 

4  200  Emergency  and  relief 

•  disaster/emergency  prevention  and  control:  organisations  that  work  to 
prevent, predict, control and alleviate the effects of disasters, to educate 
or  otherwise  prepare  individuals  to  cope  with  the  effects of  disasters, 
or provide relief to disaster victims, includes volunteer fire departments, 
lifeboat  services  and  so  on. 

• 

temporary  shelters:  organisations  providing  temporary  shelters  to  the 
homeless;  includes  travellers  aid  and  temporary  housing. 

•  refugee  assistance:  organisations  providing  food,  clothing,  shelter  and 

services  to  refugees  and  immigrants. 

4  300  Income  support  and  maintenance 

• 

income  support  and  maintenance,  organisations  providing  cash  assistance 
and  other  forms  of  direct  services  to  persons  unable  to  maintain  a 
livelihood. 

•  material assistance:  organisations providing  food, clothing,  transport and 
other forms of assistance; includes food banks  and  clothing distribution 
centres. 

Group  5:  Environment 

•  Organisations  promoting  and  providing  services  in  environmental 
conservation, pollution control and prevention, environmental education 
and  health  and  animal  protection. 

5  100  Environment 

•  pollution  abatement  and  control:  organisations  that  promote  clean  air, 
clean water, reducing and  preventing noise pollution,  radiation control, 
hazardous  wastes  and  toxic  substances,  solid  waste  management, 
recycling programmes  and  global  warming. 

294 

Lester M.  Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

•  natural resources conservation and protection: conservation and preservation 
of natural  resources,  including land,  water,  energy  and  plant  resources 
for  the  general  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  public. 

•  environmental  beautification and  open spaces: botanical  gardens,  arboreta, 
horticultural programmes and landscape services; includes organisations 
promoting  anti-litter  campaigns,  programmes  to  preserve  the  parks, 
green  spaces  and  open  spaces  in  urban  or  rural  areas,  and  city  and 
highway  beautification  programmes. 

5  200  Animals 

•  animal  protection  and  welfare,  animal  protection  and  welfare  services; 

includes  animal  shelters  and  humane  societies. 

•  wildlife  preservation  and  protection: wildlife  preservation  and  protection; 

includes  sanctuaries  and  refuges. 

•  veterinary services: animal  hospitals  and  services  providing  care  to  farm 

and  household  animals  and  pets. 

Group  6:  Development  and  housing 

•  Organisations  promoting  programmes  and  providing  services  to  help 
improve communities and  the economic and social weUbeing of society. 

6  100  Economic,  social and  community  development 

•  community  and  neighbourhood  organisations:  organisations  working 
towards  improving  the  quality  of  life  within  communities  or  neigh- 
bourhoods  -  for  example,  squatters"  associations,  local  develop-  ment 
organisations,  poor  people's  co-operatives. 

•  economic development: programmes and services to improve the economic 
infrastructure  and  capacity;  includes  building  of  infrastructure  like 
roads  and  entrepreneurial  programmes  and  technical  or  management 
consulting  assistance,  rural  development  organisations. 

•  social development: organisations working towards improving the institu- 
tional  infrastructure  and  capacity  to  alleviate  social  problems  and  to 
improve  general  public  wellbeing. 

6  200  Housing 

•  housing  assoc/at/on:  development,  construction,  management,  leasing, 

financing  and  rehabilitation  of  housing. 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

295 

•  housing assistance:, organisafions providing housing search, legal services 

and  related  assistance. 

6  300  Employment  and  training 

• 

job training programmes: organisations providing and supporting apprent- 
iceship programmes,  internships,  on-the-job training  and  other  training 
programmes. 

•  vocational  counselling  and  guidance:,  vocational  training  and  guidance, 

career  counselling,  testing  and  related  services. 

•  vocational.rehabilitation and sheltered workshops: organisations that promote 
self-sufficiency and income generation through job training and employ- 
ment. 

Group  7:  Law,  advocacy  and  politics 

•  Organisations  and  groups  that  work  to  protect  and  promote  civil  and 
other  rights,  or  advocate  the  social  and  political  interests  of  general 
or  special  constituencies, offer legal  services and  promote public safety. 

7  100  Civic  and  advocacy  organisations 

•  advocacy organisations:  organisations  that protect the fights  and  promote 
the  interest  of  specific  groups  of  people  -  for  example,  physically 
handicapped  people,  the  elderly,  children  and  women. 

•  civil  rights  associations:  organisations  that  work  to  protect  or  preserve 

individual  civil  liberties  and  human  rights. 

•  ethnic associations:  organisations that promote the interests of, or provide 

services  to,  members  belonging  to  a  specific  ethnic  heritage. 

•  civic  associations:  programmes  and  services  to  encourage  and  spread 

civic  mindedness. 

7  200  Law  and  legal  services 

• 

legal  services:  legal  services,  advice  and  assistance  in  dispute  resolution 
and  court-related  matters. 

•  crime  prevention  and  public  safety:,  crime  prevention  to  promote  safety 

and  precautionary  measures  among  citizens. 

•  rehabilitation of offenders:  programmes and services to re-integrate offend- 
ers; includes halfway houses, probation  and parole programmes, prison 
alternatives. 

296 

Lester M.  Salamon  and Helmut K. Anheier 

_  •  victim  support:  services,  counsel  and  advice  to  victims  of  crime. 

•  consumer  protection  associations: protection  of  consumer rights,  and  the 

improvement of  product  control  and  quality. 

7  300  Political  organisations 

•  political  parties  and  organisations: activities  and  services  to  support  the 
placing  of  particular  candidates  into  political  office;  includes  dissem- 
ination  of  information, public relations  and  political  fund-raising. 

Group  8:  Philanthropic  intermediaries  and  voluntarism  promotion 

•  Philanthropic  organisations  and  organisations  promoting  charity  and 

charitable  activities. 

8  100  Philanthropic  intermediaries  and  voluntarism  promotion 

•  grant-making  foundations:  private  foundations;  including  corporate 
foundations,  community  foundations  and  independent  public  law 
foundations. 

•  voluntarism  promotion  and  support: organisations  that  recruit,  train  and 

place  volunteers  and  promote  volunteering. 

•  fund-raising organisations: federated, collective fund-raising organisations; 

includes  lotteries. 

Group  9:  International  activities 

•  Organisations  promoting  greater  intercultural  understanding between 
peoples  of  different  countries  and  historical  backgrounds  and  also 
those providing relief during emergencies and promoting development 
and  welfare  abroad. 

9  100  International  activities 

•  exchange/friendship/cultural 

programmes:  programmes  and  services 
designed  to  encourage  mutual  respect  and  friendship  internationally. 

•  development  assistance associations:, programmes and projects that promote 

social  and  economic development abroad. 

•  international  disaster  and  relief  organisations:  organisations  that  collect, 
channel  and  provide  aid  to  other  countries  during  times  of  disaster 
or  emergency. 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

297 

• 

international  human  rights  and  peace organisations:  organisations  which 
promote  and  monitor  human  rights  and  peace  internationally. 

Group  I0:  Religion 

•  Organisations  promoting  religious  beliefs  and  administering  religious 
services and  rituals;  includes churches, mosques,  synagogues, temples, 
shrines,  seminaries,  monastaries  and  similar  religious  institutions,  in 
addition  to  related  associations  and  auxiliaries  of  such  organisations. 

10  100 Religious  congregations  and  associations 

•  congregations:, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, shrines, monast- 
eries,  seminaries  and  similar  organisations  promoting  religious  beliefs 
and  administering  religious  services  and  rituals. 

•  associations  of  congregations:  associations  and  auxiliaries  of  religious 
congregations  and  organisations  supporting  and  promoting  religious 
beliefs,  services  and  rituals. 

Group  11:  Business,  professional  associations  and  unions 

•  Organisations  promoting,  regulating  and  safeguarding  business,  pro- 

fessional  and  labour  interests. 

11  100  Business,  professional  associations  and  unions 

•  business  associations:  organisations  that  work  to  promote,  regulate  and 
safeguard  the  interests  of  special  branches  of business  -  for  example, 
manufacturers"  association,  farmers'  association,  bankers'  association. 

•  professional  associations:  organisations  promoting,  regulating  and  pro- 
tecting  professional  interests  -  for  example,  bar  association,  medical 
~ a t i o n .  

• 

labour  unions:  organisations  that  promote,  protect  and  regulate  the 
rights  and  interests  of  employees. 

Group  12:  Not  elsewhere  classified 

12  100  Not  elsewhere  classified 

298 

Lester M.  Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

A p p e n d i x   B.  C r o s s - w a l k   b e t w e e n   I C N P O   a n d   I S I C ,   N A C E ,   N T E E ,  
a n d   s e l e c t e d   n a t i o n a l   c l a s s i f i c a t i o n   s y s t e m s  

ICNI~ 

I S I C  

NACE a  US 

France 

Japan 

NTEE 

India 

Group I:  Culture and 
Recreation 
1  100  Culture  and 
arts 

923* 

971-7  7 9 2 2   8601-08 
9611-22 
966* 

84 

1  200  Recreation 

924 
9199" 

978-9*  79* 

8641 

67 
9617-18 
9624-25 
9712 

943 
918 
782 

A 
B70 

785* 

N 

950 
952 
956 

959 

1  300  Service clubs 

9199 ~ 

97 *~ 

8699*  96 ~ 

949 t 

$80 

95 t 

Group 2: Education 
and  Research 
2  100  Primary  and 
secondary  education 

~1 
8021 

~ 2  

~11 

8201 
9211-14 

2  200  Higher 
education 

2  300  Other 
education 

2  400  Research 

803 

~ 1  

8221 

8203 
9215 

809 
8022* 

~ 3  
934* 

8222-99 8~2 

921618 
9221 

73 
75 
8532* 

94 
952* 
911" 

8922 
7391 

77 
8301 
9311 
9321 

Group 3: Health 
3  100  Hospitals  and 
rehabilitation 

8511 

951 
667.4 

8062 
8069 

8402-06 

B21-28 

920* 

9 1 1 ,  
916 
912, 
913 

914,949"  B41-43 

921" 

920* 

922 *~ 

930* 

915 
917 
918 

93 

B50 
B60 
B80 
1390 

H* 
U* 
V* 

871-73  ES0 
E22 
E24 
E26 

3  200  Nursing  homes 

8519 

951 

8051 
8059 

8502-04 

876 

E25 

930.9* 

3  300  Mental  health 
and  crisis 
intervention 

3  400  Other  health 
services 

8511-9 %  951% 

8063 

8402-06 

871-73 ~  F 

930.9* 

8519" 

952* 
954 
955 

8071 
8081 
8091 

8407-13 
9411 
9421 

875 
879 
949* 
88 

930 

G,  H 
E60-80 
E30-40 

Classifying the non-profit sector 

299 

Appendix  B (continued) 

ICNFO 

ISIC 

NACE a  US 

France 

Japan 

NTEE 

India 

Group 4:  Social 
Services 
4  100  Social  services 

4  200  Emergency 
and 
relief 

4  300  Income 
support 
and  maintenance 

Group 5:  Environment 
5  100  Environment 

5  200  Animal 
protection 

Group 6: 
Development and 
Housing 
6  100  Economic, 
social  and 
community 
development 

6  200  Housing 

8531 
8532 

8531 
8532 

934* 
961 
962 

961 
962 

83 

83 

9511-13 
9522-23 

92 

B21 
P,  O 
K4~50 

9511-13 
9522-23 

92 

M 

8531 
8532 

961 
962 

83 

9524 

92 

P 
K30. 

941" 
969* 

941" 
949* 

94* 

900 
37 
9233 t 

8520 
0140 

0 
96 ~ 

956 
0* 

8699 + 

9723 ~ 

949 ~ 

C 
K20 

910 
956.3 ~ 

0741 
0742 

9723 

949 ~ 

D 

931 

919 

963 
968 

8699 

0-66,  77 

949 

S*,  W* 
Q30-31 

94 *~ 

7010 
452C 

50* 
834* 

6513 

55* 
79* 
81" 

949 

K,  L 

50* 
82* 

6  300  Employment 
and  training 

8022* 
8090* 
919" 

96* 
933* 

Group  7:  Law, 
Advocacy and  Politics 

8331" 

9218 

919" 

J20-30 

942 

7  100  Civic  and 
advocacy 
organisation 

919 ~ 

966 
968 ~ 

8641 
8651 
8699* 

9723 t 

949 ~ 

R 
Q70 
P80. 

942 
949 + 

7  200  Law  and  legal 
services 

7411" 
919" 

835 
963* 

8111 

7708 

949 

I 

830 

7  300  Political 
organisat~ons 

9192 

968 ~ 

8651 

9723 t 

949 ~ 

VV • 

949 t 

300 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

Appendix  B (continued) 

ICNPO 

ISIC 

NACE a  US 

France 

Japan 

NTEE 

India 

Group 8: 
Ph~mthropic 
Intermediaries and 
Voluntarism  Promotion 

919 t 

96 t 

9723 ~ 

949 t 

6732 
8699 t 

T 
$70 

949 t 

Group 9:  International 

919 t 

96 ~ 

8699 ~  9723 ~ 

949 ~ 

Q* 

9191" 

966* 

8661 

9723 ~ 

949 ~ 

X 

Group 10:  Religion 

Group 11: Business 
and  Professional 
Associations,  Unions 
Group 12:  Not 
Elsewhere Classified 

9111 
9112 
9120 

9199 
9249 
9309 

963 
964 
965 

968 
979 
984 

8611 
8621 
8631 

8699 
8999 

7715 
9711 

87 
9723 

94 
98o t 

940 

942* 

941 
949* 

$41 
Y 
J40 ~ 

949 

Z 

99 ¸ 

• 

t 

indicates  a  significant mismatch  between  ICNPO  and  other  classification;  however, 
some  equivalence  exists 
indicates  that  ICNPO  activity  is  not  captured  by  other  classification,  or  that  such 
activities  are  grouped  into  a  catch-all  or  residual  category. 

a  1970 NACE 

£ 

o 

8 

=* 

.= 

! 

P 

o 

,e 

o 
o 

~3 

~ 

= 

g 

~ 

g 

- 

- 

- 

~  E  E 

i 

z 
N 

i 

o 

Z _o 

g 

r ~  

@ 

8 

8 

8 
8 

!i, 

~i~ 
- ~   ~ 

- 

~i  - 

i 

Z 

Z 

E 

!  J 

¢ 

o 

8 
o 

~ 

E 

o 

a 

i m 

Q 

~° ~i i~ ~0 ~ ~-~- 0 

tO 

I0 

i E 

o 

E  o 
o  = 

E 

o 

j- 

E 

- 

i 

J 

m 

b 

~ 

o E 

~ - ~  
~ i   ~ 

~ 
- 

. )  

| 

o 

Q 

o 

o 
- -  

_ 

' ~  

c :  

m 

8 

_o 

Q 

c 

m 

J 

, n  

c- 

H 

m 

~ 

~: 

. 

~ 

.~ 

: 

~ l l  

m 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

_~ 

- 

m 

i 

E 

i 

N 

z 

o 

0 

a 

Ii ~.= 

E 

.~ ~ 

~.~ 

o ~  

-,g 

K 

i- 

,i 

~..  ~ 

a l  

a 

~ 

~ 

o~ 

= 

-> 

E 

£ 

m 

E 

E 

o 

N 

N 

z 

o 

e ! 

8 ~  

o 

J 

a~ 

~  ~ =  

Ig 

~.2 

ij 

i0 

[ ]  

o 

o 

! 

E 

i!0 

c~ 

c 

, q  

c 

N 

E 

E 

o 

o 

- 

~ 

- 

c-- 

e -  

l 
~ J  

o 

, r  

o 

i -  o ~  

o ~  

E 

~m 

- -  

m 

-i  °~ 

o 

E 

_o 

. °  
e 

o 

o 

. °  

7wz~ 

c~ 

U4t 

308 

Notes 

Lester M. Salamon and Helmut K. Anheier 

a  Lester  Salamon is  Professor  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore, 
Maryland 21218  and  Director  of the  Institute for  Policy  Studies  there. 
b  Helmut  Anheier  is  Research  Scientist  at  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies 
at  the  Johns  Hopkins  University and  Assistant  Professor  of Sociology  at 
Rutgers  University, New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey,  08903. He  is  co-editor 
of VoIuntas. 

*  The  authors  are  grateful  to  Kusuma  Cunningham  for  her  assistance  in 
developing  the  ICNPO  and  for  compiling Appendix  C  of  this  paper. 
1  An  'economic activity' in  the  national income statistics  is  defined as  'the 
combination  of  actions  that  result  in  a  certain  set  of  products'  (United 
Nations,  1990, p.9). 

2  For  example,  most  US  non-profit  hospitals  and  universities  would  be 
dropped  from  the  non-profit sector  under  this  definition, since  they  get 
the  largest  proportion  of  their  income  from  fees  or  government  grants. 
The same would happen to non-profit social service providers in European 
countries. 

3  A  1992 revision  of  the  NACE  system  makes  the  classification  nearly 
identical  to  the  ISIC, although  some  more  detail  is  provided  at  the 
sub-group level, allowing for a  more refined treatment in some industries 
(Eurostat,  1992). 

4  Some  analysts  would  include  service  clubs  (1  300) as  member-serving 

organisations also. 

References 

Amenomori, T. (1992) The nonprofit sector, mimeograph, Johns Hopkins Com- 

parative Nonprofit Sector Project, Baltimore,  Maryland. 

Anheier,  H., Salamon, L.M. and Rudney, G. (1992) The nonprofit sector in the 
United Nation's system of national accounts:  definition, treatment and prac- 
tice,  Working Papers of the Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit Sector Project, 
no.  4,  Institute  for  Policy  Studies,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore, 
Maryland. 

Archambault, E. (1992) Defining the nonprofit dector:  France, Working Papers of 
the Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit Sector Project, no. 7, Institute for Policy 
Studies, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 

Deutsch,  K. (1963) The Nerves of Government, Free Press,  New York. 
Drabek,  A.G.  (ed.)(1987) Development alternatives:  the  challenge  for  NGOs, 

World Development, 15, Special Issue. 

Eurostat  (1979) European System  of Integrated Accounts  (ESA), second  edition, 
Office for Official  Publications of the European Community, Luxembourg. 
Eurostat (1985) NACE: General Industrial Classification of Economic Activities within 
the  European Communities, Office  for  Official Publications  of the  European 
Community, Luxembourg. 

Classifying  the non-profit sector 

309 

Eurostat (1992) NACE: General Industrial Classification of Economic Activities within 
the European Communities, first revised edition, Office for Official Publications 
of the European Community,  Luxembourg. 

Hodgkinson,  V.A.  (1990) Mapping  the non-profit  sector in  the  United  States: 

implications for research,  Voluntas, 1:2, 6-32. 

Institut National  de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (INSEE) Enqu~te 

sur les Associations, INSEE, Paris. 

Salamon,  LM.  (1992) America's  Nonprofit  Sector: A  Primer, The  Foundation 

Center, New York. 

Salamon,  L.M. and  Abramson,  A.J. (1982) The Federal Budget and  the Nonprofit 

Sector, The Urban Institute  Press,  Washington,  DC. 

Salamon,  L.M. and  Anheier,  H.  (1992a) Toward  an  understanding  of  the 
nonprofit sector at  the  international  level:  the Johns  Hopkins Comparative 
Nonprofit Sector Project,  Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 2, 311-24. 
Salamon, LM. and  Anheier,  H. (1992b) In search of the nonprofit sector. I: The 

question of definitions,  VoIuntas, 3:2, 125-51. 

Sumariwalla, R. (1983) Preliminary observation on scope, size, and classification 
of  the  Sector,  Working Papers for  the  Spring  Research Forum: Since the Filer 
Commission, Independent  Sector, Washington,  DC. 

United Nations  (1990) International Standard Industrial Classification of All Econ- 
omic Activities,  third  revised  edition  (Statistical  Papers  Series  M, no.  4,  rev. 
3).