Int Rev Public Nonprofit Mark
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12208-018-0197-3

O R I G I N A L A RT I C L E

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory
of planned behaviour model

Robert Mittelman 1

& José Rojas-Méndez 2

Received: 2 December 2017 / Accepted: 9 April 2018
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2018

Abstract The purpose of this paper is to test an expanded model of charitable giving
and the intention to donate based on the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB). The
novelty of this research resides in disaggregating the overall attitude a donor may hold
into three different attitude constructs: attitude toward a charity, attitude toward helping,
and attitude toward donation. An online survey was conducted of 202 potential
Canadian charitable donors. By using a hierarchical multiple regression, results show
that overall, the extended TPB model proposed in this study is significantly better than
those found in the extant research in predicting the intention to donate. The strongest
influences on the intention to donate were past behaviour, moral norms, and perceived
behavioural control. Subjective norms and attitude toward charitable organisation were
found to be non-significant predictors. Managerial implications are also presented at the
end of the paper.

Keywords Charity. Charitable giving . Donor behaviour. Theory of planned behaviour.
Canada

1 Introduction

The trends in charitable giving in Canada show that charitable donations are on the
decline as fewer individual Canadians are donating to charities than in the past
(Turcotte 2015). Somewhat similarly, the United States and the United Kingdom show
static giving rates in terms of percentage of income, where most individuals are giving
very small sums, amid low donor retention rates, and a generational divide in giving

* Robert Mittelman

robert.mittelman@royalroads.ca

1 Royal Roads University, 2005 Sooke Road, Victoria, BC V9B 5Y2, Canada
2

Sprott School of Business, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1S
5B6, Canada

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

trends between the generous but aging baby boomers and the stingy and aloof
millennials (Sargeant 2014). The challenges faced in fundraising by charities are
amplified by an increase in demand for their social services by the public, growing
competition for grants and other forms of financial support, as well as reduced funding
from governments who are looking to the not-for-profit and private sectors to fill the
gap from a reduction in government-sponsored support services. Therefore, to increase
marketing and fundraising efficacy, the need to improve the targeting of appropriate
charitable donors as well as improved quality of communications by non-profit mar-
keters remains critical (Sargeant 2014).

The theory of planned behaviour (TPB) has been successfully applied to the
charitable giving context to help in predicting the intention to donate to charity.
However, extant studies measure attitude as a unidimensional construct when there is
strong theoretical and practical support that implies it should be multidimensional. This
paper will attempt to fill this gap by exploring the intention to donate by extending the
theory of planned behaviour to include three dimensions of attitude by surveying
Canadian donors and analysing the data with hierarchical multiple regression.

2 Background

The TPB (Ajzen 1991) contends that intentions are the most direct and closest predictor
of actual behaviour. According to the TPB, intentions are influenced by the attitude
toward the behaviour, subjective norms (perception of others’ reaction to their engaging
in the behaviour) and perceived behavioural control (PBC; the ability to perform the
behaviour). Furthermore, Ajzen (1991) put forth that, after the examination of tradi-
tional TPB variables, the TPB can allow additional predictors if these additional
predictors can capture a significant proportion of the variance in intention. The TPB
literature has expanded to include some additional constructs: moral norms and past
behaviour (Conner and Armitage 1998).

Specifically, the TPB has been used to predict prospective donors’ intentions in a
variety of prosocial activities, such as volunteering (e.g. Okun and Sloane 2002), blood
donation (e.g. Veldhuizen et al. 2011), organ donation (e.g. Hyde and White 2009), and
bone marrow donation (Bagozzi et al. 2001). However, to date only a relatively small
number of studies have examined the TPB in the charitable giving context (e.g., Webb
et al. 2000; Smith and McSweeney 2007; van der Linden 2011; Kashif and De Run
2015; Kashif et al. 2015).

3 Theory of planned behaviour and charitable giving

Webb et al. (2000) were amongst the first to adapt the TPB specifically to charitable
giving. They investigated the attitudinal construct and analysed it from the
perspective of charitable organisations. Central to their conceptualisation was the
argument by Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) that asserts that it
is possible to hold
multiple attitudes towards a behaviour and that there is a conceptual difference
between attitude toward the act and attitude toward the object. For Webb et al.
(2000), in the context of charitable giving, this represents the attitude toward helping

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

others and the attitude toward the charity. While previous attempts to measure
attitude towards charitable giving used a single-measure construct, Webb et al.
(2000) posit
that attitude toward helping others and attitude toward charitable
organisations are Bdistinct but related determinants of donation behaviour^ (pg. 300).
They successfully developed and validated two separate measures: a four-item
measure of Attitude toward Helping Others (Cronbach’s alpha = .79) and a five-item
measure of Attitude toward Charitable Organizations (Cronbach’s alpha = .81) (Webb
et al. 2000). Webb et al.’s (2000) measures have been used to study charitable donation
intention (Ranganathan and Henley 2008), the impact of donation amount on the
willingness to pay for cause-related marketing (Koschate-Fischer et al. 2012),
explaining volunteer’s pro-social attitudes (Briggs et al. 2010), and the effects of charity
reputation on charitable giving (Meijer 2009).

What Webb et al. (2000) fail to account for is the attitude towards the way
through which help can be provided to charitable organisations which include
financial donations, volunteering, and social purchasing to name but a few
(Peloza and Hassay 2007). Studies have shown that
these types of charity
helping behaviours are unique and thus should not be treated as equivalent
(Drollinger 2010). Smith and McSweeney (2007) develop a unidimensional,
eight-item, semantic differential scale to assess Attitude toward Donation. This
scale was assessed and showed a Cronbach’s alpha of
.93 (Smith and
McSweeney 2007) indicating an excellent internal consistency.

Focused specifically on financial donations, Smith and McSweeney (2007) used
hierarchical regression analysis to assess the predictors of intentions to donate by
sampling 227 community members in Australia. The results of their study revealed
that the TPB components of attitude toward donation, subjective norms, and PBC
¼ 0:67Þ, supporting the applica-
significantly predicted intentions to donate (R2
bility of original TPB model to charitable giving (Smith and McSweeney 2007). Their
extended model provided support for the inclusion of a number of new constructs; in
particular they found support for the inclusion of additional normative constructs,
principally moral norms, and past behaviour as they significantly increased the model
fit, increasing the R2
adjusted from the traditional TPB of 0.43 to an R2
adjusted of 0.67 for
their revised model (Smith and McSweeney 2007).

adjusted

van der Linden (2011) builds on the work of Smith and McSweeney (2007) by
questioning the predictive validity of social norms in studying the intention to donate to
charity. He hypothesises that moral norms are the main driver of behavioural intention
and not subjective norms. Results of that study confirmed the hypothesis. However, it
has been observed that to measure attitude, van der Linden (2011) chose only three of
the eight scale items developed by Smith and McSweeney (2007) and did not examine
any other dimensions of attitude. Nevertheless, the van der Linden model is more
parsimonious than the Smith and McSweeney model while accounting for 68% of the
variance in studying intention to donate to charity.

The Smith and McSweeney (2007) model has also been supported by Kashif and De
Run (2015) in their study of intention to donate to charity in Pakistan. The survey-
based questionnaire used by Kashif and De Run (2015) was identical to that of Smith
and McSweeney (2007). The results revealed significant relationship of all construct in
the extended TPB model, explaining 63% of the behaviour intentions among donors.

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

However, the approach of measuring attitude to charitable giving as a unidimen-
sional construct as exhibited in the extant literature is problematic. In general, Mac-
Kenzie (2003) argues that the incorrect definition of a construct can undermine
construct validity, statistical conclusion validity, and internal validity. With respect to
the attitude construct specifically, Bagozzi and Burnkrant (1979) were among the first
to compare the measurement of the attitude construct as either a multidimensional or
unidimensional construct. They found that convergent and nomological validity were
found for a multidimensional conceptualization of attitude but not supported for a
unidimensional one (Bagozzi and Burnkrant 1979). They surmised that the failure to
find a direct relationship between attitude and behavior may be due incorrect specifi-
cation and measurement of attitude as a unidimensional construct and that proper
assessment of the attitude construct required simultaneous measurement and use of
each of the multidimensional components (Bagozzi and Burnkrant 1979).

While limited to a handful of studies, a literature review of the TPB in charitable
giving accomplishes two important things. First, there is overall support for the use of
the TPB as a framework to study donor behaviour. Second, while the theoretical
support exists to allow individuals to hold multiple attitudes and that the charitable
giving literature has put forward these measures of attitude, they have never been used
in an empirical TPB study of the intention to donate.

3.1 Attitudes

In the marketing literature, attitudes can be defined as Brelatively enduring evaluations
of objects, issues or persons^ (Petty et al. 1991: p. 242, as cited in Webb et al. 2000).
Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) suggest attitude towards a behaviour is predicted by two
beliefs about the behaviour: beliefs about the likely outcomes of the behaviour and the
evaluations of these outcomes. It is also possible to hold multiple attitudes about a
single behaviour. According to Ajzen (2001), depending on the context, an individual
can simultaneously have multiple and conflicting attitudes without any cognitive
disagreement. Together, these beliefs produce a favourable or unfavourable attitude
towards the behaviour. In applying the TPB constructs to the charitable giving context,
the three attitudes towards charitable giving can be described as follows and lead to the
first set of hypotheses:

& H1: Attitude towards Donation will positively influence the Intention to Donate
& H2: Attitude towards Helping Others will positively influence the Intention to

Donate

& H3: Attitude towards Charitable Organizations will positively influence the Inten-

tion to Donate

3.2 Perceived Behavioural control

Perceived behavioural control is defined as Bpeople’s perception of the ease or diffi-
culty of performing the behaviour of interest^ (Ajzen 1991, p.193). There are two
separate groups of factors which can influence the perceived behavioural control –
internal and external. Internal control factors are related to the individual such as

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

personal skill, ability, and information. External control factors lay outside the individ-
ual in the environment and may include such things as dependence on others, barriers,
or resources (Ajzen 1985). For example, a donor may wish to make a financial
contribution online but not know the website address. Thus, the prospective donor
lacks the sufficient information to give and cannot do so based on an internal control
factor. Similarly, a person may know the website address and may be willing to donate
online, but, being without an Internet connection, a credit card, or the available funds, is
unable to do so due to an external control factor. A donor must determine if they have
Bthe necessary resources and opportunities to perform the behaviour successfully,
weighted by the perceived power of each factor to facilitate or inhibit behaviour^
(Conner and Armitage 1998, p. 1432). Accordingly, we hypothesize:

& H4: Perceived Behavioural Control will positively influence the Intention to Donate

3.3 Subjective and moral norms

Subjective norms are the perceived social reaction to engaging or not engaging in a
given behaviour. There are two components to Fishbein and Ajzen’s (1975) subjective
norms, normative beliefs and motivation to comply. Normative beliefs are beliefs held
by an individual about what other people, important to the individual, believe about
whether one should or should not engage in the behaviour. The importance of the belief
about what others want is influenced by the desire to meet those preferences. For
example, prospective charitable donors may perceive that their partner would not
approve of them making a large charitable donation, and if motivated to seek their
approval or avoid disapproval, a negative subjective norm towards making a donation
may be generated. However, if all their friends are also making a donation, a positive
subjective norm towards a donation may be generated.

Subjective norms have consistently been shown to be the weakest predictor of
intentions and a move to include other norms in the TPB to increase validity has led
to the introduction of moral norms (Rivis et al. 2009). In a meta-analysis of the addition
of moral norms to the TPB, Rivis et al. (2009) find that the addition of moral norms to
the model leads to a significant increase in the variance explained in donor intentions.
Moral norms, referred to as moral obligations or personal norms, are theoretically
different from subjective norms and reveals feelings about personal responsibility or
duty to perform a given behaviour because it is just inherently right or wrong regardless
of the personal or social consequences (Manstead 2000). As opposed to subjective
norms, which reflect social pressures and expectations, moral norms are personal and
internalized (Manstead 2000). In certain contexts, Ajzen (1991) believes that a measure
of moral norms could add predictive power to the model and there is strong empirical
evidence to support this particularly for behaviour involving ethical or prosocial
behaviours (Manstead 2000). Beck and Ajzen (1991) first put forward the use of moral
norms in the TPB by studying cheating, shoplifting and lying behaviour. As such, we
hypothesize that:

& H5: Subjective Norms will positively influence the Intention to Donate
& H6: Moral Norms will positively influence the Intention to Donate

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

While not included in the original TPB, the role of past behaviour has attracted
considerable attention in the study of planned behaviour and been used in numerous
extended models. Several studies have examined the role of past behaviour as an
additional predictor of unique variance in intentions and behaviour (e.g. Conner et al.
1999). Some studies have found that past behaviour is the best predictor of future
behaviour, stronger than either attitudes or PBC (e.g. Conner et al. 2002). In the reviewed
studies of TPB in charitable giving, past behaviour has been posited to be an important
and independent predictor of behavioural intention to donate (Smith and McSweeney
2007; Oosterhof et al. 2009; van der Linden 2011). There is sufficient theoretical support
to include past behaviour in a study of the TPB as it may account for a substantial portion
of the variance in charitable giving. Therefore, our final hypothesis is:

& H7: Past Behaviour will positively influence the Intention to Donate

4 Purpose of the study

The purpose of this study is to test an expanded TPB model
in charitable
giving by including and examining the multiple attitudes a donor may hold
toward different components of the financial donor experience: attitudes towards
charitable organizations, attitudes towards helping others, and attitudes towards
financial donations. Thus addressing limitations of previous studies which used
a unidimensional construct for attitude and the accuracy of their conclusions.
We take up the call by Wymer and Alves (2013, p. 66) for Bnonprofit scholars
to develop appropriate conceptualizations of constructs and valid measures for
those constructs^ with a focus on refining the use of the attitude toward
charitable giving construct in nonprofit marketing. This study will attempt to
improve on existing models using a multidimensional conceptualization of
attitude to charitable giving, with more specificity about each of the various
dimensions, and thus predict a greater amount of the variance in the intention
to donate to charity.

5 Method

In order to test the extended model, an eight-section questionnaire was designed in
order to carry out an online survey. All constructs were measured using 7-point, Likert-
style questions (see Table 1). The Intention to Donate was measured using Ranganathan
and Henley’s (2008) 4-item scale. The Attitude toward Helping Others and Attitude
toward Charity were measured using Webb et al.’s (2000) 4-item measures respectively.
The Attitude toward Donation was measured using Smith and McSweeney’s (2007) 8-
item measure. As the extant literature on the TPB in charitable giving was based
heavily on Smith and McSweeney (2007), their measures for Moral Norms (4-items),
Subjective Norms (3-items), Past Behaviour (5-items), and PBC (5-items) were also
used. Participants were told to focus on monetary donations to charity as the method of
charitable giving. Some questions asked them to recall their past monetary donations
while other questions asked them about what they would do in the future.

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

Table 1 Summary of constructs

Construct

Intention to Donate (Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7)) (INTDON)

In the coming year I am planning to donate money to charity.
It is my intention to donate money in the coming year.
It is very likely that I will donate to charity.
I will definitely donate to charity.

α

.964

Attitude towards Helping Others (Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7)) (ATHO)

.893

People should be willing to help others who are less fortunate.
Helping troubled people with their problems is very important to me.
People should be more charitable towards others in society.
People in need should receive support from others.

Attitude towards Charity (Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7)) (ATC)

.817

The money given to charities goes for good causes.
Much of the money donated to charity is wasted. (R)
My image of charitable organization is positive
Charitable organizations have been quite successful in helping the needy.
Charity organizations perform a useful function for society.

Attitude towards Donation variables (1 – lowest, 7 – highest) (ATD)

.970

My making a monetary donation to charity in the next 4 weeks would be:
Very unpleasant to Very pleasant
Very useless to Very useful
Very unsatisfying to Very satisfying
Very unfavourable to Very favourable
Very negative to Very positive
Very inconsiderate to Very considerate
Very pointless to Very worthwhile
Very bad to Very good

Moral Norms (Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7)) (MORAL)

.869

I am the kind of person who donates money to charity.
I would feel guilty if I did not donate money to charity.
I believe I have a moral obligation to donate money to charity.
Not donating money to charities goes against my principles.

Subjective Norms (SUBJ)

.590

The people closest to me would support my decision to make monetary donations to distant others.
(Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7))
The people closest to me would disapprove if I donated money to distant others. (Very Unlikely (1) to
Very Likely (7)) (Reverse-scored)
Most people who are important to me think that my donating money to distant others would be: (Very
Undesirable (1) to Very Desirable (7))

Past Behaviour (PB)

.898

I do not donate money to charities (Never true (1) to Always true (7)) (R)
I have not recently donated any money to charity (Never true (1) to Always true (7)) (R)
It is unusual for me to donate money to charities (Strongly disagree (1) to Strongly agree (7)) (R)

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

Table 1 (continued)

Construct

I usually donate money to charities (Strongly disagree (1) to Strongly agree (7))
How often have you recently donate money to charities (Never (1) to Very frequently (7))

Perceived Behavioural Control (PBC)

α

.826

If I wanted to, I could easily donate money to charities in the next month (Strongly disagree (1) to
Strongly agree (7))
Overall, how much control do you have over whether you donate money to charities in the next month
(No control (1) to Complete control (7))
It is mostly up to me whether I donate money to charities in the next month (Strongly disagree (1) to
Strongly agree (7))
I am confident that I will be able to donate money to charities in the next month. (Strongly disagree (1) to
Strongly agree (7))
Donating money to charities in the next month is easy for me to do. (Strongly disagree (1) to Strongly
agree (7))
(R) – reverse scored

They survey instrument was placed on Survey Monkey and participants were recruited
through Survey Monkey Audience. The population surveyed included a diverse group of
people from across the Canadian populations who have Internet access. Participants have
voluntarily completed various prior Internet surveys and were interested in taking additional
ones. While no direct incentives were offered, the online survey provider did offer its
participants various types of non-monetary incentives, including a contribution to a charity
of the member’s choice. The only targeting criterion was that participants must be older than
18 years of age. In total, 249 people responded while 202 people completed the survey
resulting in an 81% completion rate from starting. Respondents came from across Canada
including Atlantic Canada (19, 9.55%), Quebec (41, 20.6%), Ontario (77, 38.69%), Prairies
(34, 17.09%), BC (23, 11.56%), and Northern Canada (5, 2.51%). Respondents profiles
indicated that slightly more females (57.3%) than males participated, the majority had at
least a 4-year college degree (62.4%), and an annual income of less than $100,000 CAD
(85%). The average time to complete the survey was 11 min and 18 s. This is well under the
targeted maximum of 20 min to complete the questionnaire set to avoid potential respondent
fatigue or the average attention span of an adult student (Middendorf and Kalish 1996).

To analyse the data, hierarchical multiple regression (HMR) was chosen. In HMR,
the independent variables are entered into a regression analysis in a specified order.
This is done to examine the specific contribution of each independent variable after
controlling for more general variables. In the case of extending the Theory of Planned
Behaviour in charitable giving, it allowed for the examination and control of the
original TPB variables and the individual contribution of the various dimensions of
attitude. HMR, as opposed to structural equation modelling which tests all variables
simultaneously, allows for the identification of the added value of each individual
variable towards the overall explained variance. Additionally, it will facilitate compar-
ison with existing extended models of the theory of planned behaviour in charitable
giving as HMR was used by Smith and McSweeney (2007), van der Linden (2011),
and Kashif and De Run (2015) in their respective TPB studies in charitable giving.

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

6 Results

Before conducting the hierarchical regression analysis, each of the constructs was analysed
for consistency and reliability. All the Cronbach alpha coefficients were above 0.81, with the
only exception being Subjective Norms (α = 0.59) thus placing a question mark upon its
contribution to the model (see Table 1 for a recap). The results of the analysis is consistent
with the extant literature as each of the studies show Subjective Norms with an equally low
Cronbach alpha coefficient. All the other constructs seem to show a reasonable level of
reliability above the baseline of 0.70 (Nunnally and Bernstein 1994).

The constructs were also tested for face validity, content validity, nomological validity,
convergent validity, and external validity in line with many of the best practice recommen-
dations by Wymer and Alves (2013). The construct and items developed here for the
charitable giving were reviewed by two independent reviewers and no items seemed out
of place. As such, the constructs met the requirements of face validity. Content validity was
met after an extensive review of the literature from appropriate areas including a review of
the measures previously used, a review of the content by experts, and by pilot testing.
Nomological validity is an assessment of whether the appropriate items and constructs have
been included in the model and whether any have been neglected. This can be determined
based on extant literature related to the model. After review, the constructs proposed offer
nomological validity. Convergent validity is the degree to which two or more attempts to
measure the same concept through maximally different methods are in agreement (Peter
1981). The items for each construct were factor analyzed to determine whether all items
merit inclusion in the construct. If all items load heavily on the first factor extracted, one can
usually conclude that the items are all dimensions of the same underlying factor (Reve
1979). With respect to the constructs used in the model, all factor loadings are significant
thus supporting the convergent validity for the constructs. In order to show external validity
in the proposed model, an effort was made to use established constructs which have been
applied in both charitable giving and other settings. The constructs from the TPB (attitudes,
moral norms, perceived behavioural control, past behaviour) have been used in numerous
contexts and in numerous countries including a number of various prosocial and consumer
behaviours such as volunteering (Warburton and Terry 2000), blood donation (Giles and
Cairns 1995), dieting (Armitage and Conner 1999), and recycling (Mannetti et al. 2004).
The TPB is also used in the study of charitable giving in a number of countries including
The Netherlands, Germany, and the United Kingdom (van der Linden 2011), Australia
(Smith and McSweeney 2007; Knowles et al. 2012), Pakistan (Kashif and De Run 2015)
Malaysia (Kashif et al. 2015). These studies also used the intention to donate as their
behavioural intention in question. As all constructs have been used in different settings with
different samples, external validity has been demonstrated. Furthermore, examination of the
items and constructs for assumptions of normality was conducted using values of skewness
and kurtosis and all were found to be in normal ranges.

For the purpose of testing, a hierarchical multiple regression analysis, enter proce-

dure, was used to regress Intention to Donate onto the revised TPB model, where:

INTDON ¼ β0 þ β1ATD þ β2ATHO þ β3ATC þ β4PBC þ β5SUBJ þ β6MORAL þ β7PAST þ ε

Note: Intention to Donate (INTDON), Attitude toward Donation (ATD), Attitude
toward Helping Others (ATHO), Attitude toward Charity (ATC), Perceived

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

Behavioural Control (PBC), Subjective Norms (SUBJ), Moral Norms (MORAL), Past
Behaviour (PAST), Error Term (ε).

The constructs’ values were computed as the average score for the constructs’ individual
items (taking the reverse scores into account). Following the methodology used in hierar-
chical multiple regression for predicting the intention to donate in charitable giving from
Smith and McSweeney (2007), van der Linden (2011), and Kashif and De Run (2015),
Steps 1 through 3 of the HMR focused on adding the traditional TPB variables. Step 1 added
the three ‘attitude’ variables of Attitude toward Donation, Attitude toward Charity, and
Attitude toward Helping Others. Perceived Behavioural Control was added in Step 2 and
then the two ‘norms’ variables of Subjective Norms and Moral Norms were added in Step 3.
The final step, Step 4, involved adding Past Behaviour to the regression analysis. Results of
this analysis are presented in Table 2.

The first group of variables composed by the attitude toward donation, attitude toward
helping others and attitude toward charity, which were entered one at a time in the regression,
contribute significantly to the explained variance (R-Square Change = 0.511, F (3, 195) =
67.934). Further inspection indicated a significant effect for ATD β = 0.174 and ATHO β =
0.151 while ATC was found to be non-significant in predicting intention to donate. In the
second step, the inclusion of PBC added a significant increase in the variance explained (R-
Square Change = 0.153 F (4, 194) = 95.702). The β weight for PBC was 0.249 (p < 0.01).
The third step consisted in adding SUBJ and MORAL into the hierarchical regression.
Results show again an increased in the variance explained (R-Squared Change = 0.058, F (6,
192) = 83.044). Further analysis revealed a significant effect for moral norms only (β = .248,
p < 0.01). Subjective norms were found to be non-significant in predicting the intention to
donate. Therefore, the increase in explained variance can be fully attributed to moral norms.
Lastly, PAST was entered and produced a significant increase in the variance explained (R-
Square Change = 0.046, F (7, 191) = 90.148). The more respondents had donated in the past,
the stronger their intention to donate in the future (β = 0.266, p < 0.01). With all variables in
the equation, the revised TPB model accounted for 76% of the variance in the Intention to
Donate (see Fig. 1).

Table 2 Results hierarchical multiple regression on intention to donate

Step

Predictor

R Squared
Adjusted

R Squared
Change

F-
Value

F
Change

Standardized
Beta (β)

1

2

3

4

Attitude toward donation

0.504

0.511

67.934

67.934

0.174***

Attitude toward helping others

Attitude toward charity

Perceived behavioural control

Subjective norms

Moral norms

Past behaviour

0.151***

0.021

0.657

0.713

0.153

0.058

95.702

83.044

88.039

0.249***

20.08

0.031

0.759

0.046

90.148

37.653

0.266***

0.248***

*p < 0.10

**p < 0.05

***p < 0.01

The beta weights reported are the values at the final step

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

Fig. 1 Results of the extended theory of planned behaviour model in charitable giving Note: solid line
represents significant relationship, dashed line represents non-significant relationship. Note: * p < 0.10,
**p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.

Capturing 76% of the variance in the Intention to Donate, this model is an excellent
fit and significantly better than those models found in the literature (see Table 3). The
regression found that Past Behaviour is the strongest predictor of the Intention to
Donate with Moral Norms and Perceived Behavioural Control influencing the Intention
to Donate by almost as much.

6.1 Attitude toward charitable giving

Previous studies of the TPB model in charitable giving have used a single measure of
attitude based on the work of Smith and McSweeney (2007). This is the first study to
examine simultaneously the three types of attitudes previously identified: toward
donation, toward charitable organisation, and toward helping others. The results show
that both Attitudes toward Donation and Attitudes toward Helping Others are separate,
positive, and significant predictors of the Intention to Donate (H1 and H2 supported),
while the Attitude toward Charity is non-significant (H3 not supported). The extant
research, as shown in Table 3, found that their single measure of attitude was also
significant and positive in predicting the intention to donate (Smith and McSweeney
2007; van der Linden 2011; Kashif and De Run 2015). There was, therefore, agreement
about the role of attitude toward donation while the investigation of attitude toward
helping others and attitude toward charitable organisations is unique to this study.

6.2 Perceived behavioural control

The results across all four studies shown in Table 3 were similar with respect
to the relationship between PBC and the intention to donate, with Kashif and
De Run slightly higher than the others. In all cases, PBC was found to be a
positive and significant predictor (H4 supported).

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

Table 3 TPB in charitable giving model comparison

Mittelman and
Rojas-Mendez (2018)

Smith and
McSweeney (2007)

Van der
Linden (2011)

Kashif and
De Run (2015)

ATD -- > INTDON

0.17***

0.11*

0.21***

0.26**

ATC -- > INTDON

0.02

Not considered

Not considered Not considered

Not considered

Not considered Not considered

0.24***

0.13*

0.15***

0.54***

0.67

0.27***
−0.16
0.51***

0.49***

0.68

0.31**

0.27**

0.34**

0.29**

0.63

ATHO -- > INTDON

PBC -- > INTDON

0.15***

0.25***

SUBJ -- > INTDON

0.03

MORAL-- > INTDON 0.25***

PAST -- > INTDON
R2 Adjusted

0.27***

0.76

* p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01

6.3 Subjective norms

The relationship between subjective norms and the intention to donate was found to be non-
significant in this study (H5 not supported) and in van der Linden (2011) but was found to be
significant in Smith and McSweeney (2007) and Kashif and De Run (2015). van der Linden
(2011) explains that his results are not completely out of line with extant research, including
Smith and McSweeney (2007), in that previous studies have only found partial evidence to
support the predictive validity of subjective norms in prosocial behaviours. van der Linden
(2011) also discusses the low-reliability coefficient of the subjective norm index in his study
as less than optimal. This is also the case in this study with the Subjective Norm scale having
a very low Cronbach’s Alpha.

6.4 Moral norms

Moral Norms were always found to be significant and positive predictors of the
Intention to Donate (H6 supported). The β values do vary a great deal between the
samples. For both van der Linden (2011) and Kashif and De Run (2015), moral norms
are the strongest predictor of the intention to donate.

6.5 Past behaviour

Across the studies, there is a strong, positive, and significant relationship between Past
Behaviour and the Intention to Donate (H7 supported). Furthermore, in both this study
and Smith and McSweeney (2007), this relationship is the strongest predictor of the
intention to donate.

7 Discussion

While all four models presented in Table 3 demonstrate acceptable model fit as
expressed by the adjusted R-squared, the results from this study predict 8% more than

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

any of the existing models with an adjusted R-squared of 0.76. While the models are
different in terms of the number of predictors, the adjusted R-squared has been used for
just this purpose, the comparison of the explanatory power of different regression
models with a different number of predictors. The Kashif and De Run (2015) model
predicts the least of the intention to donate (0.63), while the Smith and McSweeney
(2007) and van der Linden (2011) have similar R-squared results of 0.67 and 0.68
respectively. Overall, the extended TPB model proposed in this study found that the
strongest influences on the intention to donate were past behaviour, moral norms, and
perceived behavioural control. The biggest difference between the three extant studies
and the one used here is the disaggregation of the attitude construct.

What these extant studies failed to examine was the distinction between the attitude
toward donation (making a financial donation), the attitude toward the intermediary
(the charity) and the attitude toward the object (helping the beneficiary). By using the
multi-dimensional construct, this study was able to discover the importance of the
attitude toward helping others as well as the non-significance of the attitude toward
charitable organisations. The use of the multi-dimensional constructs improved results
substantially when compared with other TPB in charitable giving studies. Future
studies of charitable giving that examine attitude should strongly consider the various
dimensions of attitude toward charitable giving.

Moral norms were significantly influential while subjective norms were non-signif-
icant. This result has not been consistent across studies and this could be related to the
particular nature and culture of the countries sampled. Canada, where subjective norms
were non-significant, is considered an individualistic country (Hofstede 2001). Con-
versely, Kashif and De Run (2015) found that subjective norms were a significant,
strong and positive predictor of the intention to donate in their sample in Pakistan,
which is considered a collectivistic country (Hofstede 2001). The vast majority of
studies on subjective norms (perception of others’ reaction to their engaging in the
behaviour) have taken place in single country settings either in North America or East
Asia (Smith 2015). The countries in these areas represent both highly individualistic
and highly collectivistic cultures, respectively. Matsumoto et al. (2008) examined the
influence of subjective norms across 32 nations and found that individualism-
collectivism could explain important differences in the way that subjective norms
influence behaviour. Other possible explanations could be related to the idea that
charitable giving usually takes place in private or anonymously thereby activating
moral norms as opposed to social or subjective norms (van der Linden 2011) or that
people tend to underestimate the influence of subjective norms and social pressures on
their behaviour (Nolan et al. 2008).

7.1 Managerial implications

The findings with respect to each of the constructs investigated present a number of
managerial implications. The study began examining three different attitudes towards
charitable giving: the attitude towards charitable organisations, the attitude towards
donations, and the attitude towards helping others. In terms of predicting the intention
to donate, both the attitude toward donation and the attitude towards helping others was
found to be significant where those who show a more positive attitude towards helping
others are more likely to donate. Therefore, a non-profit marketer may consider

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

targeting those who already help others as well as emphasizing the donation and the
benefit it creates and less on the organisation.

This study also found that past donation behaviour is the strongest predictor of the
intention to donate. This result fits within extant non-profit marketing literature and the
service quality literature. The importance of strengthening the link between past
behaviour and the intention to donate for non-profit marketers is significant as an
increase of 10% in donor loyalty can results in an improvement of 100% to 150% in
ROI depending on the nature of the campaign (Sargeant and Woodliffe 2007). Sargeant
and Woodliffe (2007) examine repeat and loyal donors and find that they are driven by
five factors including perceived service quality, shared beliefs, perceived risk, and the
existence of a personal link to the organisation or cause, and trust.

The implications of the strength of the relationship between perceived behavioural
control and the intention to donate are that for non-profits to increase donations they
need to make the process of donating as easy and accessible as possible. Sargeant et al.
(2007), in a study of online fundraising effectiveness, found that website accessibility
(or making it easy for the donor to offer support) is significantly and positively
correlated with both the number of new donors a site can attract as well as with the
total value of online donations. The importance of information communication tech-
nologies and website design is becoming of paramount importance for the future of
charitable giving. This includes the growing importance of social media tools, such as
Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Instagram to promote giving as well as exploring
donations by text message.

Finally, due to the potential influence of individualism-collectivism on the impact of
subjective norms upon intention to donate, non-profit marketers need to consider the
local culture when appealing for donations.

7.2 Limitations and further research

It should be acknowledged that the sampling for this study may not be fully
representative. Likewise, there is a potential risk of a non-response error, though
an effort was made to obtain responses from a wide variety of geographic regions
in the targeted country as well as a range of other demographic characteristics.
There is also a concern about social desirability bias in studies on charitable
giving and other prosocial behaviour due to the sensitive nature of the research.
Therefore, in order to improve generalizability and external validity, the hierar-
chical model for the intention to donate should be tested in other countries and
cultures. While the current model has a high R2, following Ajzen's (1991)
instructions, future studies could include other extensions of the TPB such as
internal ethics and moral intensity (Rex et al. 2015), religiosity (Reitsma et al.
2006), and emotional involvement (Bartolini 2005) if they can add significantly to
the explanatory power of the model. Furthermore, as highlighted by Johnstone and
Lindh (2018), millennial consumers (or donors), place considerable value on
influencers as motivators, often more so than the product or cause, and therefore
it is important to consider the mediating and moderating role of influencers on the
intention to donate. Finally, the results of this study should only be applied to
monetary donations to charities. For example, the hypotheses could be tested
against the intention to donate time (volunteering) or to donate used goods.

Why Canadians give to charity: an extended theory of planned...

Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References

Ajzen, I. (1985). From intention to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. Bechmand (Eds.),

Action control: From cognition to behavior. New York: Springer.

Ajzen, I. (1991). Theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 179–211.
Ajzen, I. (2001). Nature and operation of attitudes. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(1), 27–58.
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (1999). Distinguishing perceptions of control from self-efficacy: predicting
consumption of a low-fat diet using the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
29(1), 72–90.

Bagozzi, R. P., & Burnkrant, R. E. (1979). Attitude measurement and behavior change: a reconsideration of
attitude organization and its relationship to behavior. NA - Advances in Consumer Research, 6, 295–302.
Bagozzi, R. P., Lee, K. H., & Van Loo, M. F. (2001). Decisions to donate bone marrow: The role of attitudes

and subjective norms across cultures. Psychology and Health, 16(1), 29–56.

Bartolini, W. F. (2005). Prospective donors’ cognitive and emotive processing of charitable gift requests

(Doctoral dissertation, Kent State University).

Beck, L., & Ajzen, I. (1991). Predicting dishonest actions using the theory of planned behaviour. Journal of

Research in Personality, 25, 285–301.

Briggs, E., Peterson, M., & Gregory, G. (2010). Toward a better understanding of volunteering for nonprofit
organizations: explaining volunteers’ pro-social attitudes. Journal of Macromarketing, 30(1), 61–76.
Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (1998). Extending the theory of planned behavior: a review and avenues for

further research. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 1429–1464.

Conner, M., Warren, R., Close, S., & Sparks, P. (1999). Alcohol consumption and the theory of planned
behavior: an examination of the cognitive mediation of past behavior. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 29(8), 1676–1704.

Conner, M., Norman, P., & Bell, R. (2002). The theory of planned behavior and healthy eating. Health

Psychology, 21(2), 194–201.

Drollinger, T. (2010). A theoretical examination of giving and volunteering utilizing resource exchange theory.

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 22(1), 55–66.

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and

research. Reading: Addison-Wesley.

Giles, M., & Cairns, E. (1995). Blood donation and Ajzen's theory of planned behaviour: an examination of

perceived behavioural control. British Journal of Social Psychology, 34(2), 173–188.

Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions and organizations

across nations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Hyde, M. K., & White, K. M. (2009). To be a donor or not to be? Applying an extended theory of planned behavior to

predict posthumous organ donation intentions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39, 880–900.

Johnstone, L., & Lindh, C. (2018). The sustainability-age dilemma: a theory of (un) planned behaviour via

influencers. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 17(1), e127–e139.

Kashif, M., & De Run, E. C. (2015). Money donations intentions among Muslim donors: an extended theory of
planned behavior model. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 20(1), 84–96.
Kashif, M., Sarifuddin, S., & Hassan, A. (2015). Charity donation: intentions and behaviour. Marketing

Intelligence & Planning, 33(1), 90–102.

Knowles, S. R., Hyde, M. K., & White, K. M. (2012). Predictors of Young People's Charitable Intentions to
Donate Money: An Extended Theory of Planned Behavior Perspective. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 42(9), 2096–2110.

Koschate-Fischer, N., Stefan, I. V., & Hoyer, W. D. (2012). Willingness to pay for cause-related marketing: the
impact of donation amount and moderating effects. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(6), 910–927.
MacKenzie, S. B. (2003). The dangers of poor construct conceptualization. Journal of the Academy of

Marketing Science, 31(3), 323–326.

Mannetti, L., Pierro, A., & Livi, S. (2004). Recycling: planned and self-expressive behaviour. Journal of

Environmental Psychology, 24(2), 227–236.

R. Mittelman, J. Rojas-Méndez

Manstead, A. S. R. (2000). The role of moral norm in the attitude–behavior relation. In D. J. Terry & M. A.

Hogg (Eds.), Attitudes, behavior, and social context (pp. 11–30). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Matsumoto, D., Yoo, S. H., & Fontaine, J. (2008). Mapping expressive differences around the world the
relationship between emotional display rules and individualism versus collectivism. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 39(1), 55–74.

Meijer, M. M. (2009). The effects of charity reputation on charitable giving. Corporate Reputation Review,

12(1), 33–42.

Middendorf, J., & Kalish, A. (1996). The "change-up" in lectures. The National Teaching and Learning

Forum, 5(2), 1–5.

Nolan, J. M., Schultz, P. W., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). Normative social

influence is under detected. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(7), 913–923.
Nunnally, J., & Bernstein, I. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Okun, M. A., & Sloane, E. S. (2002). Application of planned behavior theory to predicting volunteer
enrolment by college students in a campus-based program. Social Behavior and Personality, 30, 243–250.
Oosterhof, L., Heuvelman, A., & Peters, O. (2009). Donation to disaster relief campaigns: Underlying social

cognitive factors exposed. Evaluation and Program Planning, 32(2), 148–157.

Peloza, J., & Hassay, D. (2007). A typology of charity support behaviors: toward a holistic view of helping.

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 17(1/2), 135–151.

Peter, J. P. (1981). Construct validity: a review of basic issues and marketing practices. Journal of Marketing

Research, 18(2), 133–145.

Petty, R. E., Unnava, R. H., & Strathman, A. J. (1991). Theories of attitude change. In T. S. Robertson & H. H.
Kassarjian (Eds.), Handbook of consumer behavior (pp. 241-280). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Ranganathan, S. K., & Henley, W. H. (2008). Determinants of charitable donation intentions: a structural
equation model. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 13(1), 1–11.
Reitsma, J., Scheepers, P., & Grotenhuis, M. T. (2006). Dimensions of individual religiosity and charity: cross-

national effect differences in European countries? Review of Religious Research, 347–362.

Reve, T. (1979). Construct validation in marketing: a comparison of methods in assessing the validity of the
affective, conative, and cognitive components of attitudes. Advances in Consumer Research, 6, 288–294.
Rex, J., Lobo, A., & Leckie, C. (2015). Evaluating the drivers of sustainable behavioral intentions: an application and
extension of the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 27(3), 263–284.
Rivis, A., Sheeran, P., & Armitage, C. J. (2009). Expanding the affective and normative components of the
theory of planned behavior: a meta-analysis of anticipated affect and moral norms. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 39(12), 2985–3019.

Sargeant, A. (2014). A retrospective-charitable giving: towards a model of donor behaviour. Social Business,

4(4), 293–323.

Sargeant, A., & Woodliffe, L. (2007). Building donor loyalty: the antecedents and role of commitment in the

context of charity giving. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 18(2), 47–68.

Sargeant, A., West, D. C., & Jay, E. (2007). The relational determinants of nonprofit website fundraising

effectiveness: an exploratory study. Nonprofit Management & Leadership, 18(2), 141–156.

Smith, P. B. (2015). Yes, subjective norms are important, but let’s not lose sight of cultural differences. Journal
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 46(10), 1310–1313. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022115599444 .
Smith, J., & McSweeney, A. (2007). Charitable giving: the effectiveness of a revised theory of planned
behaviour model in predicting donating intentions and behavior. Journal of Community and Applied
Social Psychology, 17(5), 363–386.

Turcotte, M. (2015). Volunteering and charitable giving in Canada. Spotlight on Canadians: results from the
General social survey. Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-652-x/89-652-x2015001-eng.pdf
van der Linden, S. (2011). Charitable intent: a moral or social construct? A revised theory of planned behavior

model. Current Psychology, 30(4), 355–374.

Veldhuizen, I., Ferguson, E., de Kort, W., Donders, R., & Atsma, F. (2011). Exploring the dynamics of the
theory of planned behavior in the context of blood donation: does donation experience make a difference?
Transfusion, 51(11), 2425–2437.

Warburton, J., & Terry, D. J. (2000). Volunteer decision making by older people: a test of a revised theory of

planned behavior. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 22(3), 245–257.

Webb, D. J., Green, C. L., & Brashear, T. G. (2000). Development and validation of scales to measure attitudes
influencing monetary donations to charitable organizations. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 28(2), 299–309.

Wymer, W., & Alves, H. M. B. (2013). Scale development research in nonprofit management & marketing: a
content analysis and recommendation for best practices. International Review on Public and Nonprofit
Marketing, 10(1), 65–86.