Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 27:117–134, 2015
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1049-5142 print/1540-6997 online
DOI: 10.1080/10495142.2014.965078

The Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing
Orientation: A Critical Reflection and
Contributions Toward Closing the
Practice–Theory Gap
WALTER WYMER
University of Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada

SILKE BOENIGK and MAREIKE MÖHLMANN
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany

In this article three generations of research addressing the marketing construct in nonprofit organizations are critically analyzed:
(a) market orientation in nonprofit organizations, (b) societal
orientation, and (c) research contributions aiming to close the
existing practice–theory gap on this topic. A qualitative study
among 24 nonprofit marketers is conducted in Canada and
Germany to develop a construct labeled nonprofit marketing orientation. It includes the dimensions of brand orientation, supporters’ orientation, commercial orientation, and service orientation.
Furthermore, the authors describe the nomological net of nonprofit
marketing orientation to present interconstruct relationships and
to inform future research.
KEYWORDS nonprofit marketing, marketing orientation, brand
strength, nonprofit brand orientation

INTRODUCTION
There is arguably no more central concept in the marketing discipline than
the marketing concept. However, there is no accepted opinion in nonprofit
marketing research on how to define and conceptualize the dimensions of
Address correspondence to Walter Wymer, Professor of Marketing, Faculty of
Management, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB T1K 3M4, Canada. E-mail: walter.
wymer@uleth.ca
117

118

W. Wymer et al.

this concept. We identify three generations of research that choose slightly
different approaches. These are delineated in the following.
In the first generation, researchers develop the market orientation construct and apply it in for-profit contexts. Per definition of many researchers,
market orientation is generally accepted to be the operationalization or
implementation of the marketing concept (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990; Sharp,
1991). The principle element of market orientation is the market or customer
focus (Sharp, 1991). Chad, Kyriazis, and Motion (2013a) trace the marketing
concept’s origins to Drucker (1954) and Levitt (1960), who direct businesses
to achieve profitability through focusing on meeting their customers’ needs.
Open-minded, progressive marketing scholars, during the debates within the
marketing academy regarding broadening the scope of marketing beyond
business profit growth, saw acceptance by the marketing academy of marketing relevance for nonbusiness organizations. For example, a central argument
was that nonprofit organizations might benefit from borrowing commercial
marketing tactics and, therefore, should be encouraged to use them (Arndt,
1979). In fact, these market orientation scales have been applied to nonprofit contexts by researchers (Gainer & Padanyi, 2002; Gonzalez, Vijande,
& Casielles, 2002; Kara, Spillan, & DeShields, 2004).
In the second generation of research, the question arises if marketing
concepts that were conceptualized for a business (usually a large consumer
products corporation) are valid across organizational types. Researchers
argue that the concept of market orientation is conceptually flawed, because
it was originally developed for for-profit contexts. Thus, market orientation
is not appropriate to be applied to nonprofit settings without appropriate adjustments. Societal orientation—a so-called “new marketing construct”
(Liao, Foreman, & Sargeant, 2001)—has been introduced as an alternative
that better responds to the specific needs of nonprofit organizations (DuqueZuluaga & Schneider, 2008; Liao et al., 2001). While the principle element
of market orientation is the market or customer, it is the society for societal
orientation. In fact, Liao et al. (2001, p. 263) state: “A societal orientation
construct should thus consider the extent to which a nonprofit focuses on
the needs of its key stakeholder groups, including the needs of the wider
society.”
The third generation research is a more recent development. It focuses
on a “practice–theory” gap. In fact, researchers argue that the implementation of the marketing concept is still under-researched (Chad, Motion, &
Kyriazis, 2013b; Modi & Mishra, 2010). In line with this, we argue that neither
market orientation nor societal orientation is feasible to operationalize the
implementation of marketing in nonprofit organizations nor can be used by
nonprofit markets to assess their organization’s marketing activities appropriately. When asking board managers or nonprofit marketers what their
behavioral activities in a daily marketing business look like, they mainly
refer to branding activities (Urde, Baumgarth, & Merrilees, 2013) such as

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

119

writing newsletters, using Facebook, or designing posters to communicate
to their stakeholders. However, existing marketing concepts do not capture
these activities. While market orientation refers to the principle element of
the market or customer, and societal orientation to the principle element of
society, we argue that the label nonprofit marketing orientation should be
used, when referring to the principle element of nonprofit marketing (Sharp,
1991). Thus, we define nonprofit marketing orientation as the operationalization of the marketing concept in nonprofit organizations. The research aim
of this paper is to discuss and conceptualize nonprofit marketing orientation.
With this article we seek to contribute to nonprofit marketing research
in several ways. First, we critically analyze all three generations of research
addressing the marketing construct in nonprofit organizations. In particular,
the third generation of research has rarely been addressed by researchers
so far. Second, unlike much of previous research, we will be arguing from
a managerial point of view when conceptualizing nonprofit marketing orientation, contributing to close a “practice–theory” gap. In this regard, our
conceptualization is based on a qualitative study, which we conducted
among nonprofit marketers. Third, unlike many other research contributions,
we will provide insights into the difference between nonprofit marketing
orientation and the brand construct when placing them in a nomological
net of relevant antecedents and nonprofit marketing outcomes (Urde et al.,
2013).

DIMENSIONS OF MARKET ORIENTATION IN NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS
The conceptualization of market orientation is often discussed on the level
of scales. The two most commonly used scales of market orientation
are MKTOR (Narver & Slater, 1990; Slater & Narver, 1994) and MARKOR
(Jaworski & Kohli, 1993). These authors describe major components or pillars of market orientation (see all items in Table 1). Narver and Slater’s (1990)
pillars are (a) customer orientation, (b) competitor orientation, and (c) interfunctional coordination. Kohli and Jaworski’s (1990) pillars are (a) customer
focus and (b) inter-functional coordination. When an organization has a customer orientation/focus, this refers to an organization that actively acquires
information about customers and disseminates the information throughout
the organization (Narver & Slater, 1990). Similarly, when an organization has
a competitor orientation, this refers to an organization that actively acquires
information about competitors and disseminates the information throughout
the organization (Narver & Slater, 1990). Inter-functional coordination refers
to the organization sharing the acquired information across departments,
and then collaboratively using this information to make decisions resulting in

120

W. Wymer et al.

comparatively greater customer satisfaction (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990). Clearly,
businesses were the tacit organization type in these conceptualizations (the
term “business” is almost always used instead of the term “organization”),
especially large businesses organized along specialized functional areas, having a customer focus. To strengthen this argument, we examined the scale
items to detect what organizational context these scales would apply to. Four
types of thematic areas causing market orientation to be conceptually flawed
toward a for-profit context were observed (Table 1): the organization type
is a business (BUS), the organization is large and structured into business
functional areas (SIZE), the organization has competitors (COM), and the
organization has customers (CUS).
The concept of market orientation, originally developed for the for-profit
context, has then been applied to nonprofit settings (Brady, Brace-Govan,
Brennan, & Conduit, 2011; Gainer & Padanyi, 2002; Gonzalez et al., 2002;
Kara et al., 2004), with the belief that the adaptation of business practices
by nonprofit organizations would be a valuable practice. In this regard, Kara
et al. (2004) investigated the relationship between market orientation and
business performance with an empirical study on nonprofit service providers.
Gainer and Padanyi (2002) assessed the impact on market orientation on
organizational performance in the context of cultural organizations.

DIMENSIONS OF SOCIETAL ORIENTATION
In the second generation of research, it has been argued that the marketing
concept is not feasible to be applied to nonprofit organizations, because it is
conceived with a specific type of organization in mind and thus is conceptually flawed. This fact would substantially weaken the validity of the market
orientation measure. Based on this assumption, nonprofit researchers introduced a concept labeled societal orientation. These researchers argued that
societal orientation instead of market orientation should be used to grasp
the specifics of the nonprofit sector (Duque-Zuluaga & Schneider, 2008; Liao
et al., 2001; Sargeant, Foreman, & Liao, 2002). The societal orientation construct is defined as “the extent to which a nonprofit focuses on the needs of
its key stakeholder groups, including the needs of the wider society of which
it forms part” (Liao et al., 2001, p. 263). Liao et al. (2001) describe major components or pillars of societal orientation to be (a) stakeholder orientation, (b)
competitive orientation, (c) collaborative orientation, and (d) interfunctional
orientation. Duque-Zuluaga and Schneider (2008) extended the societal orientation model, stressing the major components would be composed by (a)
beneficiary and recipient orientation, (b) donors and resource orientation, (c)
volunteer and employee orientation, (d) collaborative orientation, (e) learning and social entrepreneurship, as well as (f) inter-functional coordination.

121

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

TABLE 1 Marketing Orientation Scale Comparison
MKTOR Scale Items
Our business objectives are driven by
customer satisfaction. BUS, CUS
We monitor our level of commitment
and orientation to serving
customers’ needs. SIZE
Our strategy for competitive
advantage is based on our
understanding of customer needs.
COM
Our business strategies are driven by
our beliefs about how we can create
greater value for customers. CUS
We measure customer satisfaction
systematically and frequently. CUS,
SIZE
We give close attention to after-sales
service. CUS, BUS
Our salespeople share information
within our business concerning
competitors’ strategies. BUS, CUS,
COM, SIZE
We respond to competitive actions
that threaten us. COM
We target customers and customer
groups where we have, or can
develop, a competitive advantage.
CUS, COM
The top management team regularly
discusses competitors’ strengths and
strategies. SIZE, COM
Our top managers from every function
visit our current and prospective
customers. SIZE, CUS
We communicate information about
our successful and unsuccessful
customer experiences across all
business functions. SIZE, BUS, CUS
All of our business functions (e.g.,
marketing/sales, manufacturing,
R&D, finance/accounting, etc.) are
integrated in serving the needs of
our target markets. BUS, SIZE, CUS
All of our managers understand how
everyone in our company can
contribute to creating customer
value. BUS, CUS

MARKOR Scale Items
In this organization, we meet with customers at
least once a year to find out what products or
services they will need in the future. CUS, SIZE,
BUS
In this organization, we do a lot of in-house
market research. SIZE
We are slow to detect changes in our customers’
product references. BUS, CUS
We survey end users at least once a year to assess
the quality of our products and services. BUS,
CUS
We are slow to detect fundamental shifts in our
industry (e.g., competition, technology,
regulation). BUS, SIZE
We periodically review the likely effect of changes
in our business environment (e.g., regulation) on
customers. BUS, CUS
We have interdepartmental meetings at least once a
quarter to discuss market trends and
developments. SIZE, BUS
Marketing personnel in our organization spend
time discussing customers’ future needs with
other functional departments. CUS, SIZE
When something important happens to a major
customer market, the whole department or
organization knows about it within a short
period. CUS, SIZE
Data on customer satisfaction are disseminated at
all levels in this organization on a regular basis.
CUS, SIZE
When one department finds out something
important about competitors, it is slow to alert
other departments. COM, SIZE
It takes us forever to decide how to respond to our
competitors’ price changes. COM, BUS
For one reason or another we tend to ignore
changes in our customers’ product or service
needs. CUS
We periodically review our product development
efforts to ensure that they are in line with what
customers want. SIZE, CUS
(Continued)

122

W. Wymer et al.

TABLE 1 (Continued)
MKTOR Scale Items

MARKOR Scale Items
Several departments get together periodically to
plan a response to changes taking place in our
business environment. SIZE, BUS
If a major competitor were to launch an intensive
campaign targeted at our customers, we would
implement a response immediately. COM, CUS
The activities of the different departments in this
business are well coordinated. SIZE, BUS
Customer complaints fall on deaf ears in this
organization. CUS
Even if we came up with a great marketing plan,
we probably would not be able to implement it
in a timely fashion. SIZE
When we find that customers would like us to
modify a product or service, the departments
involved make concerted efforts to do so. CUS,
SIZE

Notes:
BUS The target organization is a business.
COM The organization has competitors.
CUS The organization has customers.
SIZE The organization is large and structured into functional departments.

CRITICAL REFLECTION ON THE NEED TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
NONPROFIT MARKETING ORIENTATION
We argue that neither market orientation nor the societal orientation construct
capture marketing in a way it is perceived by nonprofit marketers. They do
not capture marketing fundamentals and branding activities as practiced by
nonprofit organizations in a daily business environment. However, nonprofit
marketers might approach marketing from a functional perspective. With this
we refer to the actual behavior of nonprofit marketers, to the set of marketing
activities marketers carry out on a day-to-day basis (Gonzalez et al., 2002).
They might use the website for promotion purposes and to communicate.
They might produce information brochures or try to initiate positive wordof-mouth. They might use such activities to benchmark themselves to other
organizations. However, existing scales do not capture these activities (Urde
et al., 2013). As of today, the implementation of the marketing concept in
nonprofit organizations is still under-researched (Chad et al., 2013b; Modi
and Mishra, 2010). In this regard, Modi and Mishra (2010) state that “market
orientation in the for-profit sector is one of the most researched fields in
the marketing discipline. However, non-profit marketing as a whole and
market orientation of NPOs in particular are largely under-researched areas”
(p. 565). We argue that there is a necessity to close this “practice–theory”

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

123

gap by understanding what exactly nonprofit marketing orientation is from
a nonprofit marketer’s perspective.

QUALITATIVE STUDY
Methodology and Analysis
In 2013, we conducted semistructured in-depth telephone interviews with
24 nonprofit managers. We chose to conduct qualitative interviews to
extract unstandardized results from experts. The semistructured questionnaire covered two main sections. First, we were interested in exploring the
term marketing orientation for nonprofit organizations and how nonprofit
marketers define marketing in nonprofit organizations. Second, marketers
described and explained dimensions of marketing orientation for nonprofit
organizations (please find the semistructured interview questionnaire in
Appendix 1).
We recruited interviewees from a variety of nonprofit organizations, covering diverse cultural contexts, as well as different nonprofit sectors to ensure
external validity of results. To this end, half of the nonprofit marketing managers interviewed were based in Canada, and half of them in Germany. These
managers were employed in nonprofit organizations covering all 12 major
activity groups as described by the International Classification of Nonprofit
Organizations (Donoghue, 2010).
The telephone interviews were recorded and transcribed. A content analysis was then conducted utilizing the application software MAX
Qualitative Data Analysis (MAXQDA, 2011). Keyword frequencies were used
to identify thematic threads linking statements of common meanings across
interviews. There were 440 statements that were identified for compilation.
Phrases were created that summarized four central themes. Then statements
were compiled into thematic groupings. This procedure was chosen because
it helps us to structure marketers’ comments and gives an impression about
the frequencies of statements made in each of the thematic fields (please
consider the limitation that this approach does not capture the level of
importance referred to by a marketer).

Results of the Qualitative Study
First, we were interested in exploring the term marketing orientation for
nonprofit organizations and how nonprofit marketers define marketing in
nonprofit organizations. We found that respondents made reference to the
fact that marketing in nonprofit organizations might differ from marketing in
for-profit organizations.

124

W. Wymer et al.

What is marketing? I suppose it’s probably a profit definition, but in my
definition I would say that marketing is, getting people to know who we
are and what we do and why they should be a part of that.

Furthermore, they based their definition of marketing on a set of behavioral
activities they conduct to market the brand object:
I think, when we talk about marketing we’re trying to get our brand, our
image out to the public and bring more awareness of what we are about
as an organization.

Respondents also mentioned the objective of marketing, namely to gain
support for the organizations:
Enlarging the public’s understanding of what we do so that they are able
to assist us in advocating for our interests and in supporting us.

Second, concerning the nonprofit marketers’ description and explanation of dimensions of the marketing construct, we found the following.
When our nonprofit managers discussed marketing in their organizations,
brand orientation (Casidy, 2014) issues were frequently mentioned. Of the
440 statements, 255 (∼ 58%) were categorized under the brand theme.
Nonprofit managers think of their brand as their organization’s image, as perceived by important audiences. One part of marketing’s role is to engage in
regular communication activities that familiarize audiences with the organization and present the organization in a favorable manner to improve attitudes
and to remind audiences of the importance of the work carried out by the
organization. Functional activities referred to by the managers are: the use
of their website for promotion purposes, the use of social media (Facebook,
Twitter, YouTube) to communicate to their stakeholders, the publishing of
an own magazine, or the realization of all sorts of print media (see Table 2).
The nonprofit managers we interviewed view marketing as a means
to attract support or resources to the organization. We call this dimension supporters’ orientation. Branding activities facilitate supporter/resource
attraction by enhancing the visibility and reputation of the organization. The
idea is that a well-known nonprofit organization that enjoys an excellent
reputation will be more effective in attracting support than its counterparts.
Marketing is driven by communications activities and is relational. That is,
effective nonprofit marketers seek to build relationships with supporters,
believing that this approach will result in more enduring and impactful supporter actions than treating support as a transactional event. Hence, our
next most frequent thematic category, which we label “Supporters,” contains
138 of our 440 statements (∼ 31%). These statements indicated marketing
activities that were directly or indirectly used to attract support or maintain

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

125

TABLE 2 Dimensions of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation
Theme

Statement

Count

Brand
Brand
Brand

Uses the website for promotion purposes and to communicate
Informs the public to increase acceptance
Uses social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube) to
communicate
Produces information brochures
Marketing objective is that people recognize the organization
Uses public relations to spread information’s about NPO,
products, or services
Realizes advertisements to promote NPO or products and
services
Regular presence of NPO in broadcast (TV or radio)
NPO makes an effort to have a corporate identity and logo
Publishes an own magazine or seeks to appear in articles in
newspapers
Marketing objective is that people have a good feeling about
NPO
Realizes all sorts of print media
Tries to initiate positive word-of-mouth
Communicates via posters
Tries to inform beneficiaries, clients, members, and the public
Building and maintaining an image of the NPO
Category total
NPO constantly recruits employees, volunteers, and members
Communication is target group oriented
Uses dialog or direct mailings to communicate with
stakeholders
NPO seeks to acquire money donations from individuals
NPO seeks to acquire public funding
Behavior to supporters is relational
NPO tries to retain employees and volunteers
NPO receives financial resources from members
NPO seeks to acquire money donations from companies
Regularly publishes a newsletter
Door-to-door practices
Tries to establish long-term relationships
NPO seeks to acquire time donations
Category total
Develops, adapts, and eliminates products/services
NPO acquires funding through pricing of products and services
Category total
NPO organizes events to serve various stakeholders
Focuses on the needs of beneficiaries, clients, and members
Category total
Grand total

32
31
21

Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Brand
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Supporters
Commercial
Commercial
Service
Service

21
20
19
17
15
14
12
10
10
9
9
8
7
255
26
20
17
11
9
8
7
7
7
7
7
6
6
138
7
6
13
24
10
34
440

supporter relationships. For instance, the nonprofit organization (NPO) constantly seeks to recruit employees, volunteers, and members, to use dialog
or direct mailings to communicate with stakeholders, or to receive financial
resources from members (see Table 2).

126

W. Wymer et al.

Furthermore, nonprofit managers used business metaphors as a framework for understanding their organizations. This is the commercial orientation dimension. These were individuals who had transitioned to a nonprofit
managerial position after substantial business management experience. They
brought their business models to frame their thinking of their nonprofit organization. For example, they think of donors and other supporter groups as
customers. They view the organizational programs as products. We labeled
this category “Commercial,” developed two statements for the category, and
found 13 statement counts (∼ 3%) in the interview data.
In our final category, which we label service orientation, we found that
some nonprofit managers perceived marketing involved in service provision
and service quality. This is not surprising as there is a subfield of services
marketing that deals with the marketing of (primarily) for-profit service organizations. Obviously, service has an operational, programmatic component.
We counted 34 statements (∼ 8%) in the service category.
The interviews provide us with an enriched understanding of nonprofit
managers’ perspectives. This understanding influences our conceptualization
of the nonprofit marketing concept and nonprofit marketing orientation. Our
conceptualization is also influenced by our critical analysis of prior research
on these constructs. Our theoretical constructions, then, should be generally
applicable across nonprofit contexts.

DISCUSSION AND THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT
We believe fundamental flaws in prior research were that marketing scholars
failed to consider their operational context, tactical assumptions, and the limits to which their work should be applied. We avoided having a specific type
of nonprofit organization in mind as we developed our constructs. There is
a large variety of nonprofit organizational types.
We began by defining nonprofit marketing. It is an organized, planned
set of activities carried out in order to attract support for the brand object
(e.g., nonprofit organization or charity).
From whom, then, does one want to attract support? From those most
likely to have the motivation and ability to provide support. Audiences or
groups that marketers may target with marketing appeals might include the
general public, specific subgroups of the general public, public officials,
specific donor groups, volunteers, institutions (e.g., businesses, foundations),
or any other relevant audience or group.
What is meant by support? Support refers to the desired response a
marketer is seeking from a target audience or group. This might be a vote,
a donation, volunteering, signing a petition, a membership, a purchase, and
so forth.

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

127

This is not to suggest that marketing is only concerned with delivering appeals. There is an array of marketing activities that are supportive
or complementary to direct appeals for support. Marketers conduct applied
research and gather information to understand target groups and to make
better marketing decisions. Marketers conduct ongoing communication activities to help target groups become more familiar with the organization and to
enhance its image and reputation. These complementary activities indirectly
influence subsequent direct appeals for support. Individuals are more likely
to support a charity, for example, if they are familiar with the charity and if
the charity has an excellent reputation.

Nonprofit Marketing Orientation Construct
Nonprofit marketing orientation refers to a mindset, way of thinking, or
tendency to predominately view organizational issues from a marketing perspective. A marketing-oriented organization uses marketing thinking not as a
specialized area of the organization but as a general management orientation
(Webster, 1988). Through education and experience, a marketing-oriented
manager’s general direction of thought, inclination, or interest is toward
marketing concepts and marketing tactics.
A marketing-oriented manager may think more about how the organization is perceived by important target groups than a leader influenced
by another managerial orientation. A marketing-oriented manager might be
more motivated to engage in marketing tactics to influence external perception of the organization and to develop relationships with supporters. This
is not to say that a marketing-oriented manager will not be concerned with
internal operational issues. However, marketing-oriented managers would be
unlikely to see their role as internally bounded.
A marketing-oriented manager would think organizational success is
dependent upon the organization’s ability to attract supporters, and to
develop supporter relationships toward enduring and greater levels of
commitment over time. Hence, a marketing-oriented manager would see
communicating with external audiences as a necessity, a priority.

NOMOLOGICAL NET
In a nonprofit organization characterized as having a marketing orientation, we expect to find that marketing concepts, strategies, and tactics are
imbued in the general or lasting direction of thought, inclination, or interests
among an organization’s leaders. The proximate nomological net of nonprofit marketing orientation is presented in Figure 1. It was developed based
on the qualitative study as well as with relevant nonprofit marketing literature. Presenting a nomological net model provides a means of describing

128

W. Wymer et al.

FIGURE 1 Nomological net for nonprofit marketing orientation.

antecedents and consequents of our focal construct. It also illustrates suggested areas for future research. Future research can refine or expand the
model, adding antecedents, mediators, moderators, or consequents. Future
inquiry is needed to develop or evaluate the validity of construct measures.

Nonprofit Marketing Orientation Antecedents
We propose three categories of antecedents of nonprofit marketing orientation: top management factors, organizational factors, and environmental
factors.
MANAGEMENT FACTORS
The organization’s leadership, practiced by its top managers, determines the
degree to which the organization is committed to marketing activities (Chad
et al., 2013b). Top managers develop incentive systems that reinforce the
behaviors of organizational members. Top managers propagate the use of
a marketing lexicon as an operative vernacular. Top managers’ educational
and work experiences along with their personal styles direct their behaviors,
decisions, and impact on organizational culture.
ORGANIZATIONAL FACTORS
Organizational factors represent another antecedent to nonprofit marketing
orientation (Chad et al., 2013b). An organization with a long history has

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

129

a more established and enduring culture than a more recently established
organization. If the organization is a well-known and popular organization,
its culture is likely to have been reinforced. An organization that has a history
of experiencing pressure to attract and retain supporters for growth and
survival is likely to be more marketing-oriented than another organization.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
The organization exists within the context of a larger environment. It interacts
with and responds to this environment (Gonzalez et al., 2002). Hence, the
environment has some influence on all aspects of the organization, including
the degree to which it is marketing-oriented. The history of civic participation and philanthropy in a given country influences the degree to which
the general population is inclined to support its nonprofit sector. Countries
vary with respect to their support for various types of nonprofit organizations. Some types of nonprofit organizations may receive substantial public
funding, whereas other types of nonprofit organizations may receive very
little public funding. Obviously, organizations not getting public funding
are under greater pressure to attract individual support and would have an
incentive to be more marketing-oriented. The composition of a community’s
nonprofit sector would also exert influence on individual organizations. If a
segment of the nonprofit sector contains a large number of organizations and
is highly fragmented, potential supporters have alternatives. An organization
in a crowded sector would experience greater pressure to differentiate itself
from similar organizations and to communicate with potential supporters.

Implementation of Nonprofit Marketing Activities
Nonprofit marketing orientation is manifested in a group of types of behavior,
namely the organization’s marketing activities (Brady et al., 2011; Gonzalez
et al., 2002). These activities lead to the implementation of nonprofit marketing. A marketing-oriented organization, compared to an organization having
another managerial orientation, is more likely to have dedicated marketing
staff, to provide funding for marketing activities, to engage in regular communication with target audiences, to engage in public relations, and so forth.
A marketing-oriented organization uses a larger number of marketing tactics,
in a more sustained manner, and over a longer period of time than another
organization.

Brand Strength
Brand refers to how the public (or a target audience of interest) perceives
or comprehends the organization or other branded object (Simoes & Dibb,
2001). Thus, brand refers to a target group’s comprehension of a branded

130

W. Wymer et al.

object based on information they have received about it and experiences
they have had with it (Daw & Carol, 2011; Wymer, 2013).
Brand strength refers to the degree to which a brand is well-known to a
target group, is perceived favorably by a target group, and is perceived to be
remarkable by a target group (Wymer, Scholz, & Helmig, 2012). The degree
to which brand orientation influences desired marketing outcomes is mediated by brand strength. For example, if an organization rarely communicates
to external audiences, then those audiences will know little about it. When
they see the organization’s logo, they may not recall which organization
it represents, and the meaning associated with the logo may be superficial.
This would obviously be a weak brand. Conversely, when a long-established
organization has regularly developed and implemented communication plans
to familiarize target audiences with it, the logo is immediately recognized and
the purpose and reputation of the organization easily recalled. This would
be a stronger brand.
As a mediator, brand strength is influenced by the implementation of
marketing activities of the organization and, in turn, it influences consequent
variables. Brand strength is a partial mediator, not a complete mediator. For
example, a relatively unknown (low brand strength) charity may attract some
contributions during a fundraising campaign. However, we would expect a
well-known charity that is perceived as outstanding (strong brand) to have a
more successful fundraising campaign.

Performance Outcomes
Just as meta-analytic studies have found a relationship between market orientation and business performance (Cano, Carrillat, & Jaramillo, 2004), we
believe there should also be a relationship between nonprofit marketing orientation and nonprofit organizational performance. There are three general
categories of outcome variables: supporter-related outcomes, staff-related
outcomes, and mission-related outcomes.
As an organization’s brand strength increases, the implication is that
the target groups’ familiarity with the organization increases, their attitudes
toward the organization improve, and the degree to which they perceive
the organization to be exceptional in comparison with similar organizations
increases.
SUPPORTER-RELATED OUTCOMES
The number of people who know about the organization and who are
favorably disposed toward the organization increases. Since the number
of potential supporters increases and the organization’s brand preference
increases, we would expect supporter or resource acquisition to increase
(Brady et al., 2011; Duque-Zuluaga & Schneider, 2008). The increase in brand

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

131

strength is reflected in more positive perceptions of the organization from
groups that are important to the organization. Hence, the retention of current
supporters should increase. Other behavioral consequents of brand strength
should increase, like the intensity of support (more frequent support, greater
levels of support).
STAFF-RELATED OUTCOMES
It is reasonable to expect that nonprofit marketing orientation is related to
staff retention, staff attitudes, commitment, and organizational citizenship
behaviors (Chad et al., 2013b; Duque-Zuluaga & Schneider, 2008). Increasing
levels of nonprofit marketing orientation implies that marketing is perceived
as the general management model or framework through which decisions
are made and priorities are determined. The organizational culture is more
marketing-centric. The organization lexicon is laced with marketing concepts
and words that reflect the perceptional lens through which information is
comprehended. The increased emphasis on brand strength as the mediator of organization success creates a concern with the exceptionalism of
the organization, its popularity, and its perceived importance. This culture
of concern implies that organizational members have a set of shared values, beliefs, social forms, goals, and practices that not only influence the
organization’s continuous improvement, but its cohesion.
MISSION-RELATED OUTCOMES
The emphasis on brand strength implies that the organization’s marketing
tactics are not limited to favorable outbound communications, but also the
quality of its programs and its mission impact (Chad et al., 2013b; DuqueZuluga & Schneider, 2008). For the organization’s brand strength to increase,
indeed, for the organization to be the dominant brand among its peers, the
organization must be perceived to be remarkable. A mediocre organization is
unlikely to achieve the supporter and staff-related outcomes discussed previously. These three categories of outcomes are inter-related and reflective
of an organization with a high level of brand strength.

SUMMARY AND LIMITATIONS
In this article, we critically analyzed three generations of research on the
application of the marketing construct in nonprofit organizations. Our analysis showed that there is need to develop a new construct to capture
marketing in nonprofit organizations. Based on a qualitative study, we developed a concept we labeled nonprofit marketing orientation, responding to
all issues discussed in all three generations of research. Based on a qualitative

132

W. Wymer et al.

study among nonprofit marketers conducted in Canada and Germany, we
developed a conceptual framework and placed nonprofit marketing orientation. It includes the dimensions of brand orientation, supporters’ orientation,
commercial orientation, and service orientation. Furthermore, we developed a nomological net of relevant antecedents and nonprofit marketing
outcomes.
Our contribution goes further than improving the definitional development of a core marketing construct. Although much work needs to be done,
our conceptual and integrative work adds to efforts toward the systematic
development of a theory of nonprofit marketing orientation. Concerning the
focal construct, limitations include the fact that the conceptual model was
developed avoiding a specific type of nonprofit organization. The reason for
this rationale is that we wanted to increase the external validity of results.
It has to be admitted that certain subsectors might practice different applications of the marketing construct. While this article presents a first step to
capture nonprofit marketing orientation, further research might illuminate
nonprofit sector specifics. Furthermore, it has to be noticed that this research
only represents a first step in the development of a construct of nonprofit
marketing orientation. Future work on developing a valid scale of nonprofit
marketing orientation would be an important empirical work in this area.
Concerning the development of the nomological net, we encourage further
research on nonprofit marketing orientation and relationships to other constructs. The conceptualization we developed here based on literature might
be empirically verified in future research.

REFERENCES
Arndt, J. (1979). Toward a concept of domesticated markets. The Journal of
Marketing, 43(4), 69–75.
Brady, E., Brace-Govan, J., Brennan, L., & Conduit, J. (2011). Market orientation and
marketing in nonprofit organizations: Indications for fundraising from Victoria.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 16, 84–98.
Cano, C. R., Carrillat, F. A., & Jaramillo, F. (2004). A meta-analysis of the relationship between market orientation and business performance: Evidence from five
continents. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21(2), 179–200.
Casidy, R. (2014). Linking brand orientation with service quality, satisfaction, and
positive word-of-mouth: Evidence from the higher education sector. Journal of
Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 24, 142–161.
Chad, P., Kyriazis, E., & Motion, J. (2013a). Development of a marketing orientation
research agenda for the nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing, 25(1), 1–27.
Chad, P., Motion, J., & Kyriazis, E. (2013b). A praxis framework form implementing
the market orientation into charities. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector
Marketing, 25(1), 28–55.

Conceptualization of Nonprofit Marketing Orientation

133

Daw, J., & Carol, C. (2011). Breakthrough nonprofit branding: Seven principles to
power extraordinary results. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Donoghue, F. (2010). Social origins. In R. Taylor (Ed.), Third sector research,
pp. 151–170. New York, NY: Springer.
Drucker, P. F. (1954). The practice of management. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Duque-Zuluaga, L., & Schneider, U. (2008). Market orientation and organizational
performance in the nonprofit context: Exploring both concepts and the relationship between them. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 19(2),
25–47.
Gainer, B., & Padanyi, P. (2002). Applying the marketing concept to cultural organisations: An empirical study of the relationship between market orientation
and performance. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 7(2), 182–193.
Gonzalez, L.I.A., Vijande, M.L.S., & Casielles, R. V. (2002). The market orientation
concept in the private nonprofit organisation domain. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7(1), 55–67.
Jaworski, B., & Kohli, A. (1993). Market orientation: Antecedents and consequences.
Journal of Marketing, 57(3), 53–70.
Kara, A., Spillan, J. E., & DeShields, O. W. (2004). An empirical investigation of the
link between market orientation and business performance in nonprofit service
providers. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 12(2), 59–72.
Kohli, A., & Jaworski, B. (1990). Market orientation: The construct, research
propositions, and managerial implications. The Journal of Marketing, 54(2),
1–18.
Levitt, T. (1960). Marketing myopia. Harvard Business Review, 38(4), 45–56.
Liao, M., Foreman, A., & Sargeant, A. (2001). Market versus societal orientation in
the nonprofit context. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 6(3), 254–268.
MAXQDA MAX Qualitative Data Analysis. (2011). Referenzhandbuch zum
Textanalysesystem MAX QualitativeDatenAnalyse 10 für Windows 2000, XP,
Vista und 7, Berlin, Germany: Marburg.
Modi, P., & Mishra, D. (2010). Conceptualising market orientation in non-profit
organisations: Definition, performance, and preliminary construction of a scale.
Journal of Marketing Management, 26(5/6), 548–569.
Narver, J., & Slater, S. (1990). The effect of a market orientation on business
profitability. The Journal of Marketing, 54, 20–35.
Sargeant, A., Foreman, S., & Liao, M. (2002). Operationalizing the marketing concept
in the nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 10(2),
41–65.
Sharp, B. (1991). Marketing orientation: More than just customer focus. International
Marketing Review, 8(4), 20–26.
Simoes, C., & Dibb, S. (2001). Rethinking the brand concept: New brand orientation.
Corporate Communications: An International Journal, 6(4), 217–224.
Slater S., & Narver J. (1994). Does competitive environment moderate the market
orientation performance relationship? Journal of Marketing, 58(1), 46–55.
Urde, M., Baumgarth, C., & Merrilees, B. (2013). Brand orientation and market
orientation—Form alternatives to synergy. Journal of Business Research, 66,
13–20.

134

W. Wymer et al.

Webster, F. (1988). The rediscovery of the marketing concept. Business Horizons,
31(3), 29–39.
Wymer, W. (2013). Deconstructing the brand nomological network. International
Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 10(1), 1–12.
Wymer, W., Scholz H., & Helmig B. (2012). Developing and validating a scale
for brand strength. EMAC 2012: European Marketing Academy 41st Annual
Conference, May 22–25, Lisbon, Portugal.

APPENDIX: SEMISTRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE
Organization/Sector: ______________________________
Organization Size:
______________________________
Name of Interviewee: ______________________________
Job Position:
______________________________
Working Experience: ______________________________
Date and Duration: ______________________________
I. Exploring the term “marketing orientation” for nonprofit organizations
1. What do you think “marketing” is? What is the purpose of marketing?
2. What are typical marketing actions of your organization?
3. Does a marketing orientation exist in your organization?
4. What are typical actions that express the orientation of your organization?
5. Which structures, actions, behaviors are typical for not being marketing
orientated?
6. Which other “orientations” exist in your nonprofit organization?
II. Defining marketing orientation for nonprofit organizations
7. What is the meaning of marketing orientation in the nonprofit context?
8. How can a marketing orientation be distinguished between the
nonprofit and the for-profit context?
9. How would you describe the extent of marketing orientation in
comparison to peer organizations?
III. Describing and explaining dimensions of marketing orientation for nonprofit organizations
10. Which challenges does your organization face regarding marketing?
11. Which challenges does your organization face regarding related fields
of marketing, such as resource acquisition, branding, donor relationships, and similar issues?
12. How is marketing in your organization related to public relations and
communications activities?
13. For which nonprofit industries is marketing orientation more/less
important?

Copyright of Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing is the property of Taylor &
Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a
listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.

