Cogent Business & Management

ISSN: 2331-1975 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/oabm20

Models of brand equity. A systematic and critical
review

María Margarita Gutiérrez Gutiérrez, Juan José Perona Páez & Francisco de
Paula Gutiérrez Bonilla

To cite this article: María Margarita Gutiérrez Gutiérrez, Juan José Perona Páez & Francisco de
Paula Gutiérrez Bonilla (2024) Models of brand equity. A systematic and critical review, Cogent
Business & Management, 11:1, 2433168, DOI: 10.1080/23311975.2024.2433168

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2024.2433168

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group

View supplementary material 

Published online: 27 Nov 2024.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 14679

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=oabm20

Cogent  Business  &  ManageMent
2024,  VoL.  11,  no.  1,  2433168
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2024.2433168

MARKETING  |  RESEARCH  ARTIClE
Models  of  brand  equity.  A  systematic  and  critical  review

María  Margarita  Gutiérrez  Gutiérreza 
Francisco  de  Paula  Gutiérrez  Bonillac 

,  Juan  José  Perona  Páezb 

  and   

aadvertising  and  Public  Relations,  Doctoral  Program  in  strategy  communication,  advertising  and  Public  Relations, 
Corporación  universitaria  asturias/universidad  autónoma  de  Barcelona,  Bogotá,  D.C.,  Colombia;  bDepartment  of  advertising, 
Public  Relations  and  audiovisual  Communication.  universitat  autònoma  de  Barcelona,  Barcelona,  spain;  cDepartment  of 
environmental  sciences  and  sustainability,  universidad  Jorge  tadeo  Lozano,  Bogotá,  Colombia

ABSTRACT
Many  methods  have  been  developed  since  the  1980s  to  measure  Brand  Equity  (BE). 
These  methods  range  from  theoretical  and  pragmatic  approaches  to  qualitative 
methods  that  determine  the  rankings  of  remembrance,  emotionality,  and  valuation 
based  on  the  likelihood  of  purchasing  a  good,  or  service.  The  goal  of  this  systematic 
review  was  to  identify  gaps  in  the  literature  and  provide  recommendations  for  future 
research  by  analyzing  and  summarizing  the  available  data  on  models  used  to  quantify 
BE.  A  systematic  search  of  Dialnet,  Ebsco,  Google  Scholar,  Isi We  of  Knowledge,  Redalyc, 
Science  Direct,  Scopus,  Scielo,  and  Web  of  Science  was  performed  using  PRISMA 
principles.  Of  the  551  abstracts  screened,  only  23  met  inclusion  criteria.  The  review 
showed  that  no  model  allows  for  a  comprehensive  evaluation  of  BE.  This  makes  it 
easier  for  us  to  understand  and  recognize  their  benefits,  and  drawbacks.  Although 
there  are  many  variations,  none  has  been  adequately  verified  to  be  reliably  quantified. 
The  combination  of  variables  between  the  models  indicates  that  the  measurement 
does  not  produce  an  agreement  between  the  theoretical  and  pragmatic.  Everybody 
tries  to  appreciate  the  intangible,  yet  they  all  overlook  branding  messaging.  Our 
findings  shows  that  a  thorough  proposal  incorporating  a  model  that  enables  the 
inclusion  of  both  tangible  and  intangible  BE  factors  is  required.

ARTICLE  HISTORY
Received  30  August  2024
Accepted  18  November  2024

KEYWORDS
Brand  Equity;  brand; 
brand  awareness;  brand 
association;  models; 
measurement  models

SUBJECTS
Communication  Research 
Methods;  Development 
Communication;  Visual 
Communication

1.  Introduction

Although  the  latent  need  to  evaluate  brands  objectively  has  been  known  since  the  beginning  of  brand-
ing,  the  question  is  how  should  brands  be  financed,  evaluated,  and  presented  to  the  market?  (Aaker  & 
Keller,  1990;  De  Chernatory  &  McDonald,  1992;  De  Chernatory  &  Dall’Olmo,  1998;  Healey,  2008).  Thus, 
since  the  1980s,  the  concept  of  Brand  Equity  (BE),  understood  by  Aaker  (1991),  as  intangible  values 
including  loyalty,  quality,  associations,  and  brand  perception  have  been  developed  from  a  sphere  of  the 
value  associated  with  the  consumer  when  exposed  to  promotional  actions  or  to  any  activity  that  requires 
reference  to  it  (Guzmán  González  &  Rangel,  2005;  Febraa  et  al.,  2023;  Troiville,  2024).

According  to  Keller  (1993),  the  consumer  has  about  a  brand  –  its  products  or  services  –  at  the  time 
of  acquiring  it  and  that  for  him  has  a  differentiator  he  has  about  the  brand  at  the  time  of  acquisition, 
which  is  summarized  as  the  differentiator.  However,  it  is  debatable  whether  these  two  views  are  more 
reliable  and  accurate.  However,  although  they  look  at  different  variables,  both  respond  to  market  needs 
and  make  tangible  what  is  intangible,  as  concepts  such  as  purchase  trends,  rebuying  (loyalty),  preference, 
or  perception  are  abstract,  and  the  industry  has  had  to  develop  ways  of  understanding  the  consumer’s 
behavior  around  a  brand  to  get  answers  and  move  in  a  world  of  tangibles,  which  large  corporations  seek 

  strategy  Communication,  advertising  and  Public 
CONTACT  María  Margarita  gutiérrez  gutiérrez 
Relations,  Doctoral  Program  in  strategy  communication,  advertising  and  Public  Relations.,  Corporación  universitaria  asturias/universidad 
autónoma  de  Barcelona,  Carrera  18  #  79-25,  Bogotá,  D.C.,  Colombia

  margaritaggutierrez@gmail.com 

  supplemental  data  for  this  article  can  be  accessed  online  at  https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2024.2433168.

©  2024  the  author(s).  Published  by  informa  uK  Limited,  trading  as  taylor  &  Francis  group
this  is  an  open  access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  attribution  License  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),  which 
permits  unrestricted  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  provided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.  the  terms  on  which  this  article  has  been 
published  allow  the  posting  of  the  accepted  Manuscript  in  a  repository  by  the  author(s)  or  with  their  consent.

2

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

to  afford  and  introduce  into  the  stock  market  because  a  brand  is  due  to  its  consumers  and  its  potential 
is  100%  based  on  the  response  and  feelings  they  have  about  it  (Ahn  et  al.,  2018;  Ewens  et  al.,  2024; 
Wickramasingha,  2024).

Augmenting  that  the  great  economic  cycles  and  technological  progress  deeply  affect  brand  manage-
ment,  Costa  (2007,  p.  105)  states  that  we  are  in  ‘the  fourth  generation  of  the  brand’.  He  asserted  that 
industrialism  is  behind  us,  and  with  it,  the  production  economy  and  material  culture.  Post-industrialism, 
in  which  we  have  been  living  since  the  second  half  of  the  last  century,  has  been  a  casual  and  interde-
pendent  phenomenon  of  the  ‘new  economy’:  the  information  economy,  which  has  replaced  the  econ-
omy  of  production—and  the  culture  of  service,  which  is  one  of  the  axes  of  the  culture  of  data,  the 
immaterial  staff,  the  intangible,  and  values  (Papadopoulou  et  al.,  2023).  According  to  the  previous, 
today’s  society  goes  beyond  biological  consumption  to  one  framed  in  a  symbolic  universe  that  is  indis-
pensable  in  the  construction  of  the  representation  of  the  individual  in  daily  life,  including  the  social 
being  in  the  individual,  public,  social,  political,  economic,  and  cultural  spheres  and  in  the  environmental 
paradigm  described  by  Kuhn  (2006,  p.71),  as ‘the  set  of  experiences,  beliefs  and  values  that  determine 
the  way  in  which  the  individuals  see  and  interpret  reality,  their  own  reality;  and  the  way  in  which  they 
respond  to  that  perception’.  It  is  a  pattern  or  model  of  inherited  or  learned  behavior  that  exists  in  these 
times  of  crisis;  thus,  it  can  be  called  sustainable/sustainable  branding  (leuthesser,  1988;  Christensen  & 
Askegaard,  2001;  Chiu  et  al.,  2017;  Nascimento  &  loureiro,  2024).  This  concept  has  become  a  ‘symbol’ 
not  only  for  the  entry  of  products  or  services  into  the  markets,  but  also  as  a  way  to  access  other  levels 
of  perception  and  knowledge,  allowing  the  transformation  of  brands,  consumers,  and  the  systems 
involved,  which  impacts  the  psychological-social,  environmental  and  sustainable  aspects  of  these 
(Martínez,  2011; Vuong  &  Bui,  2023). This  is  in  line  with  Costa  (2007),  who  stated  that  the  brand  is  more 
psychological  than  design;  it  is  a  management  tool,  an  intangible  that  increases  the  value  of  the  brand. 
He  also  expresses  that  many  elements  accompany  the  brand,  all  supported  by  the  ideas  and  actions 
implemented  through  marketing;  for  this  reason,  in  the  era  of  communication  and  globalization,  we 
have  gone  from  having  a  brand  for  each  product  to  creating  products  for  the  brand,  so  the  idea  of  the 
meta-brand  is  above  the  products  and  not  subordinated  to  them  (Costa,  2010).

Thus,  products  fight  for ‘brand  image’  (Currás,  2010;  Jufrizen  et  al.,  2024).  While  products  want  to  be 
‘services’  (in  the  sense  of  satisfying),  companies  want  to  be  branded.  Big  brands,  more  than  big  compa-
nies.  That  is  why  they  have  become  ‘real  communication  phenomena’,  a  social  phenomenon  that  is  no 
longer  an  economic  one  (Duman  et  al.,  2018).  Currently,  large  budgets  are  reserved  for  national  and 
international  presence  and  the  promotion  of  products,  services,  and  companies  (Balmer,  1998,  2008). The 
brand  can  remain  while  the  product  is  subjected  to  wear.  The  product  or  service  offers  a  functional 
benefit,  such  as  problem-solving  or  functional  needs,  but  the  brand  offers  emotional  rewards  for  those 
who  have  chosen  it  (Christodoulides  &  de  Chernatony,  2004;  Tinto,  2008).  Consequently,  it  has  gained 
great  importance,  evolving  its  concept,  becoming  an  experience  that  exceeds  functionality,  representing 
a  lifestyle  and  even  a  dream  or  aspiration,  and  acquiring  emotional  relevance  and  satisfaction  in  the 
acquisition  of  a  product  (Barnes  &  Pressey,  2012;  Davcik  et  al.,  2015;  Pacana  &  Siwiec,  2024).  It  is  valid 
that  the  first  historical  references  to  symbolic  consumption  appear  at  the  end  of  the  19th  century  and 
at  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century,  with  the  works  of  James  (1890),  Simmel  (2002),  and  Flügel  (1930), 
and  later  arriving  at  Maslow  (1943),  who  established  a  hierarchy  with  five  needs  and  factors  motivating 
people.  These  authors  affirmed  that  consumers  strengthen  their  identity  through  the  products  they  pur-
chase.  However,  in-depth  analyses  would  not  come  until  after  the  mid-twentieth  century,  largely  influ-
enced  by  the  pioneering  study  presented  by  levy-Sidney  (1959,  p.  124),  who  pointed  out  that  companies 
must  be  aware  that  they  not  only  offer  physical  products  but  also  ‘sell  symbols  to  consumers;  thus, 
entrepreneurs  must  pay  attention  to  the  meaning  of  the  symbols  they  offer  in  the  marketplace’.  Thus,  it 
is  impossible  for  advertising  to  be  on  the  fringes  of  culture  and  customs,  a  combination  of  disciplines 
such  as  art,  anthropology,  biology,  economics,  philosophy,  politics,  psychology,  sociology,  and  technol-
ogy,  and  above  all,  marketing  in  its  broadest  expression  -  culture,  symbolism,  and  change  (Chaudhuri  & 
Majumdar,  2006;  Bevan  &  Wengrow,  2010;  Ogilvy,  2012;  Chekima  et  al.,  2016;  Meerman,  2020;  Danesi, 
2024).  Méndiz  (2010),  it  states  in  a  relevant  way  that  advertising  as  a  communicative  element  promotes 
values  that  influence  the  social  imaginary  since  it  is  there  where  the  ideas  and  symbols  that  generate 
the  culture  of  a  country  or  a  specific  community  take  place.

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

3

Knowing  the  state-of-the-art  models  used  to  measure  BE  offers  a  solution  for  measuring  BE  value  in 
an  efficient,  coherent,  and  forceful  way  through  models  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  character  every 
time a need (Kamakura & Russell, 1993; lassar et al., 1995; Dick and Basu, 1994; Dominici, 2009; Dedeoğlu 
et  al.,  2019;  Barrio-Fraile  &  Enrique-Jiménez,  2021;  De  Regt  et  al.,  2021).  Since  the  1980s,  different  brand 
measurement techniques have been developed with theoretical and pragmatic  approaches,  from  a  purely 
stock  market  to  a  qualitative  one,  for  determining  rankings  of  recall,  emotionality,  and  even  valuation  by 
purchase  possibility  (Green  &  Srinivasan,  1978;  González,  1986;  Ger  and  Belk.  1996;  Edson  &  Bettman, 
2005;  Einstein,  2011;  leite,  2024).  For  this  reason,  it  was  decided  to  conduct  a  methodical  and  orderly 
review  of  the  latest  generation  models  with  which  it  is  proposed  to  measure  the  BE,  which  is  imple-
mented  in  all  types  of  industries  and  recognized  for  having  the  seal  of  their  author.  This  first  review 
allowed  us  to  address  the  following  questions:  Do  some  methods  comprehensively  measure  BE?  Is  there 
any  consensus  in  the  literature  regarding  BE  measurement?  What  should  be  considered  when  mea-
suring  BE?

2.  Methods

The  methodological  approach  followed  two  specific  phases:  (1)  search  and  selection  strategy  and  (2) 
classification  and  analysis  of  the  collected  information,  transparently  explaining  why  the  review  was  car-
ried  out,  what  was  done,  and  what  the  findings  were,  to  adequately  follow  the  strategy  detailed  below.

2.1.  Search  and  selection  strategy

This  systematic  review  was  carried  out  through  the  Preferred  Reporting  Items  for  Systematic  Reviews  and 
Meta-analysis  PRISMA  2020,  guidelines  to  ensure  a  systematic  review  (lopes  et  al.,  2024).  The  PRISMA 
2020  statement  was  mainly  used  to  review  studies  related  to  health  issues. ‘However,  the  checklist  items 
are  applicable  to  reports  of  systematic  reviews  evaluating  other  interventions  (such  as  social  or  educa-
tional  interventions)’  (Page  et  al.,  2021,  p.  2).  The  criteria  established  in  Prisma  2020  were  applied,  and 
are  listed  below.

In  the  first  instance,  the  search  for  scientific  articles  on  ‘Brand  Equity’  and  its  ‘Measurement  Models’ 
was made. The databases of Dialnet, Ebsco, Google Scholar, ISI Web of Knowledge Redalyc, Scielo, Science 
Direct,  Scopus  and  Web  of  Science,  and  the  search  terms  were:  ‘brand’  and  ‘models’  (221,476  sources), 
‘brand  awareness’  and  ‘models’  (3,131  sources),  ‘brand  equity’  and  ‘measurement  models’  (791  sources), 
‘brand  association’  and ‘measurement  models’  (337  sources).

2.1.1.  Inclusion  criteria
The  follows:  (1)  publication  date  until  September  2022;  (2)  being  an  empirical  study,  project  report,  or 
case  study;  (3)  written  in  English  or  Spanish,  which  are  the  languages  known  by  the  authors;  (4)  pub-
lished  in  a  scholarly  peer-reviewed  journal;  (5)  mention  a  proposal  model  to  measure  BE;  and  (6)  propose 
variables  that  allow  measuring  BE.  In  this  systematic  review,  all  the  selected  studies  measured  BE  or 
proposed  a  model  for  this  measure.

2.1.2.  Pre-exclusion  criteria
Final  number  of  records  identified  through  database  searching  was  5,607.  Among  these,  5,056  records 
were  excluded  because  they  were  theoretical  books,  conceptual  book  chapters,  letters,  editorials,  or 
comments.

2.1.3.  Exclusion  criteria
Among  these  551  works,  528  were  excluded  based  on  the  following  exclusion  criteria:  (1)  the  research 
did  not  propose  a  specific  model  to  measure  BE;  (2)  documents  that  did  not  propose  specific  variables 
to  measure  BE;  (3)  studies  written  in  languages  other  than  English  or  Spanish;  and  (4)  studies  that 
resulted  in  progress  on  September  2022  (thus  were  not  included).

4

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

2.2.  Classification  and  analysis  of  the  collected  information

Key  information  was  recorded  for  each  source,  including  descriptors  for  the  publication  (e.g.  citation, 
year,  and  journal  or  source)  and  data  on  how  models  or  strategies  were  implemented  to  measure  BE 
(Supplementary  material  1).  The  23  selected  sources  were  classified  according  to  the  following  criteria.

1.  Purpose:  To  separate  the  sources  that  advanced  in  brand  building  and  measurement,  those  that 

focused  on  brand  construction,  and  those  that  developed  brand  measurement.
2.  The  sources  were  classified  by  their  brand  measurement  orientation  as  follows:

•  Market: This  is  measured  by  estimating  the  valuation  of  a  company’s  intangible  assets  based  on 

• 

the  market  prices  of  other  comparable  companies  in  recent  acquisitions  or  mergers.
Consumer:  Brand  elements  that  provide  added  value  to  consumers  are  valued,  motivating  them 
to  pay  an  additional  price  for  a  product  and  generate  brand  loyalty.

•  Accountant:  Measuring  the  historical  cost  incurred  in  creating  a  brand  or  the  replacement  cost 

• 

• 

to  reactivate  a  brand.
Financial:  BE  is  valued  as  a  company  asset  to  reflect  in  financial  statements  and  determine  its 
impact  on  profitability.
Intangible  Assessment:  If  Variables  that  measure  the  intangible  aspects  of  the  brand  were 
included  in  the  proposed  model.

3.  This  review  proposed  a  BE  valuation  classification  as  follows:

• 

• 

• 

• 

Simple  implicit  valuation:  The  source  uses  secondary  information  from  a  single  process  to 
obtain  the  results.
Complex  implicit  valuation: The  source  uses  secondary  information  with  two  or  more  processes 
to  obtain  the  results.
Simple  explicit  valuation:  The  source  uses  primary  information  from  a  single  process  to  obtain 
the  results.
Complex  explicit  valuation:  The  source  uses  primary  information  for  two  or  more  processes  to 
obtain  results.

4.  The  sources  were  classified  according  to  the  type  of  method  used:  quantitative,  qualitative,  or  mixed.
5.  The  selected  sources  were  classified  according  to  the  number  of  variables  implemented  in  their 
models:  one-dimensional  (one  variable),  two-dimensional  (two  variables),  or  multidimensional  (more 
than  two  variables  to  measure  BE).

6.  The  sources  were  differentiated  into  two  levels:  theoretical  (with  a  model  proposal)  and  pragmatic 

(normally  applied  to  a  specific  case  study).

The  review  included  a  qualitative  and  comparative  analysis  of  the  different  approaches  to  measuring  BE, 
with the purpose of conducting a comparative analysis and defining gaps and opportunities for improvement.

3.  Results  and  discussion

3.1.  The  concept  of  Brand  Equity  and  branding

The  BE  can  be  seen  in  companies  as  the  recognition  of  some  of  the  market  benefits  that  arise  when 
strong  brands  depend  on  the  resources  and  marketing  capabilities  that  the  companies  have,  as  well  as 
the  market  circumstances  and  the  context  in  which  they  operate  (Kotler,  2000;  Healey,  2008;  Keller,  2009; 
Górska-Warsewicz  et  al.,  2021).  The  understanding  and  application  of  the  BE  generates  advantages  for 
the  product  represented  in  terms  of  marketing  into  the  following  benefits:  improved  perceptions  of 
product  performance;  greater  customer  loyalty;  less  vulnerability  to  competitive  market  actions  and  eco-
nomic  crises;  higher  margins;  greater  elasticity  of  demand  in  the  face  of  price  decreases  and  greater 
inelasticity  as  customers  respond  to  price  increases;  increased  effectiveness  in  marketing  communication 
strategies;  additional  licenses  and  greater  opportunities  for  brand  extension;  the  BE  allows  the  construc-
tion  of  strong  brands  by  supporting  communication  and  linking  marketing  strategies,  in  addition  to  the 

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

5

generation  of  the  previously  mentioned  benefits;  it  also  strengthens  financial  statements  by  enabling  an 
objective  knowledge  of  the  value  of  intangible  assets  (González-Del  Foyol  &  Rodríguez-Rodríguez,  2015; 
Gutiérrez,  2021).  Thus,  it  can  be  said  that  the  product  is  bought  and  consumed;  the  brand  is  acquired, 
experienced,  and  enjoyed,  and  it  is  from  this  experience  that  the  BE  emerges  (Hoeffler  &  Keller,  2003; 
Hanaysha,  2016;  Hegner  et  al.,  2017;  Hepola  et  al.,  2017).  The  most  commonly  cited  definition  of  BE 
includes  the  concepts  of  assets  and  liabilities,  such  as  the  name,  symbol,  and  communications  link  to  the 
brand  that  adds  value  to  the  product  or  services  that  the  company  offers  (Kotler  &  Armstrong,  2013).

In  Table  1,  42  definitions  and  concepts  with  a  variety  of  analytical  approaches  for  BE  are  presented, 
reflecting  the  evolution  of  the  conception.  Existing  different  connotations  around  the  term  ‘branding’ 
(attitudinal  branding,  corporative  branding,  cultural  branding  digital  branding,  emotional  branding, 
employer  branding,  mythological  branding,  personal  branding,  product  branding,  social  branding,  etc.), 
which  is  related  to  the  fact  that  each  brand-building  agency  establishes  its  own  definition  according  to 
its  business  vision  (Holt,  2004).

Branding  is  a  business  strategy  and  the  visual,  emotional,  rational,  and  cultural  statements  of  a  com-
pany  (Feldwick,  1996;  Siegel,  2008;  Hultén,  2011;  Aaker  et  al.,  2012;  lee,  2013;  Forero-Siabato  & 
Duque-Oliva,  2014;  Forero-Siabato,  2014;  Borbély,  2016;  Kaufmann  et  al.,  2016;  Bohle  &  Marone,  2021; 
Cohen,  2023).  Achieving  brand  positioning  through  a  positive  association  between  the  brand  and  con-
sumers.  likewise,  it  highlights  the  value  of  the  brand  and  promotes  the  perception  of  emotional  satis-
faction  in  the  consumer  (Iglesias  et  al.,  2019;  Shrestha  et  al.,  2023).  It  is  also  the  monetary  management 
of  the  essence  and  expression  of  a  company.  As  many  advertisers  have  said,  only  when  a  product  or 
service establishes a friendly emotional dialogue with the consumer does it qualify as a brand (Gobé, 2005).
Given  the  complexity  involved  in  creating  a  brand  and  its  value,  BE,  and  branding  when  dealing  with 
its  management,  brands  have  reached  their  optimal  point,  and  they  have  been  nourished  by  disciplinary 
social,  political,  anthropological,  psychological,  cultural,  and  environmental  factors,  positively  influencing 
marketing,  since  symbols  and  signs  alter  reality,  logic,  and  how  the  target  population  acts,  or  responds 
positively  or  negatively.  (Rogers  &  Smith,  1993;  Reeves,  1997;  Molina  &  Morán,  2013;  Godin,  2019;  Yang 
et  al.,  2019).  Because  the  brand  is  a  system,  it  is  necessary  that  its  parts  (elements  and  functions)  operate 
synergistically,  that  is,  as  a  whole,  which  includes  the  immaterial  notion  of  the  image  (its  intangible 
imprint projected externally) (Birdwell, 1968; Gómez, 2001; Ries & Ries, 2004; Górska-Warsewicz et al., 2021).
Therefore,  using  everything  measurable  and  quantifiable  will  lead  to  the  good  use  of  quantitative  or  qual-
itative  modeling,  which  has  generated  interest  in  both  the  academic  and  business  fields  in  recent  decades. 
This  interest  drives  studies  to  be  able  to  answer  questions  about  brands,  such  as  how  they  are  created. What 
are  they?  How  should  they  be  managed  and  evaluated?  Questions  that  are  the  origin  of  a  field  of  research 
and  knowledge  that  have  generated  conceptualizations,  theories,  and  models  since  1980,  which  support  the 
understanding  and  interpretation  of,  among  other  aspects,  the  social  context  (its  reality),  virtues  and  qualities 
(personal values), habits (customs), ideological positions, and worldviews by assigning a particular context and 
meaning  to  the  experiences  of  the  other,  based  on  a  subjective  discourse,  to  establish  a  measure  of  the 
emotional  and  economic  brand  universe.  At  this  point,  an  exhaustive  search  and  understanding  of  the  mean-
ing  of  concepts  such  as  trust,  loyalty,  or  fidelity  to  a  brand  is  required  because  this  is  a  deep  topic  that  leads 
to  thinking  and  analyzing  consumer  habits,  construction,  and  adoption  of  an  identity,  which  in  turn  leads  to 
communication  of  the  concept  of  greater  value  (li,  2010;  Gobé,  2005).

Given the protagonist role and strategic importance of brands, they are now considered assets, objects 
of  evaluation,  and  investment,  just  like  any  other  company  asset,  which  means  investing  in  the ‘branding’ 
of  products  or  services  to  keep  their  branding  current  and  improve  its  characteristics,  nature,  and 
singularities.

3.2.  Brand  Equity  models

This  review  finds  different  models  for  evaluating  BE  depending  on  the  focus  on  its  measurement.  There 
are  four  groups  of  BE  valuation  methods  that  can  be  based  on  financial  or  consumer  value  (Garolera, 
1997;  Espósito,  2001;  González-Del  Foyol  &  Rodríguez-Rodríguez,  2015).  According  to  what  has  been  said 
before,  the  purpose  of  this  section  is  to  emphasize  the  methodologies  that  specialize  in  consumer  per-
ception,  which  is  related  to  and  influences  the  choice  of  a  brand  familiar  to  the  consumer  (Figure  1).

6

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

Table  1.  Brand  equity  and  brand  definitions.
author

Concept

Leuthesser  (1988)

it  represents  the  value  of  a  product  over  what  any  other  identical  product  would  have  without  the  brand  name.  in 
other  words,  Brand  equity  represents  the  degree  to  which  the  brand  name  alone  adds  value  to  the  offering. 
Cited  by  Forero-siabato  (2014);  Forero-siabato  and  Duque-oliva  (2014)

Farquhar  (1989)

it  is  the ‘added  value’  that  the  brand  confers  on  a  product  and  can  be  seen  from  the  perspective  of  the  company, 

aaker  (1991)

the  set  of  assets  and  liabilities  related  to  a  brand,  its  name  and  symbol,  which  are  added  to  or  deducted  from  the 

the  trade  or  the  consumer.

De  Chernatory  and 
McDonald  (1992)
Kamakura  and  Russell 

(1993)
Keller  (1993)
swait  et  al.  (1993)

Lassar  et  al.  (1995)
Feldwick  (1996)

Wunderman

aaker  (2000)

  Kotler  (2000)

Ries  and  Ries  (2004)
siegel  (2008)

value  provided  by  a  product  or  service  to  a  company  and/or  its  customers.

the  added  value  or  difference  between  a  brand  and  a  commodity.  the  brand  transforms  the  value  of  a  simple 

product,  becoming  an  important  input  in  the  value  creation  process.

Consumer-based  Brand  equity  occurs  when  the  consumer  is  familiar  with  the  brand  and  has  some  favorable,  strong, 

and  unique  brand  associations  in  mind.

Differential  effect  that  the  consumer  awareness  of  a  brand  has  on  their  response  to  that  brand’s  marketing.
implicit  consumer  assessment  of  the  brand  in  a  market  with  differentiated  brands  in  relation  to  a  market  without 
brand  differentiation.  trademarks  act  as  a  signal  or  indicator  about  the  nature  of  the  products  and  services  of 
quality  and  reliability  and  the  image/status.

it  is  consumer’s  perception  of  the  overall  superiority  of  a  product  with  that  name,  compared  to  other  brands.
the  term  Brand  equity  is  used  in  three  senses:
•  as  a  financial  value,  being  an  asset  of  the  company,  and  the  purpose  is  to  set  a  price  that  reflects  its  value  in 

the  market,  it  will  be  finally  reflected  in  the  accounting.

•  as  brand  strength,  referring  to  the  attributes  defined  by  aaker  (1991),  Brand  Loyalty,  Brand  Recognition, 

Perceived  Brand  Quality,  Brand  associations  and  other  brand  assets.

as  brand  image,  being  a  description  of  the  perceptions,  associations  and  beliefs  that  the  consumer  generates  in  his 

mind  about  the  brand.

general  advertising  is  Cyrano.  He  comes  under  your  window  and  sings;  people  get  used  to  it  and  ignore  it.  But  if 
Roxane  responds,  there’s  a  relationship.  We  move  the  brand  relationship  up  a  notch.  advertising  becomes  a 
dialogue  that  becomes  an  invitation  to  a  relationship.

Describes  Brand  equity  as  the  set  of  10  measures:  (1)  Loyalty  (actual  or  potential  premium  brand  pricing),  (2)  Loyalty 
(based  on  customer  satisfaction),  (3)  Perceived  comparative  quality,  (4)  Perceived  brand  leadership,  (5)  Perceived 
brand  value  (brand  functional  benefits),  (6)  Brand  personality,  (7)  consumers’  perception  of  the  organization  (and 
of  trust,  admiration  or  credibility),  (8)  consumers’  perception  of  brand  differentiation  from  competitors,  (9)  brand 
awareness  (recognition  and  recall),  (10)  market  position  (market  share),  prices  and  distribution  of  coverage.
a  Brand  is  a  name,  term,  sign,  symbol,  or  design  or  a  combination  of  them,  intended  to  identify  the  goods  and 

services  of  one  seller  or  group  of  sellers  and  to  differentiate  them  from  those  of  the  competitor. 

a  Brand  is  a  singular  idea  or  concept  that  you  own  inside  the  mind  of  a  prospect. 
successful  Branding  is  what  you  do,  not  what  you  say  or  show.  successful  branding  requires  your  delivering  consistently 
positive  experiences  for  your  constituents.  it  comes  from  keeping  your  promises  to  them,  from  earning  their  trust  that 
your  brand  will  do  its  best  at  every  point  of  contact  to  deliver  on  what  they  want  and  expect  from  you. this  trust 
leads  to  their  choosing  your  brand  again.  successful  brands  never  take  their  constituents  for  granted. they  never  forget 
that  most  important  to  constituents  are  what’s  in  it  for  them,  that  constituents  are  distracted,  and  you  must  earn  their 
attention.  (Constituents  include,  depending  on  your  product  or  service:  customers,  consumers,  suppliers,  employees, 
partners,  allies,  investors,  funders,  donors,  analysts,  critics,  unions,  regulators,  the  media,  voters,  etc.) the  logo  and 
theme  line  are  not  the  brand. the  logo  symbolizes  the  brand. the  theme  line,  if  it’s  any  good,  uniquely  and 
memorably  expresses  the  brand  promise.  (Most  theme  lines  fail  to  do  that).

Keller  (2009)

Consumer-based  brand  equity  occurs  when  the  client  has  a  high  level  of  brand  awareness  and  knowledge  and  has 

Li  (2010)

state  your  brand  is  whatever  your  customers  say  it  is…  as  a  marketer,  this  means  that,  while  a  brand  is  the 

some  strong,  favorable  and  unique  brand  associations  in  mind.

Kotler  and  Keller 

(2012)

emotional  relationship  between  the  consumer  and  the  product,  you  must  engage  with  consumers  and  build 
positive  brand  associations.  the  deeper  the  relationship,  the  more  brand  equity  exists.   

they  define  consumer-based  brand  equity  as  the  differential  effect  that  brand  awareness  has  with  the  response  of 
consumers  to  the  marketing  efforts  implemented  to  drive  it.  Branding  is  endowing  products  and  services  with 
the  power  of  a  brand.

ogilvy  (2012)

a  Brand  is:  the  intangible  sum  of  a  product’s  attributes:  its  name,  packaging,  and  price,  its  history,  its  reputation, 

and  the  way  it’s  advertised.

american  Marketing
association 

(2013-2014)

Buyer

godin  (2019)

Brand  value  is  based  on  consumer’s  attitudes  about  the  positive  attributes  of  the  brand  and  the  favorable 

consequences  of  the  use  of  the  brand  from  the  consumer’s  perspective.

a  brand  is  a  name,  a  term,  design,  symbol,  or  another  feature  that  identifies  one  seller’s  good  or  service  as  distinct 
from  those  of  other  sellers.  the  legal  term  for  brand  is  trademark.  a  brand  may  identify  one  item,  a  family  of 
items,  or  all  items  of  that  seller.  if  used  for  the  firm  as  whole,  the  preferred  term  is  trade  name.

is  more  than  a  name  and  symbol.  a  brand  is  created  and  influenced  by  people,  visuals,  culture,  style,  perception, 
words,  messages,  PR,  opinions,  news  media  and  especially  social  media.  Like  when  a  child  is  born  and  given  a 
name,  a  brand  needs  nurturing,  support,  development  and  continuous  care  in  order  to  thrive  and  grow.  some 
brands  have  a  life  cycle  and  grow  old  like  people.  some  brands  are  timeless  and  never  die,  are ‘born  again’  or 
reinvented,  while  some  brands  live  a  short  but  powerful  life  and  have  an  iconic  legacy.  Borbély  (2016).   
a  Brand  is  the  set  of  expectations,  memories,  stories  and  relationships  that,  taken  together,  account  for  a  consumer’s 

decision  to  choose  one  product  or  service  over  another.  if  the  consumer  (whether  it’s  a  business,  a  buyer,  a  voter  or  a 
donor)  doesn’t  pay  a  premium,  make  a  selection  or  spread  the  word,  then  no  brand  value  exists  for  that  consumer.

Meerman  (2020)
Cohen  (2023)

Branding  is  what  lazy  and  ineffective  marketing  people  do  to  occupy  their  time  and  look  busy.
Brands  are  shorthand  marketing  messages  that  create  emotional  bonds  with  consumers.  Brands  are  composed  of 

intangible  elements  related  to  its  specific  promise,  personality,  and  positioning  and  tangible  components  having 
identifiable  representation  including  logos,  graphics,  colors  and  sounds.

a  brand  creates  perceived  value  for  consumers  through  its  personality  in  a  way  that  makes  it  stand  out  from  other 

similar  products.  its  story  is  intricately  intertwined  with  the  public’s  perception  and  consistently  provides 
consumers  with  a  secure  sense  that  they  know  what  they’re  paying  for.  in  a  world  where  every  individual  is  also 
a  media  entity,  your  consumers  own  your  brand  (as  it  always  was).   

(Continued)

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

7

Table  1.  Continued.

author

antonucci

Concept

is  a  known  identity  of  a  company  in  terms  of  what  products  and  services  they  offer  but  also  the  essence  of  what 
the  company  stands  for  in  terms  of  service  and  other  emotional,  non-tangible  consumer  concerns.  Branding 
something  is  when  a  company  or  person  makes  descriptive  and  evocative  communications,  subtle  and  overt 
statements  that  describe  what  the  company  stands  for.  For  example,  is  the  brand  the  most  economical,  does  it 
stands  for  superior  service,  is  it  an  environmentally  responsible  provider  of  X,  Y,  Z  service  or  product.  each 
communication  is  deliberate  in  evoking  emotion  in  the  receiver  to  leave  him/her  with  an  essence  of  what  the 
company  or  person  stands  for.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

Baer  &  amber

is  the  art  of  aligning  what  you  want  people  to  think  about  your  company  with  what  people  actually  do  think  about 

Biedermann

Burgess
Leo  Burnett
Clayman

Dietrich

eisenberg

Friedlein

geller

your  company?  and  vice-versa.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

is  the  essence  of  one’s  own  unique  story?  this  is  as  true  for  personal  branding  as  it  is  for  business  branding.  the 
key,  though,  is  reaching  down  and  pulling  out  the  authentic,  unique ‘you’.  otherwise,  your  brand  will  just  be  a 
facade.  the  power  of  a  strong  logo  in  brand  identity  is  that  a  simple  visual  can  instantaneously  communicate  a 
brand  and  what  it  is  about.  some  large  brands  are  able  to  do  this  by  symbol  only,  without  words,  that  is  the 
Holy  grail  that  brands  dream  about.  this  seems  to  represent  the  very  essence  of  communication  at  its  most 
primitive  roots.  Few  can  pull  it  off.  Logos  are  vitally  important,  but  are  just  one  component  of  what  creates  a 
strong  brand.  Logos  should  support  the  broader  brand  strategy  that  supports  an  even  bigger  brand  story.  Cited 
by  Cohen  (2023).

is  a  reason  to  choose.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023)
a  brand  symbol  as  anything  that  leaves  a  mental  picture  of  the  brand’s  identity.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).
is  the  encapsulation  of  a  company’s  mission  statement,  objectives,  and  corporate  soul  as  expressed  through  the 

corporate  voice  and  aesthetic?  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

is  the  identity  of  a  product  or  service?  it’s  the  name,  the  logo,  the  design,  or  a  combination  of  those  that  people 
use  to  identify,  and  differentiate,  what  they’re  about  to  buy.  a  good  brand  should  deliver  a  clear  message, 
provide  credibility,  connect  with  customers  emotionally,  motivate  the  buyer,  and  create  user  loyalty.  Borbérly.   

is  the  sub-total  of  all  the ‘experiences’  your  customers  have  with  your  business?  For  successful  branding  you  need  to 
understand  the  principles  of  ivan  Pavlov  as  my  brother  Jeffrey  and  i  discussed  in  our  Waiting  For  Your  Cat  to 
Bark.  For  branding  to  work  you  must  have:

•  Consistency.  Pavlov  never  offered  food  without  ringing  the  bell  and  never  rang  the  bell  without  offering  food.
•  Frequency.  the  bell  rang  several  times  a  day,  day  after  day.
•  Anchoring.  Pavlov  tied  the  experiment  to  something  about  which  the  dog  was  emotional.  Frequency  and 

consistency  create  branding  only  when  the  message  is  associated  with  an  emotional  anchor.  this  is  the  most 
difficult  and  essential  element  to  get  correct.

However,  keep  in  mind  Pavlov  had  an  easier  time  because  he  chose  dogs  which  are  much  better  at  following  a 
leader,  today’s  customers  are  more  cat  like  and  not  as  easily  persuaded  or  motivated.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

is  the  sum  total  of  how  someone  perceives  a  particular  organization?  Branding  is  about  shaping  that 

perception.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

Branding  is  an  ongoing  process  of  looking  at  your  company’s  past  and  present…and  then  creating  a  cohesive 

personality  for  the  company  and  its  products  going  forward.  We  do  sWot  (strengths,  weaknesses,  opportunities, 
threats)  analysis  and  go  through  all  the  benefits  (real  and  emotional)  that  the  product  or  service  fulfills  for  its 
customers.  We  review  the  key  factors  that  spurred  growth,  pricing,  corporate  culture,  key  players,  and  we  figure 
out ‘who  you  are’,  by  key  players,  the  president,  customer  service.  then  we  create  the  brand  voice  first.  it’s  a 
wonderful  process.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

Handley

Brand  is  the  image  people  have  of  your  company  or  product.  it’s  who  people  think  you  are.  or  quoting  Ze  Frank, 

Harmon
Kerpen

Lieb
Moritz

Pinto

it’s  the ‘emotional  aftertaste’  that  comes  after  an  experience  (even  a  second-hand  one)  with  a  product,  service  or 
company.    (also,  it’s  the  mark  left  after  a  red-hot  iron  is  applied  to  a  steer’s  hindquarters).  Cited  by  Cohen,  2023).

Branding  is  the  experience  marketers  create  to  win  that  attention.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).
Branding  is  the  representation  of  your  organization  as  a  personality.  Branding  is  who  you  are  that  differentiates  you. 

Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

that  old ‘a  Brand  is  a  promise’  saw  holds  true,  but  only  partially  true.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).
a  Brand  is  the  meaningful  perception  of  a  product,  a  service  or  even  yourself  –either  good,  bad  or  indifferent—that 
marketers  want  people  to  believe  based  on  what  they  think  they  hear,  see,  smell,  taste  and  generally  sense  from 
others  around  them.  Cited  by  Cohen  (2023).

Branding  is  the  defined  personality  of  a  product,  service,  company,  organization  or  individual.  Many  folks  confuse 

‘having  a  logo’  for  an  ongoing  branding  process,  but  in  fact  a  good  logo  is  an  extension  of  a  defined  identity  for 
a  venture  in  the  same  way  that  a  flag  or  national  anthem  may  represent  a  country.  a  well  designed  brand 
personality  can  be  seen  in  everything  from  customer  service  to  the  actual  products  a  company  may  offer.
another  misconception  about  brands  is  that  they  should  reflect  a  quality;  and  that  may  be  true  in  a  brand  that’s 
about  quality  (think  of  a  Chanel  logo  which  communicates  the  idea  of  luxury)  but  on  the  other  hand  if  a  local 
dollar  store  even  has  a  designed  logo  that  may  in  fact  work  against  the  goals  of  their  brand  as  they  may  seem 
overpriced.  Like  an  artist  finding  his  or  her  voice  the  goal  of  a  branding  process  should  be  to  always  frame  in  a 
concise  way  what  makes  your  endeavor  unique;  and  then  apply  that  message  to  each  medium.  Cited  by  Cohen 
(2023).

Zyman

a  Brand  is  essentially  a  container  for  a  customer’s  complete  experience  with  the  product  or  Company.  Cited  by 

Cohen  (2023).

Source:  own  elaboration.  Definitions  were  sourced  from  a  variety  of  websites.  Principal  sources:  aaker  et  al.  (2012);  Forero-siabato  and 
Duque-oliva  (2014);  Forero-siabato  (2014);  Borbély  (2016);  Cohen  (2023).

So  far,  the  universe  of  BE  analysis  has  been  determined  by  models  of  distinctive  characteristics  that 
respond  directly  to  the  development  and  evolution  of  brands  (loureiro  &  Kaufmann,  2018;  Machado  et  al., 
2019).  Initially,  there  were  models  that  valued  a  company’s  assets  based  on  their  simple  economic  value.  

8

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

Figure  1.  Brand  equity  valuation  methods.
Source:  Forero-siabato  and  Duque-oliva  (2014,  p.  160).

Table  2.  Models  focused  on  costing.

Model

aim

intangible
Valuation Methodology

Major
Variables

Historical  Cost
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Royalties
Cost  of  replacement Brand  Measurement

no
no
Yes

Source:  own  formulation.

Table  3.  Models  focused  on  the  market.

Model

Market  share
stock  Market  Value
Value  sales  ratio.
intellectual  Capital  index
Forbes

Source:  own  formulation.

aim

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement

application

Pragmatic
Pragmatic
Pragmatic

investment  sum

Quantitative
Quantitative Quantify  contractual  costs
Mixed

the  brand  would  be  paid,  the  creation  would  be  valued 

but  the  brand  would  not  be  supported.

intangible
Valuation Methodology

Major  Variables

application

Yes
Yes
no
no
Yes

Market  share  and  position  in  the  consumer’s  mind
stock  market  price

Mixed
Quantitative
Quantitative Brand  valuation  among  competitors
Quantitative Market  value  changes
Quantitative

Pragmatic
Pragmatic
Pragmatic
Pragmatic
income  before  interest  and  taxes  −8%  brand  value Pragmatic

In  Table  2,  the  models  that  focus  on  demonstrating  BE  through  costing  are  presented,  which  means  that 
they  concentrate  on  measuring  the  historical  cost  incurred  in  creating  the  brand  or  the  replacement  cost 
for  reactivation  (Alvarado  &  lucano,  2015).

According  to  Roldán-Olmedo  (2010)  and  Rossel  (2016),  while  costing-focused  models  attribute  tacit 
value  to  brand  creation  or  rebranding,  market-focused  models  aim  to  measure  the  estimated  valuation 
of  the  company’s  intangible  assets  based  on  the  market  prices  of  other  comparable  companies  in  recent 
acquisitions  or  mergers  (Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva,  2014).  In  other  words,  it  is  based  on  an  objective 
market  comparison  to  evaluate  the  efforts  of  a  company  to  build  its  identifier  and  brand  (Table  3).

The  model  is  based  on  costing,  from  a  strictly  economic  point  of  view  (measuring  the  historical  cost 
incurred  for  its  creation,  or  what  is  invested  for  its  substitution,  reactivation,  or  reconsideration),  solved 
at  the  time  one  of  the  great  unknowns  of  the  BE,  since  the  premise  and  need  were  to  know  how  much 

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

9

Table  4.  Models  focused  on  the  financial  methods.

Model

aim

intangible
Valuation Methodology

Major
Variables

application

Projection  of  Future  Profitability. Brand  Measurement.

Return  on  assets  Roa  Method

Brand  Measurement.

Source:  own  formulation.

Yes

Yes

Quantitative estimated  future  cash  flows  minus  capital = net  

Pragmatic

Quantitative gains  on  assets

value

Pragmatic

a  brand  cost,  based  on  tangible  elements,  such  as  infrastructure,  sales,  internal  economic  projections, 
examination  of  the  market  prices  of  similar  companies,  the  transactions  that  these  generate,  and  even 
in  the  mergers  carried  out.  However,  this  assessment  ignores  the  comprehensive  efforts  that  a  company 
has  made  to  build  its  identifier  and  brand  (Keller,  1997;  Keller,  2009;  Correa  &  Hernández,  2018).  This  BV 
is  based  on  an  objective  market  comparison  to  evaluate  a  company’s  efforts  to  build  its  identifier  and 
brand.  However,  it  ignores  elements  that  are  known  to  directly  affect  it.  For  example,  different  factors 
create  an  environment  for  the  consumer  who  chooses  and  ends  up  preferring  it.  Therefore,  it  is  possible 
to  say  that  these  models  are  limited,  and  although  they  approach  measurement,  they  ignore  the  essen-
tial  and  influential  factors.

These  models  are  conceptually  and  operationally  restrictive,  static,  and  are  considered  to  have  little 
academic  support,  and  in  the  best  of  cases,  they  can  lead  to  establishing  changes  in  marketing  without 
having  direct  consumer  support,  configuring  a  methodological  weakness.

The  models  based  on  the  financial  method  aim  to  value  the  BE  to  include  it  within  the  company’s 
assets,  and  thus  be  able  to  determine  values  such  as  profitability  (Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva,  2014). 
This  is  how  the  brand  becomes  relevant  when  estimating  financial  projections  or  indicators  such  as 
return  on  assets  (ROA).  This  opens  the  gateway  and  generates  an  intrigue  about  the  need  to  have 
solid  brands  and  to  understand  brand  creation  and  brand  management  as  an  investment  that  must 
be  represented  within  the  financial  statements  and  stock  market  indicators.  This  gives  it  the  value  of 
planning  and  construction  measured  through  elements  already  previously  determined  by  established 
industries  and  used  by  the  public  to  understand  the  general  situation  of  companies  in  financial  terms 
(Table  4).

It  has  the  same  weaknesses  as  the  cost  model.  Its  opponents  argue  that  it  does  not  generate  a  real 
vision  of  the  value  that  consumers  confer  on  a  brand.  Some  argue  that  it  is  difficult  to  translate  its 
results  into  quantitative  values,  that  its  application  requires  the  use  of  complex  statistical  techniques,  and 
that  in  many  cases,  they  do  not  consider  the  multidimensional  nature  of  the  concept.  By  focusing  on 
aspects  such  as  market  share,  stock  market  value,  its  relationship  with  other  companies  in  the  same 
sector,  inventory  valuation  and  turnover,  inventory  and  sales  ratio,  operational  cycle,  and  cost  of  goods 
sold  ratio,  they  leave  many  components  of  the  BE.  The  market-focused  vision  blurs  the  will  of  the  con-
sumer  who  is  its  target,  which,  even  if  it  is  determined  by  the  economy,  does  not  often  respond  to  it. 
Consumers  have  visual  identities  and  purchase  habits  that  are  not  properly  identified.  (De  Chernatony, 
1999;  Forero,  2014;  Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva,  2014;  Ahn  et  al.,  2018; 
Interbrand,  2021; 
Montalvo-Arroyave  et  al.,  2022).

This  type  of  model  emerged  in  the  1990s  and  is  focused  on  accounting  for  Brand  Asset  Valuator—
BV—in  economic  and  profitability  terms  within  the  framework  of  the  interest  groups  of  the  most  import-
ant  organizations  at  a  strategic  level:  customers,  employees,  and  investors.  It  gives  all  the  weight  to  the 
brand  and  how  it  contributes  to  the  organization’s  success  and  the  activities  or  actions  that  guarantee 
its  permanence  (Herranz-Arcones,  2017;  The  Harris  Poll,  2019;  Interbrand,  2021;  Kantar-Brandz,  2021).  It 
includes  three  fundamental  analysis  factors:  financial  state,  role,  and  brand  strength.  A  financial  analysis 
measures  a  company’s  performance  in  terms  of  economic  profit.  This  role  measures  the  level  of  consid-
eration  that  the  market  presents  to  acquire  the  brand,  even  above  other  factors  such  as  price,  conve-
nience,  and  product  functional  characteristics.  Strength  measures  a  brand’s  ability  to  create  loyalty  and 
achieve  future  sustainability.  Ten  factors  are  considered  at  this  point:  clarity,  commitment,  governance, 
sensitivity,  authenticity,  consistency, 
relevance,  presence,  differentiation,  and  emotional  bonds 
(Montalvo-Arroyave  et  al.,  2022).  A  shortcoming  is  that  Interbrand  does  not  present  direct  records  of  how 
information  is  collected  and  processed.  According  to  Salinas  (2016),  secondary  information  is  provided 

10

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

Table  5.  Models  focused  on  the  consumer.

Model

Pooled  analysis
Farquhar,  P.

aaker,  D.
Keller,  K.

aim

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Construction

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Construction

Logit
equalization  Price
survey  analysis
Brand  loyalty
Joint  selection  simulator
set  of  concessions  between 

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement

brand  and  price

Brand  equity  ten
equity  Map
CBBe  customer-based 

brand  resonance  model

equitren
Brandoctors

sDR

Brand  value  index  eiB

interbrand

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Measurement
Brand  Construction

Brand  Measurement
Brand  Construction 

and  Measurement
Brand  Measurement

Brand  Construction 

and  Measurement
Brand  Measurement

Brandasset  Valuator  BaV.

Brand  Measurement

Brandz

Lovemaks

Brand  Measurement

Brand  Measurement

Source:  own  formulation.

intangible
Valuation Methodology

Major
Variables

application

theoretical
theoretical

Qualitative
Qualitative

Perceptions,  selections,  preferences
brand  image,  relationships  and  emotional 
experiences  and  brand  extensions.

Qualitative
Qualitative

Loyalty,  Partnerships,  Perceived  quality,  awareness.
Partnerships,  brand  and  image  awareness, 

theoretical
theoretical

Mixed
Mixed
Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative
Mixed

loyalty  and  purchase  predictions

Purchase,  price  and  consumer  perception
Consumer  response  to  prices
Brand  attributes  deduct  preferences
Loyalty,  Disposition
non-branded  product  attributes
Price  and  brand

Price,  Quality,  Perceived  value  and  awareness

Mixed
Quantitative incremental  profitability
Qualitative

Brand  creation,  development  and  maintenance

theoretical
theoretical
theoretical
theoretical
theoretical
theoretical

theoretical
theoretical
theoretical

Qualitative
Quantitative Customer  loyalty  in  re-buying

Reputation,  perceived  quality  and  user  satisfaction.

Pragmatic
Pragmatic

Quantitative Physical  attributes  of  the  product,  perceived 
value  associated  with  the  brand  and  price
Reputation,  values,  loyalty  and  emotional  bond

Mixed

Pragmatic

Pragmatic

Quantitative Financial  performance  analysis,  role  of  the  brand 

Pragmatic

in  the  purchase  decision  and  competitive 
capacity.

Brand  wealth,  strength  and  pose  (esteem, 

Pragmatic

relevance,  awareness)

Linkage,  advantage,  performance,  presence  and 

Pragmatic

relevance.

affection  for  the  brand,  creation  and  development.

Pragmatic

Mixed

Mixed

Mixed

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

through  inquiries  made  with  expert  firms  on  financial  or  market  behavior  issues,  such  as  Thomson 
Reuters,  GlobalData,  and  Infegy,  where  the  results  are  simply  accepted  as  valid,  without  the  opportunity 
to  assess.

It  is  relevant  to  note  that,  although  it  includes  cost  and  market  variables,  these  models  are  insufficient 
and  temporary,  given  that  finance,  like  the  market,  is  always  adrift  from  the  global  economic  movement, 
forgetting  the  consumer  vision.

This  review  identified  the  use  of  consumer-centered  or  consumer-based  models  from  1980  to  2023 
(Table  5).  Their  main  goal  is  to  value  brand  attributes  that  lead  consumers  to  pay  more  or  acquire  more 
frequently,  resulting  in  brand  loyalty  (Phillips,  2003;  Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva,  2014;  Pektaş,  2018; 
Mohammadi,  2021). The  variables  and  terms  used  to  refer  to  each  of  these  values  emphasize  consumers’ 
perceptions,  ideas,  and  attitudes  regarding  the  actions  that  the  brand  has  implemented  to  build  a  strong 
connection  between  the  customer  and  the  advertiser.

Considering  that  the  previously  analyzed  models  have  strengths  and  weaknesses,  those  based  on  the 
consumer  are  the  most  relevant  since  they  give  life  to  the  brand  and  are  ‘the  agent  that  has  a  direct 
relationship  and  effect  on  the  choice  of  a  brand  that  is  familiar  to  him’  (Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva, 
2014,  p.  160),  and  ‘the  most  appropriate  for  the  strategic  management  of  the  brand’  (Villarejo,  2002, 
p.15),  by  focusing  on  the  interaction  of  brands  and  their  consumers,  analyzing  the  way  to  create  brand 
capital  capable  of  attracting  it  and  leading  it  to  permanent  consumption  of  the  offer.  This  model  is  the 
most  difficult  to  establish  because  it  intends  to  value  the  intangibles  of  brand  building  and  the  values 
it  represents  for  those  who  prefer  or  know  it.  It  does  not  focus  on  costs,  the  market,  or  financial  analysis, 
but  on  knowing  the  brand  value  from  the  consumer’s  perception.

These  models  are  grouped  into  two  categories:  theoretical  and  pragmatic.  Among  the  former  are 
those  by  Aaker  (1996)  and  Keller  (1993).  The  latter  was  mostly  designed  by  American  consulting  firms 
and  has  a  level  of  application  for  big  companies  that  are  mostly  listed  on  the  stock  market  and  are 
recognized  worldwide.  This  is  how  the  collective  need  of  the  market  also  becomes  a  business  opportu-
nity  and  of  great  standards,  which  in  advertising  with  considered  authority  when  brand  loyalty  is 

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

11

supposed  as  it  is  the  list  of ‘lovemarks’  to  refer  to  what  is  known  in  the  industry  as ‘top  of  heart’,  a  term 
that  refers  to  the  sentimental  bond  of  the  users  in  reference  to  a  particular  advertiser  (Rambocas  et  al., 
2018).  None  of  the  models  considered  work  or  actions  before  their  formulation  to  analyze  their  results.
Given  the  importance  of  the  variables  that  are  the  object  of  the  models  and  their  application,  they 
become  a  relevant  and  important  focus  of  attention,  thus  in  Table  6  they  are  analysed  by  the  number 
of  variables  applied  to  each  one  and  the  function  they  perform.

The  brand  is  a  complex  system,  and  if  it  is  about  determining  a  value  or  brand  capital,  the  31  exist-
ing  models  specify  their  objectives  through  different  orientations:  (1)  those  based  on  costing,  (2)  in  the 
market  value  of  corporations,  (3)  financially  oriented,  and  (4)  those  that  deal  with  the  consumer 
(Farquhar,  1989;  Kotler,  2000;  Kotler  &  Keller,  2012;  Forero-Siabato  &  Duque-Oliva,  2014;  Andreea,  2018; 
Deslandes  et  al.,  2021;  Montalvo-Arroyave  et  al.,  2022;  Kohli  &  Jaworski,  2023).  In  turn,  they  have  certain 
complexities  and  preferences,  and  due  to  their  approach  they  are  theoretical/academic,  others  empiri-
cal/pragmatic,  with  endogenous/empirical  validation,  exogenous  empirical,  with  multiple  dimensions 
and  components,  and  with  diverse  architectures,  which  leads  to  the  focus  on  certain  interests:  (1)  exam-
ine  consumption  by  age  groups,  familiarity,  perceived  quality,  and  market-brand  relationships;  (2)  in 
determining  the  strength  and  relevance  of  the  brand,  seeing  its  differentiation,  relevance,  estimated  in 
the  market  and  recognition;  (3)  create  brands  from  the  client’s  perception  and  the  links  that  he  has 
developed;  (4)  verify  the  financial  status,  role,  and  brand  strength;  (5)  account  for  the  brand  work  in 
terms  of  image,  product,  and  price,  with  a  view  to  building  loyal  relationships  validated  in  purchase 
behavior  and  recommendation;  (6)  include  brand  awareness  in  the  target  audience;  (7)  determine  that 
the  brand’s  heritage  can  be  defeated  in  the  market  by  the  price  strategies  of  the  competition  and  (8) 
even  make  the  lovemarks  proposal  in  order  to  evaluate  the  brands  from  two  points  that  face  each 
other:  love  and  respect.

Methodologically,  some  models  are  critical  or  judgmental,  while  other  statistical  models  are  developed 
in  phases  with  a  certain  order.  We  understand  these  as  diachronic  models  because  they  slide  along  the 
axis  of  time:  a  series  of  steps  to  follow.  Other  models  follow  the  logic  of  a  set  of  categories  to  be  ana-
lyzed/managed,  and  tend  to  have  a  more  matrix  aspect.

Considering  the  above,  it  is  not  feasible  to  recommend  against  what  has  been  described  that  a  single 
type  of  model  should  be  applied  since  brands,  society,  and  the  economy  evolve,  change,  and  are  subject 
to  regional,  local,  national,  or  global  tensions.  For  this  reason,  it  can  be  conceived  that,  in  certain  circum-
stances,  it  is  viable  to  apply  a  specific  model  for  a  specific  situation,  but  in  general,  they  must  be  prag-
matic  and  not  theoretical,  with  large  samples,  quantitative,  and  multidimensional.  This  review  allows  us 
to  affirm  that  the  form  of  measurement  is  not  clear,  which  raises  doubts  about  the  objectivity  and  accu-
racy  of  the  results.  In  many  cases,  there  is  no  evidence  of  model  validation  because  there  are  no  direct 
records  of  how  the  information  is  collected  and  processed,  which  is  very  common  in  the  business  and 
consulting  fields,  where  the  procedures  used  are  not  shown.  However,  there  are  two  routes  for  the  meth-
odological  configuration  of  the  research  that  give  rise  to  the  models.  One  is  the  exogenous  route,  in 
which  the  constructs  are  validated  via  trial  and  error  with  real  consumers.  This  route  is  common  in  con-
sulting.  The  other  way  is  endogenous,  where  validations  occur  through  literature  analysis  and  expert 
panels  more  frequently  in  academic  or  theoretical  models.

Finally,  under  any  circumstance  or  need,  the  models  must  be  endowed  with  a  clear  quantitative,  sta-
tistically representative, multidimensional measurement that considers the intangible and tangible aspects 
of  the  brand,  deals  with  the  consumer,  and  values,  among  other  aspects:  the  capacity  of  the  brand  to 
create  loyalty  and  sustainability  in  the  future  considering  factors  such  as  clarity,  commitment,  gover-
nance,  sensitivity,  authenticity,  consistency,  relevance,  presence,  differentiation,  emotional  bond,  market 
trends,  clients  that  have  simple  and  complex  explicit  valuation,  financial  statement  analysis,  role  and 
strength  of  the  brand,  consideration  of  the  symbolic  values  of  the  target,  non-theoretical  exogenous 
validations,  and  an  architecture  that  corresponds  to  what  the  model  intends  (Mansoor  et  al.,  2024).  All 
the  above  imply  a  combination  of  models  and  methodologies  that  consider  brand  complexity  and  global 
market  changes.

Depending  on  the  process  used  to  obtain  the  results,  there  are  simple  and  implicit  evaluation  items: 
secondary  information  with  only  one  process,  complex  implicit  evaluation  (secondary  information  with 
two  or  more  processes),  simple  explicit  evaluation  (primary  information  with  only  one  process),  and 

12

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

P
/
l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

s
t
s
o
c

l

a
u
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
c

y
f
i
t
n
a
u
Q

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

.

d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

e
b

t
o
n

l

d
u
o
w

e
b

l

d
u
o
w

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c

e
h
t

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

t
u
b

d
e
u
a
v

l

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

,

i

d
a
p

e
b

l

d
u
o
w

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

,

i

d
a
p

e
b

l

d
u
o
w

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

e
c
i
r
p

t
e
k
r
a
m
k
c
o
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

g
n
o
m
a

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v

l

d
n
a
r
B

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

s
r
o
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

e
u
a
v

l

t
e
k
r
a
M

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

d
n
a

t
s
e
r
e
t
n

i

e
r
o
f
e
b

e
m
o
c
n

i

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

s
w
o
fl

h
s
a
c

e
r
u
t
u
f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

s
t
e
s
s
a

n
o

i

s
n
a
g

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

,
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s

l

,
s
n
o
i
t
p
e
c
r
e
P

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
p

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

i

s
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
e
r

l

,

e
g
a
m

i

d
n
a
r
b

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

e
u
a
v

l

t
e
n
=

l

a
t
i
p
a
c

s
u
n
m

i

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

e
u
a
v

l

d
n
a
r
b
%
8
−

s
e
x
a
t

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

.

d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

e
b

t
o
n

l

d
u
o
w

e
b

l

d
u
o
w

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c

e
h
t

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

t
u
b

d
e
u
a
v

l

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

m
u
s

t
n
e
m

t
s
e
v
n

i

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

o
n

o
n

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
n

o
n

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

i

,
s
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
P

,

y
t
l
a
y
o
L

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

,

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
P

s
r
e
h
t
o

;
s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

d
n
a
r
b

i

,
s
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
P

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

d
n
a
r
b

d
n
a

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

l

a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
n
e
t
x
e

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

e
c
i
r
p

,

e
s
a
h
c
r
u
P

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

n
o
i
t
p
e
c
r
e
p

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

s
e
c
i
r
p

o
t

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

r
e
m
u
s
n
o
C

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

t
c
u
d
e
d

s
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
t
a

d
n
a
r
B

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
p

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
s
i
D

,

y
t
l
a
y
o
L

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

t
c
u
d
o
r
p

d
e
d
n
a
r
b
-
n
o
n

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
e
n
o

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
t
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a
r
b

d
n
a

e
c
i
r
P

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

y
t
l
a
y
o

l

,
s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

e
g
a
m

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
i
d
e
r
p

e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p

d
n
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

,

e
u
a
v

l

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
P

,

y
t
i
l

a
u
Q

,

e
c
i
r
P

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C
(

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
fi
o
r
p

l

a
t
n
e
m
e
r
c
n

i

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

x

x

x

x

x

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
e
r

l

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

f
o

t
s
o
C

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

s
e
i
t
l
a
y
o
R

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

t
s
o
C

l

a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
H

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

e
r
a
h
s

t
e
k
r
a
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

a
/
n

s
e
b
r
o
F

x
e
d
n

i

s
e
b
r
o
F

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
fi
o
r
P

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

e
r
u
t
u
F

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
P

j

d
n
a
r
B

3
0
0
2

o
m
o
a
P

l

s
t
e
s
s
a

n
o

n
r
u
t
e
R

d
n
a
r
B

a
/
n

s
e
c
i
v
r
e
s

l

a
t
i
p
a
C

l

a
t
i
p
a
C

l

a
u
t
c
e

l
l

e
t
n

i

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a
r
B

d
n
a
r
B

8
7
9
1

5
9
9
1

-

9
8
9
1

n
a
s
a
v
n
i
r
s

i

r
a
h
u
q
r
a
F

r
a
h
u
q
r
a
F

&

n
e
e
r
g

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

l

d
e
o
o
P

d
o
h
t
e
M
a
o
R

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

o
i
t
a
r

s
e
a
s

l

e
u
a
V

l

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

o
t
i
s
o
p
s
e

e
u
a
V

l

t
e
k
r
a
M
k
c
o
t
s

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

1
9
9
1

r
e
k
a
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a
r
B

3
9
9
1

r
e

l
l

e
K

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

l
l

e
s
s
u
R

d
n
a
r
B

3
9
9
1

&

a
r
u
k
a
m
a
K

r
e
k
a
a

r
e

l
l

e
K

t
i
g
o
L

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

n
a
s
a
v
n
i
r
s

i

d
n
a
r
B

4
9
9
1

&

k
r
a
P

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

y
e
v
r
u
s

d
n
a
r
B

4
9
9
1

u
s
a
B

&

k
c
i
D

y
t
l
a
y
o

l

d
n
a
r
B

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

r
o
t
a
u
m

l

i
s

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

n
a
h
a
l
c
a
M

d
n
a
r
b

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

d
n
a
r
B

5
9
9
1

&

s
i
o
ç
n
a
r
F

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
c
n
o
c

f
o

t
e
s

d
n
a
r
B

5
9
9
1

r
e
g
e
i
r
K
&

n
e
e
r
g

n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s

l

i

t
n
o
J

d
n
a
r
B

6
9
9
1

r
e
k
a
a

n
e
t

y
t
i
u
q
e

d
n
a
r
B

e
c
i
r
p

d
n
a

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

d
r
o
f
n
a
t
s

p
a
m
y
t
i
u
q
e

d
n
a
r
B

3
9
9
1

t
i
a
w
s

e
c
i
r
P

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l

a
u
q
e

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
V

r
o
j
a
M

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

l

y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
M

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
C

l

s
e
u
a
V

l

*
*
*
*
*
y
c
n
e
d
n
e
t

*
*
*
*
l
a
i
c
n
a
n
F

i

*
*
*
g
n
i
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

*
*
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
C

*
t
e
k
r
a
M

m
a

i

r
a
e
Y

r
o
h
t
u
a

l

e
d
o
M

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
C

l

o
t

i

g
n
d
r
o
c
c
a

i

l

e
b
g
n
a
t
n

i

.
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

’
s
l
e
d
o
M

.

6

e
l
b
a
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
/
l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
V

r
o
j
a
M

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

l

y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
M

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
C

l

s
e
u
a
V

l

*
*
*
*
*
y
c
n
e
d
n
e
t

*
*
*
*
l
a
i
c
n
a
n
F

i

*
*
*
g
n
i
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

*
*
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
C

*
t
e
k
r
a
M

m
a

i

r
a
e
Y

r
o
h
t
u
a

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
C

l

o
t

i

g
n
d
r
o
c
c
a

i

l

e
b
g
n
a
t
n

i

.

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

.

6

e
l
b
a
T

.

e
c
n
a
v
e
e
r

l

d
n
a

l

a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

,

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c

d
n
a
r
B

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m
d
n
a

i

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
p

,

n
o
i
t
a
t
u
p
e
R

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

.

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

r
e
s
u

d
n
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

g
n
i
y
u
b
-
e
r

n

i

y
t
l
a
y
o

l

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
-
o
w
t

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

e
c
i
r
p

d
n
a

d
n
a
r
b

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

e
h
t

h
t
i

w

d
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a

e
u
a
v

l

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

s
e
Y

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

y
t
l
a
y
o

l

,
s
e
u
a
v

l

,

n
o
i
t
a
t
u
p
e
R

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

d
n
o
b

l

a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

d
n
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

l

a
i
c
n
a
n
F

i

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

f
o

l

e
o
r

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
d

e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p

e
h
t

n

i

.

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c

e
v
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

d
n
a

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
i
r
o

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

d
n
a

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

,

h
t
l
a
e
w

d
n
a
r
B

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

,

e
c
n
a
v
e
e
r

l

,

m
e
e
t
s
e
(

e
s
o
p

)
s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

,

e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
a

,

e
g
a
k
n
i
L

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

e
c
n
e
s
e
r
p

,

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

c
i
t
a
m
g
a
r
P

,

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
c
e
ff
a

l

a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
i
t
l
u
M

i

d
e
x
i
M

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

s
e
Y

.
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

r
e

l
l

e
K

d
e
s
a
b
-
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c

e
c
n
a
n
o
s
e
r

l

e
d
o
m

d
n
a
r
b

l

e
d
o
M

e
B
B
C

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

n
o
i
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
C

e
v
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

s
i
r
r
a
H

/

d
n
a
r
B

a
/
n

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

l

a
t
o
t

n
e
r
t
i
u
q
e

d
n
a
r
B

a
/
n

s
r
o
t
c
o
d
n
a
r
B

s
r
o
t
c
o
d
n
a
r
B

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

h
c
a
r
e
s
e
r

a
t
a
D

d
n
a
r
B

3
7
9
1

d
e
t
a
c
i
t
s
i
h
p
o
s

R
D
s

d
n
a
r
B

3
2
9
1

n
e
s
l
e
n
C
a

i

x
e
d
n

i

e
u
a
v

l

d
n
a
r
B

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

B
i
e

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

4
7
9
1

d
n
a
r
b
r
e
t
n

i

d
n
a
r
b
r
e
t
n

i

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

m
a
c
i
b
u
R

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

8
9
9
1

n
w
o
r
B

d
r
a
w

l
l
i

M

V
a
B

Z
d
n
a
r
B

d
n
a
r
B

7
9
9
1

&

g
n
u
o
Y

r
o
t
a
u
a
V

l

t
e
s
s
a
d
n
a
r
B

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
B

1
0
0
2

s
t
r
e
b
o
R

i

n
v
e
K

s
k
r
a
m
e
v
o
L

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

13

.

y
t
l
a
y
o

l

d
n
a
r
b

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

d
n
a

t
c
u
d
o
r
p

a

r
o
f

e
c
i
r
p

l

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a

n
a

y
a
p

o
t

r
e
h
/
m
h

i

g
n
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
m

,

d
e
t
a
i
c
e
r
p
p
a

e
r
a

r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

e
h
t

o
t

e
u
a
v

l

d
e
d
d
a

e
h
t

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

t
a
h
t

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

.
s
r
e
g
r
e
m

r
o

s
n
o
i
t
i
s
i
u
q
c
a

t
n
e
c
e
r

n

i

i

s
e
n
a
p
m
o
c

l

e
b
a
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
e
h
t
o

f
o

s
e
c
i
r
p

t
e
k
r
a
m
e
h
t

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

,
s
t
e
s
s
a

i

l

e
b
g
n
a
t
n

i

s
’
y
n
a
p
m
o
c

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v

l

e
h
t

g
n
i
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

f
o

y
b

s
t
n
e
m
e
e

l

e
h
t
*
*

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
i

t
i
*

.

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
fi
o
r
p

n
o

t
c
a
p
m

i

e
h
t

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

d
n
a

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

l

a
i
c
n
a
n
fi

e
h
t

n

i

d
e
t
c
e
fl
e
r

e
b

o
t

y
n
a
p
m
o
c

e
h
t

f
o

t
e
s
s
a

n
a

s
a

d
e
u
a
v

l

s
i

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t
*
*
*
*

.

d
n
a
r
b

a

e
t
a
v
i
t
c
a
e
r

o
t

t
s
o
c

t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
e
r

l

e
h
t

r
o

d
n
a
r
b

e
h
t

g
n
i
t
a
e
r
c

n

i

d
e
r
r
u
c
n

i

t
s
o
c

l

a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h

e
h
t

g
n
i
r
u
s
a
e
m
y
b

r
e
h
t
i
e
*
*
*

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

n
a
t
b
o

o
t

s
e
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

e
r
o
m

r
o

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

n
a
t
b
o

o
t

s
e
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

e
r
o
m

r
o

2

2

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

:

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
e

l

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

:

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
e

l

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

x
e
p
m
o
C

.

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
m
r
o
f

n
w
o

:

e
c
r
u
o
S

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

n
a
t
b
o

o
t

s
s
e
c
o
r
p

l

e
g
n
i
s

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

n
a
t
b
o

o
t

s
s
e
c
o
r
p

l

e
g
n
i
s

a

a

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

:

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
e

l

t
i
c
i
l

p
m

i

l

e
p
m
s

i

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

:

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
e

l

t
i
c
i
l

p
x
e

l

e
p
m
s

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Visibilility

Product

Price

Purchase

awareness

Loyalty

x

x

x

x

x

x

Brand extensions

x

sensations

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

experience

Profitability

Revenues and assets

brand

sum of percentage of 

x

x

Competence

projections
net worth and 

stock exchange

x

x

x

x

Creation and rebranding

Payment per brand

agreement

investments

.
l

e
d
o
m

r
e
p

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
V

.

7

e
l
b
a
T

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
fi
o
r
P

e
r
u
t
u
F

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
P

j

d
o
h
t
e
M
a
o
R

s
t
e
s
s
a

n
o

n
r
u
t
e
R

x
e
d
n

i

l

a
t
i
p
a
C

l

a
u
t
c
e

l
l

e
t
n

i

s
e
b
r
o
F

r
o
t
a
u
m

l

i
s

n
o
i
t
c
e
e
s

l

i

t
n
o
J

e
c
i
r
P

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l

a
u
q
e

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

y
e
v
r
u
s

y
t
l
a
y
o
L

d
n
a
r
B

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

l

d
e
o
o
P

r
a
h
u
q
r
a
F

r
e
k
a
a

r
e

l
l

e
K

t
i
g
o
L

t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
e
r

l

f
o

t
s
o
C

e
u
a
V

l

t
e
k
r
a
M
k
c
o
t
s

o
i
t
a
r

s
e
a
s

l

e
u
a
V

l

e
r
a
h
s

t
e
k
r
a
M

t
s
o
C

l

a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
H

s
e
i
t
l
a
y
o
R

e
c
i
r
p

d
n
a

d
n
a
r
b

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
c
n
o
c

f
o

t
e
s

n
e
t

y
t
i
u
q
e

d
n
a
r
B

p
a
m
y
t
i
u
q
e

l

e
d
o
m
e
c
n
a
n
o
s
e
r

d
n
a
r
b

d
e
s
a
b
-
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c

e
B
B
C

V
a
B

r
o
t
a
u
a
V

l

t
e
s
s
a
d
n
a
r
B

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
V
/
s
l
e
d
o
M

B
i
e

x
e
d
n

i

e
u
a
v

l

d
n
a
r
B

d
n
a
r
b
r
e
t
n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d
n
a
r
B

n
e
r
t
i
u
q
e

R
D
s

.

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
m
r
o
f

n
w
o

:

e
c
r
u
o
S

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table  8.  Chart  of  process  and  number  of  variables  by  model.

Model

Historical  Cost
Royalties
Cost  of  replacement
Market  share
stock  Market  Value
Value  sales  ratio
intellectual  Capital  index
Forbes
Projection  of  Future  Profitability
Return  on  assets  Roa  Method
Pooled  analysis
Farquhar;  P.
aaker,  D.
Keller,  K.
Logit
equalization  Price
survey  analysis
Brand  loyalty
Joint  selection  simulator
set  of  concessions  between  brand  and  price
Brand  equity  ten
equity  Map
CBBe  customer-based  brand  resonance  model.
equitren
Brandoctors
sDR
Brand  value  index  eiB
interbrand
Brand  asset  Valuator  BaV
Brandz
Lovemarks

Source:  own  formulation.

Process

simple  explicit  assessment
simple  explicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  explicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
simple  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment
Complex  implicit  assessment

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

15

Classification  according  to  number  of 
variables

one-dimensional
one-dimensional
two-dimensional
two-dimensional
one-dimensional
two-dimensional
one-dimensional
two-dimensional
one-dimensional
two-dimensional
one-dimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
two-dimensional
two-dimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
one-dimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
two-dimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional
Multidimensional

complex  explicit  evaluation  (primary  information  with  two  or  more  processes).  In  Tables  7  and  8,  the 
variables  and  models  are  related  to  determine  which  are  the  most  representative  and  how  concepts  are 
interwoven.

BE  refers  to  its  qualities,  responsibilities,  attributes,  and  functionalities  linked  to  the  name,  logos,  sym-
bols,  business  achievements,  innovations,  importance  in  the  market,  and  what  it  communicates  to  add 
or  subtract  value  in  the  market  and  front  of  its  consumers  (Aaker,  1996;  Otero  &  Giraldo,  2019).  It  is 
debatable  whether  to  decide  which  is  the  best  model  or  proposal  to  evaluate  a  brand.  It  is  evident  that 
variables  that  respond  exclusively  to  market  needs  do  not  allow  intangible  items  to  be  made  tangible 
through  concepts  that  are  abstract  and  changeable,  such  as  loyalty,  preference,  and  visibility,  which  allow 
us  to  understand  consumer  behavior  and  influence  the  performance  of  the  brand  in  all  its  areas.

As  an  analogy  from  the  biological  point  of  view,  ‘Brand  Equity’  or  ‘Brand  Capital’  is  equivalent  to  RNA 
that  is  translated  into  DNA  (the  brand),  and  the  first, ‘Brand  Equity’,  allows  understanding  and  applying  the 
information  previously  developed.  In  general,  the  BE  is  the  sum  of  attributes,  properties,  characteristics, 
particularities,  and  linked  responsibilities  that  accompany  all  the  symbols  and  the  brand,  and  that  ulti-
mately  result  in  adding  or  subtracting  value  to  the  product  (its  trade  name),  to  the  service,  to  the  com-
pany,  and  ultimately  to  its  target  population,  a  value  that  ultimately  is  the  consumer’s  perception  of  BE.

The  variables  in  the  models  were  almost  uniform.  Most  of  them  require  two  or  more  complex  proce-
dures  to  extract  the  exposed  variables,  and  they  respond  to  the  categories  that  each  model  attempts  to 
analyze,  whether  one-dimensional,  two-dimensional,  or  multidimensional.  Therefore,  it  can  be  assumed 
that  most  of  them  consider  a  compound  of  variables  for  the  BE,  while  those  that  consider  only  one 
variable  are  models  related  to  cost  estimation  or  financial  processes,  without  involving  consumers.  It  is 
important  to  emphasize  that  when  the  consumer  is  exposed  to  the  purpose  of  the  model,  the  secondary 
information  becomes  relevant  and  the  process  becomes  complex  in  response  to  the  need  to  conduct 
different  processes  for  the  collection  and  processing  of  data.  Most  methods  used  in  focus  group  surveys 
and  interviews  are  structured,  semi-structured,  or  free  from  qualitative  aspects  (Swait  et  al.,  1993;  Zang 
&  Kim,  2013;  Sun  et  al.,  2014).  On  the  qualitative  side,  there  are  processes  such  as  purchasing  with 

16

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

recognition  through  loyalty  and  surveys.  In  terms  of  categorization,  it  is  important  to  note  that  although 
the  models  name  each  variable  differently,  generalizations  can  be  made  (Villarejo,  2002;  Sasikala,  2013).
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  none  of  the  models  consider  the  actions  previously  developed  for 
the  design  and  creation  of  the  brand,  all  of  which  are  supported  by  a  posteriori  analysis  of  the  commu-
nications  issued.  The  results  show  the  need  to  consolidate  knowledge  in  this  field  because  there  are 
wide  conceptual  differences,  criteria,  and  diverse  orientations.

It  is  concluded  that  in  the  empirical  models,  a  short-term  approach  prevails,  with  a  wide  reservation 
about  the  methodologies  used  for  their  design  and  incomparable  results  among  themselves,  while  the 
academic  models,  although  they  try  to  validate  their  constructs,  are  still  far  from  meeting  all  the  scien-
tific  criteria  expected  in  products  of  this  type  (Montalvo-Arroyave  et  al.,  2022).  The  models  have  been 
applied  to  all  corporations  and  brands;  each  one  has  a  differentiating  seal,  which  is  that  of  its  creator, 
and  they  are  not  the  only  measuring  instruments.

The  aim  of  reviewing  the  models  was  to  understand  them  and  to  review  their  variables,  strengths, 
and  weaknesses.  They  are  very  varied,  but  none  of  them  were  properly  tested  to  robustly  measure  BE. 
No  model  allows  for  comprehensive  evaluation.

The  gap  in  the  consensus  between  the  theoretical  and  pragmatic  for  measurement  is  evident;  hence, 
there  is  a  lack  of  conjugation  of  the  variables  between  the  models.  Brand  models  have  focused  on  iden-
tifying  and  measuring  their  impacts,  and  assigning  value  to  this  intangible.  It  is  evident  that  in  the 
models,  the  inclusion  of  variables  that  consider  brand  communication  is  not  relevant,  that  is,  they  do  not 
know  the  communication  of  branding.

4.  Conclusion

This  review  allows  us  to  conclude  that  the  evaluation  included  in  the  models  is  stable,  and  most  require 
two  or  more  complex  processes  to  determine  the  variables  considered.  The  responses  to  the  categories 
that  each  model  proposes  to  analyse  for  BE  have  different  perspectives,  concepts,  and  variables;  hence, 
seven  models  are  one-dimensional,  eight  two-dimensional,  and  16  multidimensional.  Twenty-four  are 
models  that  consider  multiple  variables,  while  one-dimensional  models  do  not  involve  consumer  focus 
on  financial  or  costing  processes.  In  general,  when  models  focus  on  the  consumer,  they  do  so  by  seeking 
secondary  information,  they  become  relevant,  and  the  process  becomes  more  complicated  when  they 
involve  several  methodologies  for  data  collection  and  processing.  When  it  comes  to  focus  groups, 
whether  the  interviews  are  structured,  semi-structured,  or  mixed,  they  focus  on  the  qualitative  aspect, 
and  for  the  quantitative  aspect,  surveys  and  sampling  are  applied  to  establish  loyalty  through  what 
happens  in  the  purchasing  processes.  In  general,  it  can  be  established  that  although  the  models  name 
the  variables  differently,  it  is  possible  to  generalize  them,  which  allows  for  establishing  the  relationship 
between  the  different  models,  determining  those  that  are  most  representative  and  the  possibility  of 
intertwining  the  concepts.

The  review  of  the  models  allowed  us  to  recognize  and  understand  their  variables,  strengths,  and 
weaknesses.  Its  versatility  and  variation  are  wide,  as  is  its  variability,  but  none  seems  to  have  the  com-
prehensiveness,  robustness,  and  certainty  to  establish  the  BE.

The  analyses  allow  us  to  establish  that  there  is  no  consensus  between  the  pragmatic  and  theoretical, 
given  that  the  combination  of  variables  between  the  models  is  very  limited.  The  measurement  does  not 
generate  a  consensus  between  the  pragmatic  and  theoretical,  as  evidenced  by  the  small  combination  of 
variables  between  the  models.

Everyone  tries  to  value  the  intangible,  ignoring  the  communication  of  branding,  which  becomes  a 
deficiency,  since  it  is  the  mechanism  that  attracts  the  consumer.  It  includes  communication;  therefore,  it 
can  invalidate  interpretations.  All  the  analyses  lead  to  the  need  to  move  towards  the  proposal  of  a  com-
prehensive  model  that  incorporates  the  intangible  and  tangible  aspects  of  BE,  with  variables  that  con-
sider  these  dimensions.

It  must  be  considered  that  among  the  variables  that  guarantee  the  success  of  a  brand,  experience, 
loyalty,  and  visibility  are  identified,  and  in  correspondence  with  the  new  trends  around  the  environmen-
tal  paradigm  that  involve  emotional,  social,  and  CSR,  it  is  valid  to  ask:  How  are  brands  implementing 

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

17

them?  Some  studies  have  shown  that  they  generate  credibility,  personality,  and  increased  BE.  These  and 
many  more  are  the  characteristics,  traits,  and  responsibilities  linked  to  the  logos,  logo  symbols,  and  com-
munications  of  a  brand,  which  add  value  to  a  service  or  product.  The  models  analyzed  in  the  scientific 
literature  review  did  not  have  quantitative  approximations  of  brand  value  for  all  variables.

This  has  led  companies  to  understand  the  need  to  approach  either  collectively  or  individually  through 
‘emotional  branding’  and  thus  access  the  power  that  underlies  emotions,  desires  and  commitments  and 
deepen  the  link  between  the  company  and  the  consumer,  which  in  the  end  BE  and  as  a  result  of  con-
sumer  appreciation  will  be  a  positive  or  negative  added  value.

In  this  context,  companies  use  CSR  as  a  component  of  greenwashing  for  their  communications,  and 
given  that  its  impact  on  brand  equity  is  not  known,  the  aim  is  to  move  towards  a  model  that  includes 
it as a measurement value, given that the 31 brand valuation models formulated to date do not include it.
Based  on  the  above  approach  and  the  delimitation  of  the  problem,  a  methodological  design  is  pro-
posed,  which  includes  the  implementation  of  perception  surveys  and  their  statistical  analysis  to  move 
towards  a  model  of  brand  value  measurement  and  its  validation.

Considering  what  has  been  analyzed,  what  is  proposed,  and  what  is  underway  from  this  research  is 
the  formulation  and  validation  of  a  quantitative  model  that  includes  variables  such  as  experience,  loyalty, 
visibility,  analysis  of  Corporate  Social  and  Environmental  Responsibility,  and  GreenWashing,  with  support 
in  whether  or  not  there  is  responsible  communication  and  in  the  study  of  symbols,  logos,  and  the  mes-
sage  that  accompanies  them.

Author  contributions

María  Margarita  Gutiérrez  Gutiérrez,  Corresponding  Author,  Conceptualization;  Formal  analysis; 
Investigation; 
Methodology; Writing  -  original  draft;  writing  -  review  and  editing.  Juan  José  Perona  Paéz,  Co-author, Writing  -  review 
&  editing.  Francisco  de  Paula  Gutiérrez  Bonilla,  Co-author,  Writing  -  original  draft;  Methodology;  Writing  -  review  & 
editing.

Disclosure  statement

No  potential  conflict  of  interest  was  reported  by  the  author(s).

About  the  authors

María  Margarita  Gutiérrez  Gutiérrez,  PhD.  In  Strategy  Communication,  Advertising  and  Public  RelationsDoctoral 
Program  in  Strategy  communication,  Advertising  and  Public  relations.  Research  Associate  in  Asturias  Corporate 
University,  with  interest  in  branding,  advertinsing,  aand  corporate  social  reponsibility.

Juan  José  Perona  Páez,  PhD.  In  Information  Sciences.  Associated  Professor  at  the  Department  of  Advertising,  Public 
Relations  and  Audiovisual  Communication.  Universitat  Autònoma  de  Barcelona.  With  interest  in  radio,  advertising 
and  sound  education  and  radio  advertising.

Francisco  de  Paula  Gutiérrez  Bonilla,  PhD.  In  Biological  SciencesFull  Professor  at  the  Department  of  Environmental 
Sciences  and  Sustainability  Universidad  Jorge  Tadeo  lozano.  With  interest  in  fisheries,  aquaculture,  models  and 
enviroment.

ORCID

María  Margarita  Gutiérrez  Gutiérrez 
Juan  José  Perona  Páez 
Francisco  de  Paula  Gutiérrez  Bonilla 

  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5084-4995

  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8256-9070

  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6761-6035

Data  availability  statement

All  data  will  be  available  in  the  supplementary  material  of  this  manuscript.  Data  available  on  reasonable  request 
from  the  corresponding  author:

18

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

References

Aaker,  D.  A.  (1991).  Managing  Brand  Equity:  Capitalizing  on  the  value  of  a  brand  name.  The  Free  Press.
Aaker,  D.  A.  (1996).  Measuring  brand  equity  across  products  and  markets.  California  Management  Review,  38(3),  102–

120.  https://doi.org/10.2307/41165845

Aaker,  D.  A.  (2000).  Gestión  del  valor  de  la  marca.  Capitalizar  el  valor  de  la  marca.  Editorial  1Díaz  de  Santos.
Aaker,  D.  A.,  &  Keller,  K.  l.  (1990).  Consumer  evaluations  of  brand  extensions.  Journal  of  Marketing,  54(1),  27–41. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299005400102

Aaker,  D.  A.,  del  Blanco,  Á.,  &  Moreno-lópez,  Y.  (2012).  Relevancia  de  la  marca:  hacer  a  los  competidores  irrelevantes. 

Pearson.  Educación.

Ahn,  J.,  Park,  J.  K.,  &  Hyun,  H.  (2018).  luxury  product  to  service  brand  extension  and  brand  equity  transfer.  Journal 

of  Retailing  and  Consumer  Services,  42(42),  22–28.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2018.01.009

Alvarado,  K.  S.,  &  lucano,  A.  (2015).  Valor  de  marca:  un  acercamiento  conceptual  mediante  su  origen  y  modelos.  Revista 

Valor  Agregado,  2(1),  21–32.  Núm2015

Andreea,  C.  (2018).  Exploring  Kapferer’s  Brand  identity  prism  applicability  in  theatre.  International  Journal  of  Advances 
in Management and Economics,  2(2),  18–23.  https://www.managementjournal.info/index.php/IJAME/article/view/251
Balmer,  J.  (1998).  Corporate  identity  and  the  advent  of  corporate  marketing.  Journal  of  Marketing  Management,  14(8), 

963–996.  https://doi.org/10.1362/026725798784867536

Balmer,  J.  (2008).  Identity  based  views  of  the  corporation.  Insights  from  corporate  identity,  organizational  identity, 
social  identity,  visual  identity,  corporate  brand  identity  and  corporate  image.  European  Journal  of  Marketing, 
42(9/10),  879–906.  https://doi.org/10.1108/03090560810891055

Barnes,  S.,  &  Pressey,  A.  (2012).  Are  consumer  and  brand  personalities  the  same?  Psychology  and  Marketing,  29(5), 

334–349.

Barrio-Fraile,  E.,  &  Enrique-Jiménez,  A.  M.  (2021).  The  strategic  value  of  corporate  social  responsibility  CSR:  The  pres-
ent  and  future  of  its  management.  El  Profesional  de  la  Información,  30(3).  https://doi.org/10.3145/epi.2021.may.12

Bevan,  A.,  &  Wengrow,  D.  (2010).  Cultures  of  commodity  branding.  left  Coast  Press.
Birdwell,  A.  E.  (1968).  A  study  of  the  influence  of  image  congruence  on  consumer  choice.  The  Journal  of  Business, 

41(1),  76–88.  https://doi.org/10.1086/295047

Bohle,  M.,  &  Marone,  E.  (2021).  Geoethics,  a  branding  for  sustainable  practices.  Sustainability,  13(2),  895.  https://doi.

org/10.3390/su13020895

Borbély,  S.  (2016).  Branding  and  extroversion  handbook:  a  guide  for  SMEs’  to  support  the  own  brand  building  process  of 

SMEs.  Branding  EU.  Erasmus+.  https://issuu.com/brandingeuroproject/docs/branding_eu_handbook_en

Caro,  A.  (2014).  Comprender  la  publicidad  para  transformar  la  sociedad.  Cuadernos.  Info,  34,  39–46.  https://doi.

org/10.7764/cdi.34.584

Chaudhuri,  H.,  &  Majumdar,  S.  (2006).  Of  Diamonds  and  desires:  Understanding  conspicuous  consumption  from  a 

contemporary  marketing  perspective.  Academy  of  Marketing  Science  Review,  1(11),  1–18.

Chekima,  B.,  Chekima,  S.,  Azizi,  S.,  Syed, W., Wafa,  K.,  Aisat,  O.,  Aisat,  I.,  Aisat,  l.,  &  london,  S.  (2016).  Sustainable  consump-
tion:  The  effects  of  knowledge,  cultural  values,  environmental  advertising,  and  demographics.  International  Journal  of 
Sustainable  Development  &  World  Ecology,  23(2),  210–220.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2015.1114043

Chiu,  M.,  Huang,  H., Weng, Y.,  &  Chen,  C.  (2017). The  roles  of  customer-brand  relationships  and  brand  equity  in  brand 

extension  acceptance.  Journal  of  Electronic  Commerce  Research,  18(2),  155–176.

Christensen,  l.,  &  Askegaard,  S.  (2001).  Corporate  identity  and  corporate  image  revisited.  A  Semiotic  perspective. 

European  Journal  of  Marketing,  35(3/4),  292–315.  https://doi.org/10.1108/03090560110381814

Christodoulides,  G.,  &  de  Chernatony,  l.  (2004).  Dimensionalising  on-and  offline  brands  composite  equity.  Journal  of 

Product  &  Brand  Management,  13(3),  168–179.  https://doi.org/10.1108/10610420410538069

Cohen,  H.  (2023).  30  branding  definitions.  https://heidicohen.com/30-branding-definitions/
Correa,  D.,  &  Hernández,  D.  (2018).  Informes  de  sostenibilidad  y  su  impacto  en  la  creación  de  valor  financiero  de  las 

empresas.  Contaduría  Universidad  de  Antioquia,  70(70),  43–60.  https://doi.org/10.17533/udea.rc.331295

Costa,  J.  (2007).  Pospublicidad:  la  era  de  la  comunicación  global.  En:  Pensar  la  Publicidad,  1(1),  41–54.
Costa,  J.  (2010).  La  marca.  Creación,  diseño  y  gestión.  Trillas.
Currás,  R.  (2010).  Identidad  e  imagen  corporativas:  Revisión  conceptual  e  interrelación.  Universitat  de  València.  Teoría 

y  Praxis,  7(2010),  9–34.

Danesi,  M.  (2024).  AI  in  Marketing  and  Advertising.  In  AI-Generated  Popular  Culture.  Palgrave  Macmillan.  https://doi.

org/10.1007/978-3-031-54752-2_7

Davcik,  N.  S.,  Vinhas,  D.  S.,  &  Hair,  J.  (2015).  Towards  a  unified  theory  of  brand  equity:  Conceptualizations,  taxonomy 
and  avenues  for  future  research.  Journal  of  Product  &  Brand  Management,  24(1),  3–17.  https://doi.org/10.1108/
JPBM-06-2014-0639

De  Chernatony,  l.  (1999).  Brand  management  through  narrowing  the  gap  between  brand  identity  and  brand  repu-

tation.  Journal  of  Marketing  Management,  15(1-3),  157–179.  https://doi.org/10.1362/026725799784870432

De  Chernatory,  l.,  &  Dall’Olmo,  F.  (1998).  Defining  a  brand:  Beyond  the  literature  with  experts’interpretations.  Journal 

of  Marketing  Management,  14(5),  417–443.  https://doi.org/10.1362/026725798784867798

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

19

De  Chernatory,  l.,  &  McDonald,  M.  (1992).  Creating  powerful  brands:  The  strategic  route  to  success  in  consumer,  indus-

trial  and  service  markets.  Butterworth  Heinemann.

De  Regt,  A.,  Plangger,  K.,  &  Barnes,  S.  J.  (2021).  Virtual  reality  marketing  and  customer  advocacy:  Transforming  expe-
riences  from  storytelling  to  story  doing.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  136,  513–522.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbus-
res.2021.08.004

Dedeoğlu,  B.  B.,  Van  Niekerk,  M.,  Weinland,  J.,  &  Celuch,  K.  (2019).  Re-conceptualizing  customer-based  destination 
Journal  of  Destination  Marketing  &  Management,  11,  211–230.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

brand  equity. 
jdmm.2018.04.003

Deslandes,  S.,  De  Moraes,  C.,  leite  de  Moraes,  C.,  Maksud,  I.,  Marques,  E.,  Souza,  E.,  Bosi,  M.  A.,  Magalhães,  Ianni, 
A.,  &  M.,  Zöllner.  (2021).  Distribution  of  scientific  capital  among  tenured  professors  in  the  Social  and  Human 
Sciences  and  Epidemiology  in  the  collective  health  field.  Scielo  Journals.  Dataset,  https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.
figshare.19969089.v1

Dick,  A.  S.,  &  Basu,  K.  (1994).  Customer  loyalty:  Toward  an  integrated  conceptual  framework.  Journal  of  the  Academy 

of  Marketing  Science,  22(2),  99–113.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0092070394222001

Dominici,  G.  (2009).  From  marketing  mix  to  E-marketing  mix:  A  literature  review.  International  Journal  of  Business  and 

Management,  9(4),  17–24.

Duman, T., Ozbal, O., & Duerod, M. (2018). The role of affective factors on brand resonance: Measuring customer-based 
brand  equity  for  the  Sarajevo  brand.  Journal  of  Destination  Marketing  &  Management,  8,  359–372.  https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jdmm.2017.08.001

Edson,  J.  E.,  &  Bettman,  J.  R.  (2005).  Self‐construal,  reference  groups,  and  brand.  Journal  of  Consumer  Research,  32(3), 

378–389.  https://doi.org/10.1086/497549

Einstein,  M. 

(2011).  The  evolution  of 

religious  branding.  Social  Compass,  58(3),  331–338.  https://doi.

org/10.1177/0037768611412138

Espósito,  I.  M.  (2001).  Brand  Equity.  Modelos  de  valuación  de  marcas  comerciales.  Tesis  de  Maestría  en  Dirección  de 

Empresas  Centro  de  Estudios  Macroeconómicos  de  Argentina  (CEMA).  Universidad  del  CEMA.

Ewens,  M.,  Ryan,  H.  P.,  &  Wang,  S.  (2024).  Measuring  intangible  capital  with  market  prices.  Management  Science,  0(0). 

https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.02058

Farquhar,  P.  (1989).  Managing  brand  equity.  Marketing  Research,  1,  24–33.
Febraa,  l.,  Costa,  M.,  &  Pereira,  F.  (2023).  Reputation,  return  and  risk:  A  new  approach.  European  Research  on 

Management  and  Business  Economics,  29(1),  100207.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iedeen.2022.100207

Feldwick,  P.  (1996).  What  is  brand  equity  anyway  and  how  do  you  measure  it.  Journal  of  the  Marketing  Research 

Society,  38(2),  1–17.  https://doi.org/10.1177/147078539603800201

Flügel,  J.  C.  (1930).  The  psychology  of  clothes.  london  Press.
Forero-Siabato,  M.  (2014).  Determinación  de  la  aplicabilidad  del  Brand  Equity  basado  en  el  consumidor  para  el  contexto 

colombiano.  Universidad  Nacional  de  Colombia.

Forero-Siabato,  M.,  &  Duque-Oliva,  E.  (2014).  Evolución  y  caracterización  de  los  modelos  de  Brand  Equity.  Suma  de 

Negocios,  5(12),  158–168.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-910X(14)70038-2

Garolera,  J.  (1997).  Aspectos  distintivos  del  “Brand  Equity”  en  marcas  percibidas  como  locales  y  como  globales.  IESE.
Ger,  G.,  &  Belk,  R.  W.  (1996).  Cross-cultural  differences  in  materialism.  Journal  of  Economic  Psychology,  17(1),  55–77. 

4870(95)00035-6  https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-

Gobé,  M.  (2005).  Branding  emocional.  El  nuevo  paradigma  para  conectar  las  marcas  emocionalmente  con  las  personas. 

Divine  EGG  Publicaciones.

Godin,  S.  (2019).  Esto  es  marketing.  Traductora  Isabel  Murillo  Fort.  Editorial  Alienta.
Gómez,  P.  A.  (2001).  Imaginarios sociales y análisis semiótico. Una aproximación a la construcción narrativa de la realidad 
(pp.  195–209).  Cuadernos  de  la  Facultad  de  Humanidades  y  Ciencias  Sociales  -  Universidad  Nacional  de  Jujuy. 
Cuaderno  No  17,  FHYCS.

González,  J.  A.  (1986).  Advertising  and  symbolic  consumption.  Infancia  y  Aprendizaje,  9(35-36),  99–108.  https://doi.or

g/10.1080/02103702.1986.10822132

González-Del  Foyol,  M.  E.,  &  Rodríguez-Rodríguez,  S.  (2015).  Método  para  calcular  el  valor  financiero  de  marcas  comer-

ciales.  Caso  “Cubita  y  diseño”,  titularidad  del  Grupo  Empresarial  CIMEX.  AFCEE  (pp.  21–38).  Número  Especial.

Górska-Warsewicz,  H.,  Dębski,  M.,  Fabuš,  M.,  &  Kováč,  M.  (2021).  Green  brand  equity  empirical  experience  from  a 

systematic  literature  review.  Sustainability,  13(20),  11130.  https://doi.org/10.3390/su132011130

Green,  P.,  &  Srinivasan,  V.  (1978).  Conjoint  analysis  in  consumer  research:  Issues  and  outlook.  Journal  of  Consumer 

Research,  5(2),  103–123.  https://doi.org/10.1086/208721

Gutiérrez,  M.,  M.  (2021).  El  Marketing,  el  greenwashing  y  su  influencia  en  el  Brand  Equity.  Caso  de  estudio:  Colombia. 

grafica,  9(18),  135–147.  https://doi.org/10.5565/rev/grafica.185

Guzmán  González,  M.,  &  Rangel,  E.  (2005).  El  valor  de  la  marca  y  su  efecto  en  la  lealtad  y  en  la  fijación  del  precio  por 

el  consumidor  (Bachelor’s  thesis).

Hanaysha,  J.  (2016).  Examining  the  link  between  word  of  mouth  and  brand  equity:  A  study  on  international  fast-food 
restaurants  in  Malaysia.  Journal  of  Asian  Business  Strategy,  6(3),  41–49.  https://doi.org/10.18488/journal.1006/ 
2016.6.3/1006.3.41.49

Healey,  M.  (2008).  What  is  branding?.  Roto  Visión.

20

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

Hegner,  S.  M.,  Fenko,  A.,  &  Teravest,  A.  (2017).  Using  the  theory  of  planned  behaviour  to  understand  brand  love. 
Journal  of  Product  &  Brand  Management,  26(1),  26–41.  https://search.proquest.com/docview/1885728312?account
id=48773  https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-06-2016-1215

Hepola,  J.,  Karjaluoto,  K.,  &  Hintikka,  A.  (2017).  The  effect  of  sensory  brand  experience  and  involvement  on  brand 
equity  directly  and  indirectly  through  consumer  brand  engagement.  Journal of Product & Brand Management,  26(3), 
282–293.  https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-10-2016-1348

Herranz-Arcones,  M.  (2017).  Modelos  de  gestión  de  marca  y  su  aplicación  en  el  ámbito  de  las  ciudades  [Tesis  doctoral]. 

Universidad  Complutense  de  Madrid.  UCM.  https://eprints.ucm.es/id/eprint/41689/1/T38556.pdf

Hoeffler,  S.,  &  Keller,  K.  (2003).  The  marketing  advantages  of  strong  brands.  Journal  of  Brand  Management,  10(6), 

421–445.  https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540139

Holt,  D.  B.  (2004).  How  brands  become  icons.  The  principles  of  cultural  branding.  Harvard  Business  School  Press.
Hultén,  B.  (2011).  Sensory  marketing:  the  multi-sensorial  brand-experience  concept.  European  Business  Review,  23(3), 

256–273.  https://doi.org/10.1108/09555341111130245

Iglesias,  O.,  Markovic,  S.,  &  Rialp,  J.  (2019).  How  does  sensory  brand  experience  influence  brand  equity?  Considering 
the  roles  of  customer  satisfaction,  customer  affective  commitment,  and  employee  empathy.  Journal  of  Business 
Research,  96,  343–354.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.05.043

Interbrand.  (2021).  Methodology.  Applications  for  brand  valuation.  https://interbrand.com/thinking/best-global-brands- 

2021-methodology/

James,  W.  (1890).  Principles  of  psychology.  Holt.
Jufrizen,  S.  T.,  Pirari,  W.  S.,  &  Sari,  M.  (2024).  E-satisfaction  and  e-loyalty:  The  role  of  brand  image  and  e-service  quality. 

Jurnal  Ekonomi  dan  Keuangan.  https://doi.org/10.24034/j25485024.y2024.v8.i1.5677

Kamakura,  W.,  &  Russell,  G.  (1993).  Measuring  brand  value  with  scanner  data.  International  Journal  of  Research  in 

Marketing,  10(1),  9–22.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-8116(93)90030-3

Kantar (2021). Kantar-BrandZ: Most Valuable global brands 2021. https://www.kantar.com/campaigns/brandz-downloads/

kantar-brandz-most-valuable-global-brands-2021

Kaufmann,  H.  R.,  loureiro,  S.  M.,  &  Manarioti,  A.  (2016).  Exploring  behavioral  branding,  brand  love  and  brand 
co-creation.  Journal  of  Product  &  Brand  Management,  25(6),  516–526.  https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-06-2015-0919
Keller,  K.  l.  (1993).  Conceptualizing,  measuring,  and  managing  customer-  based  Brand  Equity.  Journal  of  Marketing, 

57(1),  1–22.  https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299305700101
Keller,  K.  l.  (1997).  Strategic  brand  management.  Prentice  Hall.
Keller,  K.  l.  (2009).  Building  strong  brands  in  a  modern  marketing  communications  environment.  Journal  of  Marketing 

Communications,  15(2-3),  139–155.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527260902757530

Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. (2023). Market driving: Some directions for future research. Industrial Marketing Management, 

113,  348–351.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2023.06.012

Kotler,  P.  (2000).  Dirección  de  marketing:  Análisis,  planificación,  gestión  y  control.  Prentice  Hall.
Kotler, P., & Armstrong, G. (2013). Fundamentos de marketing. Decimoprimera edición. Pearson-Prentice Hall. Educación 

y  Economía.

Kotler,  P  Keller,.,  &  K.,  l.  (2012).  Dirección  de  Marketing  (14a  ed.).  Editorial  Pearson  Educación.
Kuhn,  T.,  S.  (2006).  La  estructura  de  las  revoluciones  científicas.  Trad.  De  Carlos  Solís  Santos.  3ra  ed.  Fondo  de  Cultura 

Económica.

lassar,  W.,  Mittal,  B.,  &  Sharma,  A.  (1995).  Measuring  customer-based  brand  equity.  Journal  of  Consumer  Marketing, 

12(4),  11–19.  https://doi.org/10.1108/07363769510095270

lee,  E.,  J.  (2013).  A  prototype  of  multi-component  brand  personality  structure:  A  consumption  symbolism  approach. 

Psychology  &  Marketing,  30(2),  173–186.  https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20596

leite,  l.  (2024).  Brand  valuation:  How  convergent  (or  divergent)  are  global  brand  rankings  and  how  correlated  is 
brand  value  to  enterprise  value?  Journal  of  Marketing  Analytics,  12(2),  375–389.  https://doi.org/10.1057/
s41270-022-00201-7

leuthesser,  l.  (1988).  Defining,  measuring  and  managing  Brand  Equity.  Marketing  Science  Institute.
levy-Sidney,  J.  (1959).  Symbols  for  sales.  Harvard  Business  Review,  37(4),  117–124.
li,  C.  (2010).  Groundswell.  Winning  in  a  world  transformed  by  social  technologies.  Strategic  Direction,  26(8).  https://

doi.org/10.1108/sd.2010.05626hae.002

lopes,  P.  R.,  Rosário,  A. T.,  &  Rosário,  F.  S.  (2024).  Sustainable  brand  advertising—The  green  advertising  for  generation 

Z,  a  qualitative  lRSB  analyze.  Platforms,  2(2),  84–100.  https://doi.org/10.3390/platforms2020006

loureiro,  S.,  &  Kaufmann,  H.  (2018).  The  role  of  online  brand  community  engagement  on  positive  or  negative 
self-expression  word-of-mouth.  Cogent  Business  &  Management,  5(1),  1508543.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/ab
s/10.1080/23311975.2018.1508543  https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2018.1508543

Machado,  J.  C.,  Vacas-de-Carvalho,  l.,  Azar,  S.  l.,  André,  A.  R.,  &  dos  Santos,  B.  P.  (2019).  Brand  gender  and 
consumer-based  brand  equity  on  Facebook:  The  mediating  role  of  consumer-brand  engagement  and  brand  love. 
Journal  of  Business  Research,  96,  376–385.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.07.016

Mansoor,  M.,  Justin,  P.,  Abid,  S.,  &  Jun-Hwa,  C.  (2024).  When  mass  meets  prestige:  The  impact  of  symbolic  motiva-
tions, inspirations, and purchase  intentions for Masstige products. Journal of Business Research, 176, 114591. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2024.114591

Martínez,  M.  E.  (2011).  El  Branding,  la  sustentabilidad  y  el  compromiso  social  del  diseño  (Cuando  ser  es  más  im-
portante  que  parecer).  Revista  del  Centro  de  Investigación.  Universidad  la  Salle.  9,  Núm.  35,  enero-junio  (pp. 
11–17).

Maslow,  A.,  H.  (1943).  A  theory  of  human  motivation.  Psychological  Review,  50(4),  370–396.  https://doi.org/10.1037/

h0054346

COGENT BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT

21

Meerman,  D.  (2020).  New  rules  of  marketing  &  PR.7th  ed.  John  Wiley  &  Sons.
Méndiz,  A.  (2010).  Los  valores  en  la  publicidad.  Un  nuevo  enfoque  ético  y  comercial.  Ic.  Media  Net.  Publicaciones.
Mohammadi,  M.  (2021).  Does  companies’  green  values  effect  on  consumer  attitude  and  behavior  toward  purchasing  the 
thesis].  Marketing 

product?  Jyväskylän  Ammattikorkeakoulu/JAMK  University  of  Applied  Sciences 
Management  Degree  Program  in  International  Business.

[Bachelor’s 

Molina, J., & Morán, A. (2013). Viva la publicidad viva. Emoción, síntesis y experiencias interactiva para branding. lemoine 

Editores.

Montalvo-Arroyave,  l.  F.,  Viana-Ruiz,  l.  R.,  &  Arango-lopera,  C.  A.  (2022).  Modelos  de  creación  y  gestión  de  marca. 
Revisión  sistemática  de  literatura  y  descripción  de  sus  fundamentos  metodológicos.  INNOVA  Research  Journal,  7(2), 
163–193.  https://doi.org/10.33890/innova.v7.n2.2022.2068

Nascimento,  J.,  &  loureiro,  S.  M.,  C.  (2024).  Mapping  the  sustainability  branding  field:  Emerging  trends  and  future 
directions.  Journal  of  Product  &  Brand  Management,  33(2),  234–257.  https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-02-2023-4349

Ogilvy,  D.  (2012).  Confessions  of  an  advertising  man.  Atheneum,  Revised  edition.  South  Bank  Publishing.
Otero,  M.  C.,  &  Giraldo,  W.  (2019).  Antecedentes  y  consecuencias  del  valor  de  marca.  Un  estudio  centrado  en  los 
consumidores jóvenes. Suma de Negocios, 10(3), 81–88. juliodiciembre 2019. https://doi.org/10.14349/sumneg/2019.
v10.n23.a1

Pacana,  A.,  &  Siwiec,  D.  (2024).  Predicting  quality  of  modified  product  attributes  to  achieve  customer  satisfaction. 

Designs,  8(2),  36.  https://doi.org/10.3390/designs8020036

Page,  M.  J.,  McKenzie,  J.  E.,  Bossuyt,  P.  M.,  Boutron,  I.,  Hoffmann,  T.  C.,  Mulrow,  C.  D.,  Shamseer,  l.,  Tetzlaff,  J.  M.,  Akl, 
E.  A.,  Brennan,  S.  E.,  Chou,  R.,  Glanville,  J.,  Grimshaw,  J.  M.,  Hróbjartsson,  A.,  lalu,  M.  M.,  li,  T.,  loder,  E.  W., 
Mayo-Wilson,  E.,  McDonald,  S.,  …  Moher,  D.  (2021). The  PRISMA  2020  statement:  An  updated  guideline  for  report-
ing  systematic  reviews.  Bmj,  372(71),  n71.  https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71

Papadopoulou,  C.,  Vardarsuyu,  M.,  &  Oghazi,  P.  (2023).  Examining  the  relationships  between  brand  authenticity,  per-
ceived  value,  and  brand  forgiveness:  The  role  of  cross-cultural  happiness.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  167(2023), 
114154.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.114154

Pektaş,  F.  (2018).  The  effect  of  lifestyle  on  the  demand  for  alternative  tourism.  International  Journal  of  Management 

Economics  and  Business,  14(1),  0–0.  https://doi.org/10.17130/ijmeb.201813781

Phillips,  C.  (2003).  How  do  consumers  express  their  identity  through  the  choice  of  products  that  they  buy?  Working 
Paper Series (2003). https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7d5f/ad63a8f06ec8a5f0d2681d6237b04fa89dba.pdf?_ga=2.2741 
8687.280165893.1576503828-1092974078.1574082348

Rambocas,  M.,  Kirpalani,  V.  M.,  &  Simms,  E.  (2018).  Brand  equity  and  customer  behavioral  intentions:  A  mediated 
moderated  model.  International  Journal  of  Bank  Marketing,  36(1),  19–40.  https://doi.org/10.1108/IJBM-09-2016-0139

Reeves,  R.  (1997).  La  realidad  en  la  publicidad.  Delvicobates.  Biblioteca  CC  de  la  Información  (UPSA).
Ries,  A.,  &  Ries,  l.  (2004).  Las  22  leyes  inmutables  de  las  marcas.  McGraw-Hill.  Interamericana  Editores.  S.A.
Rogers,  M.,  &  Smith,  K.,  H.  (1993).  Public  perceptions  of  subliminal  advertising:  Why  practitioners  shouldn’t  ignore 

this  issue.  Journal  of  Advertising  Research,  33(2),  10–18.

Roldán-Olmedo,  S.  (2010).  Brand  Equity.  El  valor  de  la  marca  en  tiempo  de  crisis  económica.  Argentina.  Universidad  de 

Palermo.  Facultad  de  Comunicación  y  Diseño.

Rossel,  A.  A.  (2016).  Brand  equity:  métodos  de  valuación  y  aplicaciones  en  el  mundo  de  los  negocios  [Tesis  de  Maestría]. 

Universidad  de  Chile.  Facultad  de  Economía  y  Negocios.  Escuela  de  Administración.  Santiago  de  Chile.

Salinas, G. (2016). Brand valuation: principles, applications and latest developments. En: F. D. Riley, J. Singh, & C. Blankson 

(Eds.),  The  Routledge  companion  to  contemporary  brand  management  (pp.  48–67).  Routledge.

Sasikala, D. (2013). Brand Asset Valuator-measuring brand value. International Journal of Social Science & Interdisciplinary 

Research,  2(6),  133–138.

Shrestha,  R.,  Kadel,  R.,  &  Mishra,  B.  K.  (2023).  A  two-phase  confirmatory  factor  analysis  and  structural  equation  mod-
elling  for  customer-based  brand  equity  framework  in  the  smartphone  industry.  Decision  Analytics  Journal,  8(2023), 
100306.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dajour.2023.100306

Siegel,  A.  (2008).  Branding  y  el  Arte  de  la  Comunicación  Louis  J.  Slovinsky.  Jorge  Pinto  Books  Inc.
Simmel,  G.  (2002).  Cuestiones  Fundamentales  de  Sociología.
Sun,  X., Wang,  P.,  lepp,  A.,  &  Robertson,  l.  (2014).  Symbolic  consumption  and  brand  choice:  China’s  youth  hostels  for 
the  international  travel  market.  Journal  of  China  Tourism  Research,  10(1),  51–68.  https://doi.org/10.1080/19388160.2
013.870950

Swait,  J.,  Erdem, T.,  louviere,  J.,  &  Dubelaar,  C.  (1993). The  equalization  price:  A  measure  of  consumer-perceived  brand 
equity.  International  Journal  of  Research  in  Marketing,  10(1),  23–45.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-8116(93)90031-S

The  Harris  Poll.  (2019).  The  Harris  Poll.  Equitrend  Model.  https://theharrispoll.com/equitrend/
Tinto,  J.  (2008).  La  imagen  de  marca  de  las  ciudades.  Provincia.,  núm.  19,  enero-junio  (pp.  91–121).  Universidad  de  los 

Andes  Mérida.

22

M. M. G. GUTIÉRREZ ET Al.

Troiville,  J.  (2024).  Connecting  the  dots  between  brand  equity  and  brand  loyalty  for  retailers:  The  mediating  roles  of 
brand  attitudes  and  word-of-mouth  communication.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  177(2024),  114650.  https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2024.114650

Villarejo,  Á.  (2002).  Modelos  multidimensionales  para  la  medición  del  valor  de  marca.  Investigaciones  Europeas  En: 

Dirección  y  Economía  de  La  Empresa,  8(3),  13–44.  https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/634171.pdf

Vuong,  T.  K.,  &  Bui,  H.,  M.  (2023).  The  role  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  in  employees’  perception  of 
brand  reputation  and  brand  equity.  Case  Studies  in  Chemical  and  Environmental  Engineering,  7(2023),  100313. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscee.2023.100313

Wickramasingha,  W.  M.  A.,  S.  (2024).  Evolution  of  branding:  literature  review.  Journal  of  Sales,  Service  and  Marketing 

Research,  1–13.

Yang,  D.,  Sonmez,  M.,  Gonzalez,  M.,  liu,  Y.,  &  Yoder,  C.  Y.  (2019).  Consumer-based  brand  equity  and  consumer-based 
brand  performance:  evidence  from  smartphone  brands  in  the  USA.  Journal  of  Brand  Management,  26(6),  717–732. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41262-019-00154-w

Zang,  B.,  &  Kim,  J.-H.  (2013).  luxury  fashion  consumption  in  China:  Factors  affecting  attitude  and  purchase  intent. 

Journal  of  Retailing  and  Consumer  Services,  20(1),  68–79.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2012.10