Journal of Marketing Management

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjmm20

Brand scandals within a corporate social
responsibility partnership: asymmetrical effects
on for-profit and non-profit brands

Veronica Gabrielli, Ilaria Baghi & Francesca Bergianti

To cite this article: Veronica Gabrielli, Ilaria Baghi & Francesca Bergianti (2021): Brand scandals
within a corporate social responsibility partnership: asymmetrical effects on for-profit and non-profit
brands, Journal of Marketing Management, DOI: 10.1080/0267257X.2021.1928267

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2021.1928267

Published online: 28 May 2021.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 140

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjmm20

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT            
https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2021.1928267

Brand scandals within a corporate social responsibility 
partnership: asymmetrical effects on for-profit and non-profit 
brands

Veronica Gabriellia, Ilaria Baghia  and Francesca Bergiantib

aDepartment of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, 
Italy;  bLabour, Development and Innovation, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia – Marco Biagi 
Foundation, Modena, Italy

ABSTRACT
This research explores the effects of a brand scandal that affects a for- 
profit brand collaborating with a non-profit organisation. Two experi-
mental studies demonstrated that the effects on the for-profit brand 
were driven by the domain of the partnership and the crisis, while the 
effects on the non-profit brand were not. A crisis in the same domain 
as the partnership had stronger effects on the for-profit brand (inten-
tion to buy and negative word of mouth). These effects are mediated 
by perceptions of brand hypocrisy and a decrease in for-profit brand 
equity.  The  non-profit  brand  is  equally  hurt  by  the  for-profit  brand 
crisis, regardless of the partnership-crisis consistency.

Our  results  indicate  a  strong  asymmetry:  the  non-profit  brand, 
despite  its  innocence,  is  more  vulnerable  than  the  guilty  for-profit 
brand.

ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 9 July 2020  
Accepted 11 April 2021 

KEYWORDS 
Corporate social 
responsibility; brand crisis; 
brand equity; brand 
hypocrisy; mediation model

Introduction

Since  2015,  H&M  customers  worldwide  have  been  invited  to  join  different  charity  pro-
grammes in partnership with UNICEF. Every time a customer purchases a gift card, H&M 
donates  5%  of  the  total  gift  card  amount  to  UNICEF  to  support  specific  childhood 
development  programmes  in  developing  countries.1  However,  H&M  has  recently  been 
widely  accused  of  racism  because  of  an  image  that  appeared  in  its  online  store  that 
portrayed a Black child model wearing a sweatshirt with the text ‘coolest monkey in the 
jungle’. The image was widely criticised for its reference to a monkey, an animal that has 
long featured in anti-Black racial and ethnic slurs, and H&M has been overwhelmed by the 
resulting  serious  reputational  crisis.2  UNICEF  has  never  distanced  itself  from  H&M  in 
response  to  this  incident,  appearing  to  overlook  the  plausible  negative  effects  of  this 
crisis  on  its  own  reputational  assets.  To  date,  there  has  been  no  investigation  on  brand 
scandals parallel to ethical and responsible practices.

Ethical and responsible practices are becoming increasingly common brand strategies 
adopted by companies all over the world (Wymer & Sargeant, 2006). One potential means 
of  rapidly  positioning  a  company  as  ethically  and  socially  responsible  is  to  manage 

CONTACT Veronica Gabrielli 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy
© 2021 Westburn Publishers Ltd.

veronica.gabrielli@unimore.it 

Department of Communication and Economics, 

2

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

partnerships with non-profit organisations in the form of cause-related marketing (CRM) 
programmes (Brønn & Vrioni, 2001; Kotler & Lee, 2005). CRM involves an alliance between 
a  for-profit  brand  and  a  charitable  organisation  in  order  to  realise  a  wide  range  of 
activities, such as offering products whose proceeds are partially donated to humanitarian 
programmes,  devoting  a  percentage  of  company  sales  to  a  social  issue  or  developing 
a communication campaign with a non-profit organisation (Boenigk & Schuchardt, 2013). 
CRM  can  lead  companies  to  appear  virtuous  by  highlighting  their  support  of  socially 
desirable goals (Kotler & Lee, 2005; Vanhamme et al., 2015). Existing research has exam-
ined the main effects of CRM programmes on intentions to purchase a brand’s products 
(Chang, 2008; Folse et al., 2010), actual product choice (Chang & Cheng, 2015), consumer 
willingness  to  pay  (Koschate-Fischer,  Diamantopoulos  et  al.,  2012)  and  brand  attitude 
(Polonsky  &  MacDonald,  2000).  Moreover,  previous  studies  (J.  E.  Kim  &  Johnson,  2013; 
Strahilevitz, 1999) have shown that some factors – such as personal cause affinity (Arora & 
Henderson,  2007),  emotional  involvement  (Baghi  et  al.,  2009),  fit  between  cause  and 
product (Gupta & Pirsch, 2006) and product category (Baghi & Antoetti, 2017) – mediate 
positive  responses  to  CRM,  as  they  influence  the  extent  to  which  consumers  perceive 
a link between the product and the social cause (for a review, see Lafferty et al., 2016).

On  the  other  hand,  many  studies  have  argued  that  consumers  have  become  more 
suspicious  of  the  motives  behind  companies’  support  for  a  cause,  which  can  discredit 
both  the  partnership  and  the  company  (Anuar  &  Mohamad,  2012).  Scepticism  of  CRM 
motives may lead consumers to question whether a company’s support of a social cause is 
designed to benefit the social cause itself out of sincere social concern or, on the contrary, 
to benefit the firm (Y. J. Kim & Lee, 2009; Webb & Mohr, 1998).

Technically, CRM is a co-branding activity (Hoeffler & Keller,  2002): it is developed by 
two  entities  that  remain  reciprocally  independent  but  join  their  efforts  and  image  to 
increase  their  visibility  in  a  specific  domain  (Baghi  &  Gabrielli,  2013,  2018).  Each  entity 
contributes  its  specific  competences  and  experience,  adding  value  to  the  joint  pro-
gramme.  When  two  brands  promote  their  alliance  in  a  CRM  programme,  they  tend  to 
become associated with one another in the minds of consumers, creating a link between 
the  two  brand  nodes.  Keller  (1993)  called  this  occurrence  a  secondary  association  that 
leads consumers to transfer information about one brand in the alliance to the other. The 
spillover effect describes the phenomenon that occurs when consumers transfer informa-
tion  and  opinions  from  one  brand  to  its  partner  (Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998),  in  the  process 
revising their previous attitudes or behaviours towards both brands. It also refers to the 
phenomenon  in  which  an  event  influences  beliefs  about  attributes  and  entities  not 
directly associated with the event itself (Ahluwalia et al., 2001). Most of the literature on 
CRM as a corporate social responsibility (CSR) partnership has focused only on for-profit 
entities,  leaving  the  influence  on  non-profit  brands  partially  unexplored  (Michel  & 
Rieunier, 2012). However, it is plausible that, in a CRM co-branding alliance, both the non- 
profit  and  the  for-profit  brand  may  be  exposed  to  positive  or  negative  spillover  effects 
due  to  their  alliance.  This  transfer  of  association  may  be  caused  by  positive  or  negative 
information  or  signals  about  one  of  the  two  partners  in  the  alliance,  such  as  a  brand’s 
irresponsible behaviour or misconduct (Swaminathan & Reddy, 2004; Votolato & Unnava, 
2006).  In  this  case,  the  benefits  of  CRM  co-branding  may  be  tempered  by  situations  in 
which one of the brands receives negative publicity (Votolato & Unnava, 2006).

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

3

Brand crises are highly negative and unexpected events (Dawar & Lei, 2009) that can 
threaten  a  company’s  existence.  These  scandals  often  undermine  a  brand’s  perceived 
ability  to  deliver  expected  benefits  and  weaken  brand  equity,  affecting  consumer  atti-
tudes and future purchases (Ahluwalia et al., 2000). Brand crises can be of different types. 
For example, crises can be intentional or unintentional depending on perceived controll-
ability  –  that  is,  whether  the  brand  is  perceived  as  deliberately  committing  violations 
(Coombs  &  Holladay,  1996).  Furthermore,  brand  crises  can  be  performance  related  – 
involving  defective  or  harmful  products  and  reducing  a  brand’s  perceived  ability  to 
deliver  functional  benefits  –  or  values  related,  wherein  ethical  issues  surrounding  the 
values  espoused  by  the  brand  are  questioned  (Dutta  &  Pullig,  2011).  Consistent  with 
signalling theory (Spence, 1974), crises can embody signals of the brand’s ‘bad’ character. 
As  signals,  crises  can  call  the  credibility  of  the  brand  into  question  and  ultimately 
influence consumers’ attitudes and behaviour towards the brand (Connelly et al., 2011), 
depending on their personal involvement with the crisis issue (Trump, 2014). As brands in 
an  alliance  share  meaning  and  associations,  crises  might  affect  the  culpable  brand 
individually but also the partner brand. Drawing on spillover theory, we posit that crises 
function as negative associations that could motivate consumers to question not only the 
credibility of the culpable brand but also that of the partner in the alliance due to negative 
signals provoked by the scandal.

A key question is whether a brand crisis can influence consumer perceptions of the 
allied brand(s). In this area, the extant evidence is related to companies (manufacturers 
or  service  providers)  or  product  brands,  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  co-branding 
partners  (i.e.  effects  on  competitors  and  the  entire  industry;  Trump  &  Newman, 2017). 
Few studies have investigated the effects of a brand crisis within an alliance involving 
a  different  entity  akin  to  a  brand  (see  Table  1  for  a  summary  of  relevant  studies  on 
crises in alliance contexts). There is no research examining the impact of a crisis within 
a CRM co-branding alliance, despite several noteworthy real-world examples, of which 
the  above-mentioned  scandal  of  H&M  during  its  alliance  with  UNICEF  is  only  one.  In 
2014,  the  popular  ridesharing  service  Uber  announced  its  ‘Ride  for  a  Cause’  charity 
initiative, in which it would donate 1 USD to one of five charities for every ride taken in 
a  given  day.3  However,  after  4  weeks,  the  company  was  hit  by  a  scandal  describing 
a plan to dig up dirt on immoral practices, from sexual violence to privacy violations.4 
Walmart,  despite  its  philanthropic  approach  with  regard  to  the  Walmart  Foundation,5 
has been accused by the International Forum on Workers’ Rights of using slave labour 
in  Bangladesh  and  China.6  Burberry  collaborates  with  several  non-profit  organisations 
(such as Wide Rainbow to promote education and performing arts in low-income areas 
of  the  US  and  the  International  Youth  Foundation  to  promote  entrepreneurship  and 
leadership among youth),7  but has also been accused by the New York Times of using 
child  labour  in  its  factories.  These  examples  demonstrate  the  importance  of  the  need 
to  investigate  the  effects  of  a  scandal  involving  a  company  engaged  in  a  CRM  co- 
branding  activity  with  a  non-profit  organisation.

The  present  study  aims  to  fill  this  gap  and  to  investigate  the  effects  of  negative 
information about misconduct on the part of the for-profit partner in a CRM alliance on 
consumers’  responses  towards  both  partners.  We  also  consider  the  consistency  of  the 
misbehaviour with the scope of the CRM alliance – in other words, whether it took place in 

4

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Table 1. Key empirical studies on crises in alliance contexts.

Study
Votolato and 

Research context
Brand–spokesperson 

Unnava (2006)

alliances

Carrillat et al. 
(2013)

Carrillat et al. 
(2014)

Celebrity endorsement 

scandal

Celebrity endorsement 

scandal

Thomas and 

Fowler (2016)

Impact of defective 
product crisis on 
celebrity evaluation

Singh et al. (2020)

Impact of crisis types 

and response 
strategies on 
corporate image of 
both brands 
involved in an 
alliance

Dependent 
variable(s)

● Attitudes 

towards the host 
and partner 
brand

● Brand attitude
● Purchase 
intentions
● Attitudes 

towards brand 
and direct 
competitor
● Attitudes 
towards 
celebrity

● Corporate image
● Brand 
alliance 

attitude
● Purchase 
intentions

Key findings
● Moral crises more detrimental in a spokesper-

son alliance

● Negative spillover to host brand

● Post-crisis  brand  evaluations  more  positive 

when a celebrity admits responsibility

● Scandals  related  to  the  endorser  lower  atti-
tudes towards the endorsed brand and com-
petitor brands, especially those involving 
personal crises

● Excuses  and  repentance  mitigate  negative 

celebrity evaluations

● Ingratiation does not mitigate negative celeb-

rity evaluations

● Preventable crises detrimental to the image of 

the culpable ally

● Denial  response  effective  for  restoring  corpo-
rate image compared with diminishing or 
acknowledging/rebuilding responses

● Non-culpable  partner  suffers  from  crises  only 
indirectly due to negative post-crisis attitudes 
towards the alliance

the  same  domain  (e.g.,  pollution  in  an  environmental  protection  CRM  programme)  or 
another domain (e.g., tax avoidance in an environmental protection CRM programme).

The  growing  adoption  of  CSR  practices  mirrors  the  strong  consumer  interest  in 
companies’  ethical  and  moral  conduct  (Brunk,  2012;  Brunk  &  De  Boer,  2020;  Carrigan 
&  Attalla,  2001).  Among  other  benefits  associated  with  CSR  (Kang  et  al.,  2016;  Sen  & 
Bhattacharya,  2001),  for-profit  companies  known  for  being  socially  responsible  can 
better  withstand  negative  publicity  following  reputational  crises  (Gistri  et  al.,  2019; 
Klein & Dawar, 2004).  Intriguingly, there is also evidence that a company being socially 
responsible  improves  how  individuals  react  to  subsequent  information  about  that 
company’s  irresponsible  behaviour  (Eisingerich  et  al.,  2011;  Vanhamme  et  al.,  2015). 
This  perspective  argues  that  CSR  offers  a  buffer  effect  in  that  it  builds  goodwill  with 
relevant stakeholders that buffers the damaging impact of negative publicity following 
crises (Fombrun & Gardberg, 2000; Godfrey, 2005; Peloza, 2006). This evidence, however, 
contrasts  with  research  on  the  damaging  impact  of  perceived  corporate  hypocrisy 
(Pashupati  et  al.,  2002;  Wagner  et  al.,  2009).  Companies  known  for  their  CSR  activities, 
including CRM, might fall under closer scrutiny because their higher voluntary commit-
ments  increase  the  chances  of  engaging  in  inconsistent  behaviour  (Alicke  et  al.,  2012). 
When inconsistent information is available and the misconduct is in the same domain as 
the  CSR  promises,  companies  suffer  from  perceptions  of  hypocrisy,  which  can  damage 
reputation  (Laurent  et  al.,  2014;  Lenz  et  al.,  2017;  Wagner  et  al.,  2009).  Following  this 
stream of  literature, we argue that the  effect of negative information about a  for-profit 
brand’s  misconduct  on  consumers’  responses  is  more  damaging  when  the  brand  is 
accused of a misdeed in the same domain as the CRM programme due to perceptions of 
hypocrisy.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

5

From  the  non-profit  perspective,  we  argue  that  negative  spillover  may  occur  but 
should  not  be  influenced  by  the  consistency  between  the  misdeed  and  the  aim  of  the 
alliance.  We  assume  that  the  negative  impact  on  a  non-profit  brand  due  to  a  partner’s 
misconduct  is  related  to  the  warmth  stereotype  of  non-profit  organisations  (J.  L.  Aaker 
et al., 2012), regardless of the specific social domain of the misconduct. Moreover, when 
negative information about an ethical misdeed of the for-profit brand partner is available, 
the  non-profit  brand  partner  suffers  reputational  damages;  however,  since  it  is  not 
deemed  culpable  or  complicit  in  the  unethical  behaviour,  the  domain  of  the  misdeed 
does not aggravate the negative spillover (Votolato & Unnava, 2006). Consistent with this 
stream  of  literature,  we  assume  that  consumers’  evaluations  of  and  behaviour  towards 
a non-profit brand engaged in a CRM programme with a misbehaving for-profit brand are 
not affected by the specific domain of the for-profit brand’s crisis.

Therefore,  we  assume  an  asymmetric  effect:  the  for-profit  brand  is  more  strongly 
affected by its misbehaviour when it is strictly related to the CRM domain, while the non- 
profit brand is equally exposed to negative spillover from the for-profit brand’s misbeha-
viour, regardless of the specific domain of the moral misconduct.

The  contribution  of  the  present  study  is  to  analyse  this  situation  considering  four 
important aims: 1) filling the literature gap on the effects of a brand crisis on a CRM co- 
branding alliance; 2) investigating the effects of this crisis on the for-profit and non-profit 
brands  in  parallel;  3)  highlighting  the  process  that  leads  to  consumers’  behavioural 
reactions  to  a  brand  that  has  misbehaved  and  was  previously  involved  in  a  co-branded 
CRM programme; and 4) introducing the role of the consistency between the domain of 
the CRM partnership and the misdeed, especially regarding consumers’ responses to the 
for-profit brand.

To extend the generalisability of our analysis, we tested our hypotheses using fictitious 
brands (Study 1) and real brands (Study 2). In Study 1, we demonstrated that consistency 
in the domain of the partnership and the crisis is crucial in determining the perceptions of 
the for-profit brand’s hypocrisy, which have a significant negative impact on brand equity 
evaluation and intention to buy the brand’s products. Study 1 also provides evidence that 
different domains of for profit misconduct within a moral crisis framework do not result in 
significantly different evaluations of  or behaviours towards the non-profit.  Study 2 tests 
our hypotheses using real brands. The findings confirm the results of Study 1 and extend 
the  investigation  of  the  damaging  effects  on  the  for-profit  brand  of  a  wider  range  of 
negative outcomes, including the intention to spread negative word of mouth regarding 
the hypocritical for-profit brand. Moreover, Study 2 demonstrates that negative outcomes 
on the non-profit brand in terms of brand equity and intention to donate are the result of 
a negative spillover effect from the for-profit partner’s behaviour, regardless of the values- 
related crisis domain. Study 1 and Study 2 corroborate the assumption of an asymmetric 
effect  of  the  relationship-crisis  domain  on  the  for-profit  versus  the  non-profit  brand. 
Finally, we discuss our research findings and their theoretical and managerial implications.

Literature review and research hypotheses

Hoeffler and Keller (2002) confirm that a co-branding strategy is the most advisable way to 
implement positive CRM activities for both brand partners (Michel & Rieunier, 2012). For 
example, a for-profit brand could be coupled with a non-profit brand to create a special 

6

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

edition of a product or devote a percentage of its revenues to a non-profit brand in order 
to realise specific programmes (e.g., Mont Blanc and UNICEF8). From a branding perspec-
tive,  a  CRM  alliance  includes  all  the  elements  that  connote  a  co-branding  activity  (D.  A. 
Aaker,  1996;  Helmig  et  al.,  2008).  First,  the  two  participants  are  independent  before, 
during and after the product is offered (Ohlwein & Schiele, 1994). In fact, in a CRM activity, 
the  product  or  programme  results  from  a  collaboration  between  two  partners  that 
operate  in  a  distinct  context  (one  is  specialised  in  the  product  realisation,  whereas  the 
other  is  focused  on  social  goals).  Second,  they  have  different  structural  characteristics 
(one  is  a  for-profit  company;  the  other  is  a  non-profit  organisation),  and  third,  they  are 
formally independent, as they are not together in a holding or group with a certain degree 
of affinity (Barone et al., 2007). It is important to stress that in a CRM activity, consumers 
are  aware  that  the  programme  or  product  resulting  from  the  partnership  links  the  for- 
profit and non-profit brand (Hillyer & Tikoo, 1995; Levin et al., 1996; Rao, 1997).

In fact,  CRM  activity might be  shaped  in different  ways in  co-branding contexts. The  co- 
branding literature (D. A. Aaker, 2004, 2006) defines four forms of co-branding. The first occurs 
when two master brands are strongly involved in co-designing a product labelled by the two 
brands together – a very specific example, as the product might be authentically new to the 
market. The second and third kinds of co-branding occur when one partner hosts the other in 
one of its products or activities: the partner might contribute as an ingredient brand (second 
type) – for example, a for-profit brand contributing its competences to a social project – or 
a  differentiator  (third  type),  such  as  a  non-profit  brand  that  contributes  its  social  halo  to 
a  commercial  product  (e.g.,  the  special  ‘Product  Red’  edition  to  fund  the  fight  to  end  AIDS 
within  various  well-known  companies’  portfolios9).  The  fourth  co-branding  type  is  tactical 
alliances:  short-term  collaborations  between  two  partners  to  implement  a  temporary  but 
impressive  initiative  (e.g.,  ad  campaign,  funding  campaign).  This  is  one  of  the  most  diffuse 
forms of CRM, wherein a company uses its privileged market positioning and reputation to 
stress the importance of a social cause – for example, donating part of its revenue to the cause. 
Whatever the form of co-branding, a partnership between a for-profit and a non-profit brand 
implies both advantages and  risks linked to the co-branding itself. Indeed, Bower and  Grau 
(2009) demonstrated that a company’s explicit presentation of its donations to a non-profit 
resulted in a perception of non-profit endorsement and an inferred explicit seal of approval by 
the non-profit, implying co-branding opportunities and threats.

The  most  important  advantage  of  a  co-branding  CRM  partnership  is  the  opportunity  to 
facilitate the reciprocal transfer of positive associations between the two partners (Hoeffler & 
Keller, 2002). The major risk is the spillover of negative associations from one partner to the 
other. This risk is particularly high in the CRM context, as many companies engage in ethical 
misconduct despite their promises made within the alliance. We refer in particular to scandals 
defined as values-related (Dutta & Pullig, 2011) or moral crises (Votolato & Unnava, 2006), in 
contrast  to  those  related  to  products  (Dutta  &  Pullig,  2011)  or  competence  (Votolato  & 
Unnava, 2006). What happens to a non-profit organisation collaborating with a brand in the 
event of a values-related partner scandal? The literature on brand crises in the alliance domain 
has not yet considered the case of a partnership between a for-profit and non-profit brand, 
and the CRM literature has focused only on the positive effects of such partnerships, mostly 
considering  the  for-profit  perspective.  This  research  proposes  a  different  perspective,  con-
sidering the frequent case of a values-related scandal involving a for-profit company after the 
announcement of its collaboration with a non-profit organisation.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

7

Effects on the non-profit brand: hypotheses

First, we turn our attention to the non-profit partner. As discussed above, a link with a for- 
profit  company  is  considerable  as  a  co-branding  activity.  There  is  a  risk  of  negative 
spillover in the sense of an event or entity that can influence beliefs about other entities 
associated  with  it  (Ahluwalia  et  al.,  2001).  The  marketing  literature  has  produced  con-
trasting results about the spillover effect, and marketplace data show that it is not a stable 
phenomenon  (Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998;  Till  &  Shimp,  1998;  Votolato  &  Unnava,  2006; 
Washburn et al., 2000). Keller and Aaker (1992) state that a failed brand extension might 
harm the parent brand, but Swaminathan and Reddy (2004) produced contrasting results 
in  co-branding  within  brands  with  different  levels  of  quality  in  their  product  portfolios. 
The marketing literature generally focuses on partnerships between entities embedded in 
the  same  context  (i.e.  companies  collaborating  in  the  production  of  an  innovative  pro-
duct).  Votolato  and  Unnava  (2006)  conducted  an  interesting  experiment  in  which  they 
considered  two  entities  of  a  different  nature:  a  for-profit  brand  and  an  endorser.  Their 
focus  was  on  the  type  of  misdeed  and  the  kind  of  relationship.  Votolato  and  Unnava 
(2006)  demonstrated  that  a  host  brand  not  directly  involved  in  or  culpable  for  a  moral 
scandal is still affected by negative information about the partner, even if the partner is of 
a different nature. Their study opened the door to a stream of research investigating the 
spillover effect between partners from different fields, which highlighted the relevance of 
two  elements:  consistency  and  culpability.  Votolato  and  Unnava  (2006)  grounded  their 
hypothesis  in  the  consistency  between  the  crisis  domain  and  the  partner’s  nature  and 
demonstrated  that  consistency  matters  only  in  the  event  of  the  culpability  of  the  host 
brand.  In  fact,  in  their  study,  within  an  alliance  between  a  company  and  a  person 
(endorser),  a  values-related  crisis  had  worse  effects  than  a  competence  crisis  on  the 
host brand only if the host brand was culpable (i.e. aware of its partner’s misbehaviour).
Shifting  this  consideration  to  the  context  of  CRM  alliances,  in  the  event  of  moral 
misbehaviour  on  the  part  of  a  for-profit  brand  already  partnered  with  a  non-profit 
organisation where the latter is not aware of the former’s misconduct, we do not expect 
a significant effect of the specific crisis domain, as in Votolato and Unnava (2006) experi-
ments. The present study deepens the investigation by analysing degrees of consistency 
in a moral scandal: an ethical scandal in the same domain as the non-profit organisation 
and an ethical scandal in a different domain. In light of Votolato and Unnava (2006) study, 
we expect that the specific domain of the moral scandal will not be relevant in terms of 
the  effects  on  a  host  brand  (the  non-profit)  unaware  of  its  partner’s  misbehaviour.  The 
present research shifts previous research to the CRM context and extends the investiga-
tion  to  include  more  appropriate  cognitive  and  behavioural  co-branding  dependent 
variables.  While  Votolato  and  Unnava  (2006)  investigation  was  limited  to  effects  on 
brand attitude, the present study considers a potential negative effect at different levels 
beyond  effects  on  attitude.  In  line  with  the  co-branding  and  spillover  literature 
(Choudhury & Kakati, 2014; Washburn et al., 2000), we assume that company misconduct 
impacts consumers’ general evaluations of the partner and intentions to behave favour-
ably  or  unfavourably  towards  it.  In  particular,  we  assume  a  negative  effect  on  the  non- 
profit’s  customer-based  brand  equity  and  intention  to  donate.  We  consider  customer- 
based  brand  equity  the  more  appropriate  dependent  variable,  as  it  can  summarise  and 
comprehend  different  dimensions  of  consumer  evaluation  (Choudhury  &  Kakati,  2014; 

8

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Keller  &  Sood,  2003;  Washburn  et  al.,  2000),  and  intention  to  donate  as  the  ultimate 
behavioural outcome for a non-profit organisation.
Thus, our hypotheses are as follows: 

H1a:  The  domain  of  the  crisis  involving  the  for-profit  brand  (consistent  vs  inconsistent 
with respect to partnership domain) does not exert any significantly different effect on the 
non-profit partner’s brand equity.

H1b:  The  domain  of  the  crisis  involving  the  for-profit  brand  (consistent  vs  inconsistent 
with  respect  to  partnership  domain)  does  not  exert  any  significantly  different  effect  on 
consumers’ intentions to donate to the non-profit partner.

Effects on the for-profit brand: hypotheses

The  literature  has  extensively  investigated  the  effects  of  negative  information  about 
a  brand’s  conduct  on  consumers’  reactions  (Ahluwalia  et  al.,  2000;  Trump,  2014),  and 
scholars  have  highlighted  the  negative  repercussions  on  brand  equity  (Ahluwalia  et  al., 
2000; Dawar & Lei, 2009; Dawar & Pillutla, 2000; Roehm & Tybout, 2006). As scandals are 
unexpected  events  that  undermine  a  brand  or  product’s  perceived  ability  to  provide 
expected  benefits,  they  may  damage  the  brand’s  overall  value.  Many  researchers  have 
demonstrated  that  damages  resulting  from  a  sudden,  unexpected  negative  event  may 
rapidly  erode  a  firm’s  accumulated  intangible  assets,  such  as  brand  equity  (Ahluwalia 
et al., 2000; Dawar & Lei, 2009; Dawar & Pillutla, 2000; Pullig et al., 2006; Roehm & Tybout, 
2006). Corporate crises often result in negative prominence, threatening brand equity and 
affecting future purchases (Griffin et al., 1991). The negative impact of a corporate crisis on 
brand equity is a problem for a company, as brand equity represents overall brand value 
(D.  A.  Aaker,  1992).  In  particular,  customer-based  brand  equity  is  defined  as  the  added 
value attributed to a product or marketing activity due to the presence of a specific brand 
name (Keller, 1993, 2002, 2003). Brand equity as a construct can summarise the value that 
consumers attribute to a brand, and any element that can negatively alter it (e.g., a brand 
crisis)  may  be  responsible  for  permanent  damage  to  the  brand.  Although  the  negative 
impact  of  values-related  crises  on  brand  equity  has  been  somewhat  explored  in  the 
literature,  the  specific  case  of  a  CRM  partnership  before  the  crisis  implies  some  other 
considerations. In particular, some studies on brand crises have stressed that consumers’ 
responses  can  vary  depending  on  the  crisis  context  and  typology  due  to  the  specific 
corporate  associations  disconfirmed  by  the  scandal  (Brown  &  Dacin,  1997).  In  a  recent 
work,  Jeon  and  Baeck  (2016)  investigated  how  consumers  react  to  brand  scandals, 
demonstrating  that  the  more  people  are  exposed  to  brand  associations  related  to  an 
issue, the more likely they are to negatively react to a crisis involving this domain. In the 
present study, we deepen the investigation of the specific domain of values-related crises 
and  demonstrate  whether  consumers  differentiate  their  reactions  within  the  domain  of 
the crisis on the basis of previous specific CRM brand association exposure. In particular, 
when  a  for-profit  brand  collaborates  with  a  non-profit  organisation  on  a  specific  pro-
gramme to achieve a socially relevant goal, this topic becomes very prominent in its brand 
composition,  joining  the  mental  associations  expected  to  be  fixed  in  consumers’  minds 
when thinking about the brand (D. Aaker, 1991; Gill & Dawra, 2010). Making this mental 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

9

association more prominent implies that this kind of information will be more likely to be 
noticed by consumers (Johnston & Hewstone, 1992; Queller & Smith, 2002). New informa-
tion, such as a brand crisis, is first compared to previous beliefs about the brand entity. If it 
is  congruent,  it  is  categorised  within  the  same  informational  node,  thereby  altering 
previous  beliefs;  this  means  that,  if  the  new  information  is  pertinent  but  contradicts 
previous  beliefs,  people  tend  to  take  it  into  consideration,  negatively  revising  their 
previous  beliefs.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  new  information  is  not  pertinent,  it  constitutes 
a new mental category and thus a different informational node. This theoretical model has 
been widely adopted by marketing researchers to branding topics (Boush & Loken, 1991; 
Loken & John, 1993; Weber & Crocker, 1983).

Applying this theory to the specific topic of a crisis after a CRM partnership, it becomes 
particularly  relevant  whether  the  scandal  is  related  to  previous  beliefs  about  the  brand 
(i.e.  the  scandal  is  in  the  same  domain  as  the  partnership)  or  is  in  another  domain.  We 
expect that, when the partnership domain and crisis domain are consistent, the scandal 
information  will  disconfirm  previous  brand  associations  established  through  the  CRM 
partnership and consumers will revise their opinions of the faulty brand. For this reason, 
we  hypothesise that  a crisis  involving  the topic  at  the  heart of  the  partnership  with the 
non-profit  organisation  will  have  more  negative  effects  on  the  for-profit  brand  than 
a  crisis  involving  a  topic  not  directly  related  to  any  co-branding  programme  by  the 
same  company.  In  the  former  scenario,  the  information  about  the  scandal  contradicts 
consumers’ previous beliefs and shows that the company is hypocritical. This assumption 
is  consistent  with  research  on  the  damaging  impact  of  perceived  corporate  hypocrisy 
(Pashupati  et  al.,  2002;  Wagner  et  al.,  2009).  Companies  known  for  their  CSR  activities 
might be more closely scrutinised because their higher voluntary commitments increase 
the  chances  of  inconsistent  behaviour  (Alicke  et  al.,  2012).  When  information  about 
misbehaviour  in  the  same  domain  as  the  CSR  promises  is  available,  companies  suffer 
from perceptions of hypocrisy, which can damage the organisation (Laurent et al., 2014; 
Lenz et al., 2017; Wagner et al., 2009) and affect consumer intentions to retaliate against 
the  company.  This  hypocrisy  effect  perspective  suggests  that  a  brand  involved  in  a  CRM 
alliance  and  confronted  with  a  scandal  in  the  same  domain  as  the  partnership  faces 
a  double  condemnation  for  both  the  irresponsible  behaviour  and  the  perceptions  of 
hypocrisy  (Laurent  et  al.,  2014).  Following  this  stream  of  research,  we  assume  that 
perceived  company  hypocrisy  aggravates  the  negative  impact  of  a  scandal  in  the  same 
domain as the CRM engagement on consumers’ perceived for-profit brand equity. 

H2a: Crisis domain (same vs different with respect to partnership domain) influences for- 
profit  perceived  hypocrisy.  In  particular,  when  the  crisis  and  partnership  domains  are 
consistent, there is a greater positive impact on perceived brand hypocrisy, in comparison 
with the absence of consistency.

H2b: The more hypocritical the for-profit brand is considered to be, the lower its perceived 
brand equity.

In other words, brand equity is expected to be hurt by the crisis through the perception 
of  hypocrisy.  The  attribution  of  hypocrisy  to  the  for-profit  brand  is  consistent  with 
Weiner’s (1980) attribution–affect–intention model, which relates ethical and moral issues 

10

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Figure 1. Conceptual model of effects on for-profit brand investigated in Study 1 and Study 2.

to behavioural outcomes. This model explains that, when a negative event occurs due to 
a specific cause, observers evaluate the information according to their moral beliefs and 
attributes and develop a desire to punish the subject. That is, negative information may 
impact individual values and stimulate intentions (Alicke, 2000). The literature on brand 
scandals demonstrates that the final dependent variable of a scandal is the intention to 
behave  in  a certain  way  towards the  brand  (Ahluwalia  et  al., 2000;  Frijda,  2000).  Several 
researchers  have  recognised  the  relationship  between  attribution  and  behavioural  out-
come  –  in  particular,  the  ultimate  consumer  behavioural  outcome,  namely  intention  to 
buy the products offered by the for-profit brand (Folkes, 1984; Jorgensen, 1994; Romani 
et al., 2013). This intention is strictly linked to the overall value assigned to the brand (i.e. 
brand equity; Cobb-Walgren et al., 1995; Jalilvand & Samiei, 2012; Senthilnathan, 2012).

To  conclude,  we  hypothesise  that  the  damage  to  for-profit  brand  equity  caused  by 
a crisis (through perceived hypocrisy) has a significant effect on consumers’ intentions to 
buy the for-profit brand’s products. 

H2c:  A  for-profit  brand  crisis  reduces  intention  to  buy  the  for-profit  brand’s  products 
through the mediation of perceived hypocrisy and brand equity.

Figure 1 summarises the conceptual model investigated in the present study.

Study 1: research method and measures

A  sample  of  160  Italian  consumers  (61.3%  male;  mean  age  32  years)  took  part  in  an 
online  experiment.  Participants  were  recruited  on  Prolific  Academic.  Respondents  were 
on  average  interested  in  the  ethical  issues  related  to  the  study  (single  sample  t-test 
respected to middle point of scale = 4; p > .05) and did not differ significantly in terms of 
personal involvement on these ethical issues across the manipulation sets (independent 
t-test  p  >  .05).  We  conducted  an  experimental  analysis  with  the  aim  of  improving 
internal  validity  by  allowing  for  tight  control  of  the  study  setting  (Schendler  &  Hofer, 
1979).  The  control  inherent  in  experimental  studies  increases  the  ability  to  test  causal 
hypotheses  (J.  H.  Kim  &  Jang,  2014).  However,  the  experimental  design  suffers  for  low 
realism  in  inducing  potential  scepticism.  To  overcome  this  issue,  researchers  can  use 
realistic  representations  (e.g.,  newspaper  articles,  advertisements,  consumer  reviews). 
Hypothetical  scenarios  are  largely  used  in  marketing  research  on  failures  to  depict 
realistic  scandals  (Baghi  &  Gabrielli,  2021;  Dutta  &  Pullig,  2011;  Wang,  2016;  Yuan 

Partnership-crisisconsistency (samedomain vs differentdomain)H2aH2bH2c; H2dPerceived BrandEquityIntention to buy (Study 1and Study 2)Negative word of mouth(Study 2)PerceivedhypocrisyJOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

11

et  al.,  2016).  The present  study  used  a  magazine  ad  to  present  the  CRM activity  (in  line 
with Bower & Grau, 2009) and a newspaper article to announce the crisis. Moreover, we 
checked  for  co-branding  perceptions,  scandal  credibility  and  scandal  severity  within 
respondents. We conducted a between-subjects experiment with one factor (high crisis– 
partnership  consistency  vs  low  crisis–partnership  consistency).  At  the  beginning  of  the 
questionnaire, we presented the description of a CRM collaboration between a fictitious 
company  engaged  in  apparel  production,  Toscati  Moda,  and  a  fictitious  non-profit 
organisation  engaged  in  protecting  animals,  Unione  Diritti  Animali  (UDA).  Participants 
were told that Toscati Moda had engaged in a funding campaign wherein, for one year, 
it  would  donate  a  percentage  of  its  revenues  to  UDA  for  an  animal  protection  pro-
gramme. The initiative was presented in the form of a fictitious ad published in a fashion 
magazine.  This  description  of  a  CRM  programme  is  comparable  to  the  fourth  co- 
branding typology: a tactical alliance. It is generally interpreted as a co-branding activity, 
despite  its  transaction-based nature,  because  two brands  are presented  simultaneously 
to  consumers  (Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998)  and  their  alliance  is  based  on  a  CSR  foundation. 
Generally,  consumers  are  very  sensitive  to  the  percentage  of  donations,  but  not  to 
whether  that  percentage  is  of  price  or  profits  (Olsen  et  al.,  2003);  moreover,  they  may 
not  fully  understand  campaign  deadlines  (Grau  et  al.,  2007).  We  selected  this  kind  of 
CRM because it is one of the most recurring within CRM activities and is associated with 
the  lowest  degree  of  commitment  between  the  two  partners.  We  thus  supposed  that 
this  would  be  the  most  adverse  scenario  for  revealing  a  negative  effect  and  therefore 
the  most  suitable  for  testing  our  hypothesis.

Both brands were fictitious, but their names directly referred to their core activity: Toscati 
Moda  (Toscati  Fashion)  referenced  fashion,  while  UDA  (Unione  per  i  Diritti  degli  Animali- 
Union  for  Animal  Rights)  referenced  animal  rights.  After  providing  this  information,  we 
asked  respondents  to  answer  some  questions  about  the  alliance  through  four  semantic 
differentials  (Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998)  to  check  whether  they  evaluated  the  partnership  as 
plausible,  meaningful  and  substantial.  Respondents  confirmed  that  they  had  assimilated 
the  information  about  the  partnership  and  considered  it  equally  and  highly  meaningful 
(Mno-fit  set  = 4.90 vs Mfit  set  = 5.15; t-test p > .05). They were then presented with a fictitious 
newspaper article about a case of brand misconduct by the for-profit organisation Toscati 
Moda subsequent to the collaboration. We manipulated the partnership–crisis consistency. 
In the high-consistency condition, the for-profit brand was accused of using pelt inserts in 
its  apparel  products,  while  in  the  low-consistency  condition,  the  for-profit  company  was 
accused of breaking hygiene rules in its buildings.  We performed manipulation checks on 
partnership–crisis  consistency  (5  items  scored  on  a  7-point  Likert  scale;  Lee  et  al.,  2012). 
Scores were in line with scenario manipulations (Mpartn.-crisis  fit  within  no-consistency  set  = 3.32 vs 
Mpartn.-crisis  fit  within  consistency  set  =  3.86;  t-test  p  <  .05).  We  also  checked  crisis  severity 
(Antonetti & Maklan, 2016) and credibility (Newell & Goldsmith, 2001). Despite the different 
degrees  of  consistency  with  the  partnership,  the  two  crises  were  perceived  as  equally 
credible (Mcredib.  within  no-consistency  set = 3.92 vs Mcredib.  within  consistency  set = 4.20; t-test p > .05) 
and equally severe (Msev.  within  no-consistency  set  = 4.89 vs Msev.  within  consistency  set  = 5.24; t-test 
p  > .05). These checks legitimate the adequacy of the two experimental scenarios.

After  reading  the  newspaper  article,  participants  were  asked  to  rate  the  hypothesised 
moderators:  perceived  for-profit  brand  hypocrisy  (5  items  scored  on  a  7-point  Likert  scale; 
Wagner et al., 2009), for-profit brand equity and non-profit brand equity (17 items scored on 

12

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

a  7-point  Likert  scale;  Baghi  &  Gabrielli,  2019).  Next,  the  hypothesised  dependent  variable 
was rated: respondents were asked to indicate their intentions to buy the brand’s products 
in the future (2 items scored on a 7-point Likert scale; Grewal et al., 1998) and to donate to 
the non-profit organisation (2 items scored on a 7-point Likert scale; Savary et al., 2015). At 
the end of the questionnaire, we asked for some sociodemographic sample characteristics.

Study 1: analysis and results

Measures

We  checked  the  reliability  of  the  questionnaire’s  scales:  for-profit  brand  hypocrisy 
(AVE = .73; CR = .82; α = .89), for-profit brand equity (AVE = .88; CR = .94; α = .89), non- 
profit brand equity (AVE = .78; CR = .84; α = .95), for-profit intention to buy (α = .86) and 
non-profit  intention  to  donate  (α  =  .92).  Discriminant  validity  was  supported,  as  the 
Fornell–Larcker  criterion  was  met  for  all  constructs  and  loadings  were  always  higher 
than cross-loadings (Hair et al., 2011).

Study 1: effects on non-profit brand

Analysis showed that the independent variable of partnership–crisis fit did not induce any 
differential  effect on the  non-profit brand. We performed  two  distinct analyses to  investi-
gate  the  eventual  negative  effects  on  two  dependent  variables  related  to  the  non-profit 
brand: its brand equity and consumers’ intentions to donate to the non-profit organisation.
In  particular,  the  t-test  did  not  show  any  significant  effect  of  partnership–crisis  fit 
on  non-profit  brand  equity.  Participants  did  not  attribute  any  significantly  lower 
score  to  the  non-profit’s  brand  equity  in  the  presence  of  the  same  partnership–crisis 
domain  (Mnon-profit  brand  equity  =  3.90)  than  in  a  different  partnership–crisis  domain 
(Mnon-profit  brand  equity  =  3.86;  t-test  p  >  .05).

Moreover, our analysis did not show any significant effect of partnership–crisis domain 
on  consumers’  intentions  to  donate  to  the  non-profit.  Participants  were  not  differently 
prone  to  donate  to  a  non-profit  organisation  linked  to  a  faulty  for-profit  brand  in  the 
presence  of  a  scandal  consistent  with  the  non-profit’s  aim  (Mwtd  =  2.87)  than  in  the 
absence  of  any  consistency  between  the  scandal  and  the  aim  of  the  non-profit  (Mwtd 
=  2.74; t-test  p  > .05).  The  absence  of any differential effect  of partnership–crisis  consis-
tency on either non-profit brand equity or intention to donate fully supports H1a and H1b.

Study 1: effects on for-profit brand

Brand  hypocrisy
Our  analysis  showed  a  main  and  positive  effect  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  on  per-
ceived for-profit brand hypocrisy. Participants showed a higher perception of hypocrisy of 
the for-profit brand in the presence of partnership–crisis consistency (Mhypocrisy = 5.11) than 
in its absence (Mhypocrisy  = 4.68; t-test p  < .05).

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

13

Brand  equity
Our analysis did not show any main negative effect of partnership–crisis fit on for-profit 
brand  equity  (see  Table  2).  Participants  did  not  show  a  different  level  of  perceived  for- 
profit  brand  equity  in  the  presence  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  (MBE  =  2.94)  com-
pared  with  an  absence  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  (MBE  =  3.02;  t-test  p  >  .05). 
Therefore, the impact of partnership–crisis consistency on brand equity is not direct but 
is rather mediated by perceived brand hypocrisy (see further results).

Intention to buy
Our analysis showed a main negative effect of partnership–crisis consistency on intention 
to buy the for-profit brand’s products. Participants showed lower intentions to buy in the 
presence of partnership–crisis consistency (Mwtb  = 1.67) than in its absence (Mwtb  = 2.03; 
t-test p < .05).

To test H2a, H2b and H2c, we conducted a mediation analysis using PROCESS model 6 
(Hayes,  2012;  Muller  et  al.,  2005)  with  10,000  bootstrap  estimation  resamples  and  95% 
confidence  intervals  to  verify  the  expectation  that  partnership–crisis  consistency  would 
negatively impact intention to buy the for-profit brand’s products through two mediators: 
perceived  brand  hypocrisy  (positively  linked)  and  for-profit  brand  equity  (negatively 
linked). The independent variable (partnership–crisis consistency) was coded −1 (absence 
of partnership–crisis consistency) or +1 (presence of partnership–crisis consistency). The 
analysis was conducted on a sample of 160 between-subjects evaluations. The mean of all 
items for each construct was used in the analysis after checking scale reliability.

The  presence  of  a  crisis  in  the  same  domain  as  the  partnership  did  not  have  any 
negative  direct  effect  on  the  intention  to  buy  the  for-profit  brand’s  products,  while  the 
effect was sequentially mediated by perceived hypocrisy and for-profit brand equity (see 
Table  3  for  each  path  coefficient  estimation).  Partnership–crisis  domain  consistency 
increased  perceived  hypocrisy,  which  reduced  brand  equity  and  intention  to  buy  the 
faulty brand.

All path coefficients in the model were consistent with the hypotheses. The hypothe-
sised mediation model was supported (indirect effect of partnership–crisis consistency on 
intention  to  buy  through  the  sequential  mediation  of  perceived  hypocrisy  and  brand 

Table 2. Study 1 descriptive statistics.

Non-profit brand

For-profit brand

Dependent  variables
Perceived 

Mean

hypocrisy

Perceived 
brand 
equity

Intention to 
buy/ 
donate

SD
Mean

SD
Mean

SD

Same partner-
ship–crisis 
domain
–

Different partner-
ship–crisis domain
–

–
3.91

1.36
2.87

1.70

–
3.86

1.37
2.74

1.36

Sig.
–

.832

.605

Same partner-
ship–crisis 
domain
5.11*

Different partner-
ship–crisis domain
4.68*

1.08
2.94

1.01
1.67*

1.08

1.03
3.02

1.20
2.03*

1.20

Sig.
.011

.658

.045

** indicates p  < .001; * indicates p  < .05

14

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Table 3. Study 1 mediation model for intention to buy for-profit brand’s products with partnership– 
crisis consistency comparison (same vs different domain).

Partnership–crisis consistency (X) → for-profit brand hypocrisy (M1)
For-profit brand hypocrisy (M1)→ for-profit brand equity (M2)
For-profit brand equity (M2) → intention to buy for-profit brand’s 

products (Y)

Unstandardised 
coefficient
.22
−.34
.39

t-value
2.56*
−4.35

5.36***

.05

LLCI ULCI
.38
−.49 −.19
.53

.25

Partnership–crisis consistency (X) → intention to buy for-profit brand’s 

−.10

−1.26

−.25

.06

products (Y)

R2  = 33%, F(3, 156) = 25.60, p  < .001
Legend:  partnership–crisis  fit  (X)  =  independent  variable;  intention  to  buy  (Y)  =  dependent  variable;  for-profit  brand 
hypocrisy (M1) and for-profit brand equity (M2) = mediators; LLCI and ULCI = lower-level and upper-level confidence 
intervals,  respectively;  all  computations  used  5,000  bootstrap  samples  to  generate  95%  bias-corrected  bootstrap 
confidence intervals; * indicates p  < .05, ** indicates p  < .01, *** indicates p  < .001.

equity  =  −.03;  LLCI  =  −.06;  ULCI  =  −.01).  H2a  and  H2b  are  supported,  and  the  overall 
mediation  model  with  regard  to  intention  to  buy  the  for-profit  brand’s  products  was 
confirmed (H2c).

Study 2: literature review and research hypotheses

The  results  of  Study  1  corroborated  our  hypothesis  that  a  values-related  crisis  affecting 
a for-profit brand previously involved in a CRM activity with a non-profit brand does not 
have  differential  effects  on  the  non-profit  in  the  event  of  a  crisis  in  the  same  versus 
a  different  moral  domain  as  the  partnership  domain.  In  contrast,  the  for-profit  brand  is 
affected  differently  according  to  the  crisis  domain:  the  presence  of  crisis–partnership 
consistency induces a significant perception of brand hypocrisy, which negatively affects 
for-profit brand equity and, in turn, consumers’ intentions to buy products offered by the 
for-profit brand.

After  investigating  fictitious  brands,  we  developed  another  study  using  real  brands. 
This  step  intended  to  verify  the  robustness  of  the  findings  of  Study  1  and  clarify  those 
results, deepening the analysis of the dependent variables in comparison with their pre- 
crisis  average  values  and  extending  the  analysis  to  one  added  dependent  variable.  The 
use of real brands allowed us to detect whether the strong effects of a brand scandal after 
the  announcement  of  a  CRM  collaboration  were  resistant  to  previous  beliefs  about  the 
brands. The marketing literature describes brand equity as an evolving entity; consumers 
are always prone to revising their mental associations with a brand and thus to adapting 
their  evaluations  of  and  behaviours  towards  a  brand.  For  this  reason,  we  expected  to 
observe the  same effects even with real, well-known  brands. In branding alliance inves-
tigations,  counterchecking  results  with  real  brands  is  critical  to  analyse  genuine  brand 
associations,  as  highly  familiar  brands  generally  have  well-established,  accessible  and 
stable  prior  associations  (Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998).  Extending  our  research  to  real  brands 
enabled  us  not  only  to  comprehend  whether  the  effects  of  the  crisis  domain  were 
different  according  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  consistency  with  the  partnership  (as 
for Study 1) but also to compare these effects with prior levels of for-profit and non-profit 
dependent variables, in the absence of any brand crisis. This is particularly relevant for the 
non-profit  brand.  Previous  research  (Votolato  &  Unnava,  2006)  referred  to  the  spillover 
effect  but  did  not  measure  dependent  variables  in  a  control  set  without  a  crisis.  In 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

15

the  second  stage,  the  present  study  investigated  the  spillover  effect  on  the  non-profit 
brand, including a control set without any crisis. This condition enabled us to disentangle 
a  relevant  topic:  does  the  insignificant  effect  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  that 
emerged  in  Study  1  mean  that  there  is  a  homogeneous  spillover  effect  or  that  there  is 
no spillover effect?

Previous  research  has  demonstrated  that,  for  brand  extensions  and  brand  alliances, 
the  spillover  effect  is  based  on  expectations  fed  by  previous  experiences  and  beliefs 
related  to  brands  (Loken  &  John,  1993;  Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998).  A  recent  theoretical 
contribution on brand crises points out that a crisis might have an exogenous source. In 
particular,  Whitler  et  al.  (2021)  defined  brand  infection  as  an  unexpected  event  that 
damages  a  brand  through  no  fault  of  the  focal  brand  other  than  its  proximity  to  or 
shared  associations  with  the  transgressing  brand.  The  transfer  of  negative  impact  from 
the transgressing brand to other proximal and/or associated brands is a brand-to-brand 
damage  transfer  comparable  to  a  spillover  effect.  It  occurs,  for  example,  from  a  faulty 
brand  to  a  competing  brand  within  the  same  industry,  or  in  any  other  case  of  a  direct 
link  from  the  faulty  brand  to  another  brand.  In  the  absence  of  any  link,  it  is  an 
environmental  event-to-brand  process  of  damage  (e.g.,  COVID-19).  Bower  and  Grau 
(2009)  demonstrated  that  the  link  between  the  for-profit  and  non-profit  brand  is 
established  in  consumers’  minds  beginning  with  one  partner’s  explicit  announcement 
of  the  initiative  (for  example,  through  an  ad).  From  this  moment  on,  a  signal  is 
established  and  consumers  will  be  conditioned  by  this  information,  despite  the  two 
partners’  different  industry  scopes  (Decker  &  Baade,  2016).  In  particular,  when  one 
partner  is  a  non-profit,  the  partnership  is  likely  to  be  more  effective  if  it  is  nurtured 
over time but can also be conveyed through only a sporadic single pairing (Stuart et al., 
1987;  Till  &  Nowak,  2000).  Accordingly,  for-profit  brand  scandals  may  provoke  a  brand 
infection rather than a brand contamination. A recent investigation of spillover effects in 
brand  infection  across  different  fields  (Fan  et  al.,  2019)  suggest  that  expectations  are 
generally  based  on  social  norms  and  standards  and  that  consumers  usually  automati-
cally  refer  to  stereotypes.  The  authors  focused  on  warmth  versus  competence  stereo-
types,  applying  them  to  a  brand  scandal  that  occurred  in  companies  originating  in 
countries  with  high-competence  versus  high-warmth  national  stereotypes.  The  authors 
demonstrated an interaction between the scandal domain and the country stereotype in 
provoking  damage  transfer  from  the  faulty  brand  to  the  entire  country,  conceptually 
linked by the country-of-origin effect. The country was not directly involved in the crisis 
but was perceptually ‘next to’ the brand via the link with a specific trait associated with 
it  (competence  or  warmth).  Within  CRM  activity,  the  trait  that  constitutes  the  link 
between  the  for-profit  and  the  non-profit  brand  is  warmth:  non-profit  organisations 
are  stereotyped  as  warm  (J.  Aaker  et  al.,  2010).  We  therefore  expect  that  any  moral 
scandal  that directly  or indirectly involves  non-profit organisations (as with  the  country 
indirectly  involved  in  the  brand  scandal  in  previous  research  (Fan  et  al.,  2019)  violates 
consumers’  expectations  based  on  the  non-profit  organisation’s  warmth  stereotype, 
despite  the  specific  domain  of  warmth  or  moral  transgression.  Thus,  in  Study  2,  we 
expected to observe a significant spillover effect on the non-profit brand but anticipated 
that this negative effect would occur regardless of the specific crisis domain (consistent 
with  Study  1),  as  any  moral  crisis  contrasts  with  the  non-profit’s  warmth  stereotype. 

16

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

H1c: The for-profit brand crisis exerts a negative spillover effect on the non-profit’s brand 
equity, regardless of the crisis–partnership domain.

H1d: The for-profit brand crisis exerts a negative spillover effect on consumers’ intentions 
to donate to the non-profit brand, regardless of the crisis–partnership domain.

Regarding the for-profit brand, we expected to observe the same causal relations that 
emerged  in  Study  1:  a  significant  effect  of  crisis–partnership  domain  consistency  on 
intention  to  purchase  the  for-profit  brand’s  products,  mediated  by  perceived  hypocrisy 
and brand equity. However, Study 2 expanded the analysis to include another dependent 
variable: the intention to spread negative word of mouth about the for-profit brand. There 
is significant evidence that consumers often punish companies for their ethical violations 
by  spreading  negative  information  about  the  brand  (Antonetti  &  Maklan,  2016;  Grappi 
et  al.,  2013;  Romani  et  al.,  2013).  Consumers  engage  in  negative  word  of  mouth  out  of 
a  desire  to  correct  a  perceived  injustice  of  which  they  disapprove  (Bechwati  &  Morrin, 
2003;  Grappi  et  al.,  2013).  Spreading  negative  information  about  the  company  is  also 
a way to express a general sense of dissatisfaction (Richins, 1983) or to assuage negative 
emotions by sharing information with others (Choi & La, 2013; Richins, 1983) in order to 
punish a faulty and hypocritical brand.

In Study 2, we investigated the same theoretical model for real, well-known brands and 
extended our hypotheses to another dependent variable relevant to well-known brands: 
the  activation of negative word  of mouth towards both brands involved in the partner-
ship (for-profit and non-profit).

In summary, for the for-profit brand, the hypotheses in Study 2 are the same as those in 
Study 1. We included the intention to spread negative word of mouth as another potential 
negative outcome that could damage both brands involved. 

H1e:  The  for-profit  brand  crisis  (same  vs  different  with  respect  to  partnership  domain) 
exerts  a  negative  spillover  effect  on  consumers’  intentions  to  spread  negative  word  of 
mouth about the non-profit brand, regardless of the crisis–partnership domain.

H2d:  The  for-profit  brand  crisis  (same  vs  different  with  respect  to  partnership  domain) 
increases intention to spread negative word of mouth about the for-profit brand through 
the mediation of perceived hypocrisy and brand equity.

Figure 1 summarises the conceptual model investigated in the present study.

Study 2: research method and measures

A  sample  of  219  Italian  consumers  participated  in  Study  2  (70%  female;  mean  age 
38 years). Participants were recruited on Prolific Academic. Respondents were on average 
interested  in  the  ethical  issues  related  to  the  study  (single  sample  t-test  respect  middle 
point of scale = 4; p > .05) and did not differ significantly in terms of personal involvement 
in  these  ethical  issues  across  the  manipulation  sets  (independent  t-test  p  >  .05).  We 
conducted a between-subjects experiment with one factor (high crisis–partnership con-
sistency vs low crisis–partnership consistency vs no crisis). The methods and procedures 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

17

of Study 2 were similar to those of Study 1, with the addition of the control set to collect 
evaluations of real brands prior to the crisis. Brand domain and crisis typologies were the 
same, but we adopted two real, well-known brands.

The  choice  to  replicate  the  same  scenarios  in  Study  2  was  intended  to  provide 
comparable  results  in  order  to  highlight  any  potential  similarities  or  discrepancies 
between  artificial  and  real  brands,  all  else  being  equal.  Moreover,  due  to  the  presence 
of  already-known  brands  in  Study  2,  the  presence  of  a  control  set  (with  no  crises)  was 
intended to  better qualify the negative  effects  on  non-profit brand equity  as a spillover 
effect in order to offer a deeper understanding of Study 1’s findings.

We chose apparel brand Zara as the for-profit organisation and WWF – which focuses 
on  animal  protection – as  the  non-profit organisation. Hereafter we  will refer  to Zara as 
the  for-profit  brand  (FPB) and  to WWF  as  the  non-profit brand  (NPB). These two  brands 
were  selected  based  on  a  pre-test  conducted  among  82  Italian  consumers.  They  were 
rated  as  well-known  brands  with  the  same  level  of  brand  awareness  (Mfor-profit 
baw = 4.34 vs Mnon-profit baw = 4.27; p > .05).

As  in  Study  1,  in  Study  2  we  first  presented  the  co-branding  CRM  collaboration 
between  the  for-profit  brand  and  non-profit  organisation  for  both  the  control  and  the 
manipulated  sets.  After  presenting  this  information,  we  asked  respondents  to  answer 
some questions about  the alliance’s meaningfulness  through four semantic  differentials 
(Simonin  &  Ruth,  1998).  They  were  then  presented  with  a  fictitious  newspaper  article 
about a case of brand misconduct by the for-profit organisation. In the high-consistency 
condition, FPB was accused of using pelt inserts in its apparel products, while in the low- 
consistency condition, FPB was accused of breaking hygiene rules in its buildings. In the 
control condition (no crisis), participants were not presented with the newspaper article 
about FPB’s misconduct. After the scenario description, participants were asked to answer 
questions  about  the  mediators  and  dependent  variables.  Measures  were  the  same  as 
those used in Study 1, with the addition of intention to spread negative word of mouth 
about  the for-profit  and non-profit brands as  an additional dependent  variable (2 items 
scored on a 7-point Likert scale; Romani et al., 2013).

Study 2: analysis and results

Manipulation checks

A  manipulation  check  confirms  the  adequacy  of  the  two  brands  selected:  FPB  and  NPB 
were  confirmed  as  well-known  brands  (single-sample  t-test  Mfor-profit  baw  =  4.28  vs 
middle point  of scale = 4, p  < .05; single-sample t-test Mno-profit baw = 4.16 vs middle 
point  of  scale  =  4,  p  <  .05)  that  registered  no  significantly  different  levels  of  brand 
awareness (Mfor-profit  baw  = 4.28 vs Mno-profit  baw  = 4.16; t-test p > .05).

The  partnership  was  rated  as  equally  plausible,  meaningful  and  substantial  in  the  two 
manipulation sets (Mno-fit  set  = 4.75 vs Mfit  set  = 4.92; t-test p > .05). Regarding partnership– 
crisis consistency, the average score was significantly different between the two manipula-
tion  sets,  in  line  with  scenario  manipulations  (Mpartn.-crisis  fit  within  no-consistency  set  =  2.92  vs 
Mpartn.-crisis  fit  within  consistency  set = 3.75; t-test p < .05), although the two crises were perceived 
as  equally  credible  (Mcredib.  within  no-consistency  set  =  3.88  vs  Mcredib.  within  consistency  set  =  4.11; 
t-test p > .05; Newell & Goldsmith, 2001) and equally severe (Msev. within no-consistency set = 4.33 

18

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

vs  Msev.  within  consistency  set  =  4.40;  t-test  p  >  .05;  Antonetti  &  Maklan,  2016).  These  checks 
legitimate the adequacy of the two experimental scenarios.

Finally,  in  order  to  corroborate  the  hypothesis  based  on  the  warmth  stereotype,  we 
measured the average level of warmth (5 items scored on a 7-point Likert scale; Halkias & 
Diamantopoulos, 2020) for the for-profit and non-profit brands. In line with our expecta-
tions,  non-profit  brand  warmth  was  significantly  higher  than  for-profit  (Mfor-profit 
warmth = 4.38 vs Mno-profit warmth = 4.97; t-test p < .05).

Measures

We  checked  for  the  reliability  of  the  questionnaire’s  scales:  for-profit  brand  hypocrisy 
(AVE = .83; CR = .85; α = .80), for-profit brand equity (AVE = .89; CR = .93; α = .92), non- 
profit brand equity (AVE = .78; CR = .84; α = .92), for-profit intention to buy (α = .93), for- 
profit negative word of mouth (α = .92) and non-profit negative word of mouth (α = .86). 
Discriminant  validity  was  supported,  as  the  Fornell–Larcker  criterion  was  met  for  all 
constructs and loadings were always higher than cross-loadings (Hair et al., 2011).

Study 2: effects on non-profit brand

Our analysis (see Table 4 for descriptive statistics) showed that the independent variable 
of partnership–crisis consistency induced a spillover effect on non-profit brand equity and 
that  this  effect  was  the  same  whether  or  not  a  crisis  was  pertinent  to  the  partnership 
domain.

In particular, MANOVA showed a significant effect of partnership–crisis consistency on 
non-profit brand equity (F(1, 216) = 114.82; p < .001). Participants attributed a significantly 
lower  score  to  non-profit  brand  equity  in  the  presence  of  a  partner  crisis  (MBE_no  crisis 
=  5.19  vs  MBE_same  domain  =  4.17  vs  MBE_different  domain  =  3.94).  Simple  contrasts  show  no 
significant difference between a crisis related to the partnership domain and one extra-
neous to the partnership domain (p > .05). H1a is thus supported, as in Study 1. H1c is also 
supported:  the  for-profit  partner  crisis  induces  a  negative  spillover  effect  on  non-profit 
brand equity, regardless of the pertinence of the crisis to the partnership domain.

Moreover,  MANOVA  showed  a  significant  effect  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  on 
consumers’  intentions  to  donate  to  the  non-profit  brand  (F(1,  214  =  4.630;  p  <  .05). 
Participants were less prone to donate to a non-profit organisation linked to a faulty for- 
profit brand (Mwtd_no  crisis  = 3.57 vs Mwtd_same  domain  = 3.20 vs Mwtd_other  domain  = 2.79). In 
fact, simple contrasts show that willingness to donate is lower in the presence of a partner 
crisis with respect to the control set, but this negative effect is not significantly different 
(Mwtd_same  domain  = 3.20 vs Mwtd_other  domain  = 2.79; p  > .05) in the presence of a scandal 
consistent with the non-profit organisation’s aim and in the absence of any consistency 
between the scandal and the aim of the non-profit organisation. H1b is thus supported, as 
in Study 1, and H1d is also supported.

Regarding the intention to activate negative word of mouth, the difference in experi-
mental conditions confirmed the pattern that emerged in previous analyses of dependent 
variables.  MANOVA  showed  a  significant  effect  of  the  for-profit  partner  crisis,  as  the 
control  set  registered  a  lower  score  than  the  manipulated  sets  (F(1,  214  =  2.91;  p  <  .05; 
Mnwom_no  crisis  =  1.66  vs  Mnwom_same  domain  =  2.07  vs  Mnwom_other 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

19

.

g
S

i

0
0
0

.

0
0
0

.

0
0
0

.

0
0
0

.

i

n
a
m
o
d

*
7
2
4

.

4
8
0

.

0
7
2

.

0
9
0

.

2
9
2

.

1
6
1

.

6
4
3

.

2
4
1

.

i

n
a
m
o
d

*
0
6
4

.

9
8
0

.

7
7
2

.

2
0
1

.

6
1
3

.

7
5
1

.

7
7
3

.

1
5
1

.

i

s
i
s
i
r
c
–
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

t
n
e
r
e
ff
D

i

i

s
i
s
i
r
c
–
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

e
m
a
S

o
N

s
i
s
i
r
c

4
7
3

.

4
7
0

.

*
6
7
4

.

0
9
0

.

*
3
5
4

.

4
5
1

.

*
1
5
2

.

7
2
1

.

.

g
i
S

–

–

0
0
0

.

1
1
0

.

3
4
0

.

i

s
i
s
i
r
c
–
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

t
n
e
r
e
ff
D

i

i

s
i
s
i
r
c
–
p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

e
m
a
S

i

n
a
m
o
d

i

n
a
m
o
d

–

–

4
9
3

.

7
9
0

.

9
7
2

.

3
4
1

.

3
9
1

.

2
1
1

.

–

–

7
1
4

.

2
9
0

.

0
2
3

.

2
4
1

.

7
0
2

.

5
0
1

.

o
N

s
i
s
i
r
c

–

–

n
a
e
M

D
S

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
D

y
s
i
r
c
o
p
y
h

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
P

*
9
1
5

.

n
a
e
M

d
n
a
r
b

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
P

1
0
1

.

*
7
5
3

.

n
a
e
M

D
S

3
7
1

.

*
6
6
1

.

n
a
e
M

D
S

4
9
0

.

D
S

/
y
u
b

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

I

e
t
a
n
o
d

f
o

d
r
o
w
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

h
t
u
o
m

y
t
i
u
q
e

5
0

.

<
p

s
e
t
a
c
i
d
n

i

*

;

1
0
0

.

<
p

s
e
t
a
c
i
d
n

i

*
*

d
n
a
r
b

t
fi
o
r
p
-
r
o
F

d
n
a
r
b

t
fi
o
r
p
-
n
o
N

.
s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

2

y
d
u
t
S

.

4

e
l
b
a
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

domain = 1.93). Simple contrasts show that partnership–crisis consistency does not exert 
any  significant  effect  on  consumers’  intentions  to  activate  negative  word  of  mouth 
against the non-profit brand (p > .05). H1a is therefore supported.

All  of  the  dependent  variables  referring  to  the  non-profit  brand  showed  the  same 
pattern:  as  in  Study  1,  the  pertinence  of  the  for-profit  crisis  to  the  partnership  domain 
did  not  matter.  However,  using  real  brands  in  Study  2  enabled  us  to  discover  that  the 
average  score  of  dependent  variables  in  the  presence  of  any  kind  of  for-profit  brand 
crisis is systematically lower than the corresponding score pre-crisis (control set). That is, 
the non-significant effect registered in Study 1 does not mean that the for-profit brand 
is  not  responsible  for  any  spillover  effect  on  the  non-profit  brand.  On  the  contrary, 
a  spillover  effect  due  to  the  for-profit  crisis  occurs,  but  it  does  not  depend  on  consis-
tency  between  the  crisis  and  the  partnership  domain.  Moreover,  this  negative  effect  is 
not limited to non-profit brand equity and consumers’ intentions to donate to the non- 
profit  brand  but  also  impacts  willingness  to  spread  negative  word  of  mouth  about  the 
non-profit  brand.

Study 2: effects on for-profit brand

Brand  hypocrisy
MANOVA  showed  a  main  and  positive  effect  of  partnership–crisis  consistency  on  per-
ceived for-profit brand hypocrisy (F(1, 218) = 14.41; p < .05). Even for well-known brands, 
participants  showed  a  higher  perception  of  hypocrisy  of  the  for-profit  brand  in  the 
presence of a crisis consistent with the partnership (Mhypocrisy  =  4.60) than in the absence 
of partnership–crisis consistency (Mhypocrisy  = 4.27) or in the absence of any kind of crisis 
(Mhypocrisy  = 3.74). Simple contrasts show that a crisis in the same domain as the partner-
ship increases perceived hypocrisy compared with a crisis in a different domain (p < .05) or 
no  crisis  (p  <  .05).  A  simple  contrast  shows  a  significant  difference  in  the  impact  on 
perceived hypocrisy between a same-domain condition and a different-domain condition 
(p < .05) and between a same-domain condition and a no-crisis condition (p < .05). There 
was  also  a  significant  difference  between  a  different-domain  condition  and  a  no-crisis 
condition for the same variable (p < .05).

Brand  equity
MANOVA showed a significant effect of a for-profit brand crisis on perceived brand equity 
(F(1,  218)  =  114.815;  p  <  .001),  but  this  effect  is  not  related  to  partnership–crisis  consis-
tency.  In  fact,  participants  showed  a  different  level  of  for-profit  brand  equity  in  the 
presence  of  partnership–crisis  in  comparison  with  the  control  set  (i.e.  in  the  absence  of 
any  crisis;  MBE_no  crisis  =  4.76  vs  MBE_same  domain  =  2.77  vs  MBE_other  domain  =  2.70),  but 
a simple contrast does not show a significant difference between the two manipulation 
sets  (p  >  .05).  There  is,  however,  a  significant  difference  between  a  different-domain 
condition and a no-crisis condition for the same variable (p  < .05) and between a same- 
domain condition and a no-crisis condition (p < .05).

Intention to buy
MANOVA showed a significant effect of partnership–crisis consistency on intention to buy 
the  for-profit  brand’s  products  (Mwtb_no  crisis  =  4.53  vs  Mwtb_same  domain  =  3.16  vs 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

21

Table 5. Study 2 mediation model for for-profit brand dependent variables with partnership–crisis fit 
comparison (presence of fit vs absence of fit).

Partnership–crisis fit (X) → for-profit brand hypocrisy (M1)
For-profit brand hypocrisy (M1)→ for-profit brand equity (M2)
For-profit brand equity (M2) → intention to buy for-profit brand 

(Y1)

Unstandardised 
coefficient
.17
−.33
.85

t-value
2.22*
−3.70

7.18***

.02

LLCI ULCI
.30
−.51 −.16
.62 1.09

.14

Partnership–crisis fit (X) → intention to buy for-profit brand (Y1)
R2  = 35%, F(3, 139) = 24.88, p  < .001
For-profit brand equity (M2) → negative word of mouth (Y3)
Partnership–crisis fit (X) → negative word of mouth (Y3)
R2  = 34%, F(3, 140) = 23.97, p  < .001
Legend: partnership–crisis fit (X) = independent variable; intention to buy (Y1), intention to boycott (Y2) and intention to 
activate negative word of mouth (Y3) regarding for-profit brand = dependent variables; for-profit brand hypocrisy (M1) 
and  for-profit  brand  equity  (M2)  =  mediators;  LLCI  and  ULCI  =  lower-level  and  upper-level  confidence  intervals, 
respectively;  all  computations  used  5,000  bootstrap  samples  to  generate  95%  bias-corrected  bootstrap  confidence 
intervals; * indicates p  < .05, ** indicates p  < .01, *** indicates p  < .001.

−2.97*** −.54 −.11
.24

−.33
.03

−.17

−.08

1.25

.34

.36

Mwtb_other  domain  =  2.92;  F(1,  218  =  22.81;  p  <  .001).  A  simple  contrast  does  not  show 
a  significant  difference  between  a  same-domain  condition  and  a  different-domain  con-
dition  (p  >  .05).  There  is,  however,  a  significant  difference  between  a  different-domain 
condition and a no-crisis condition for the same variable (p  < .05) and between a same- 
domain condition and a no-crisis condition (p < .05).

Negative  word of mouth
MANOVA showed a similar pattern: a for-profit brand crisis induces consumers to activate 
negative  word  of  mouth  (Mnwom,_no  crisis  =  2.51  vs  Mnwom  _same  domain  =  3.77  vs 
Mnwom_other  domain  =  3.46;  F(1,  219  =  16.41;  p  <  .001).  A  simple  contrast  shows  that  the 
average  score  of  the  no-crisis  set  is  significantly  different  from  the  score  of  the  same- 
domain  (p  <  .05)  and  different-domain  conditions  (p  <  .05).  There  is,  however,  no 
significant  difference  between  a  different  domain  condition  and  a  same-domain  condi-
tion for the same variable (p > .05). Therefore, the impact of partnership–crisis consistency 
on  the  dependent  variables  is  not  direct  but  rather  is  mediated  by  perceived  brand 
hypocrisy and brand equity (see mediation model results).

Mediation model: intention to buy for-profit brand’s products

Next, we ran a conditional effect analysis using PROCESS model 6 with perceived hypoc-
risy and brand equity as sequential mediators (Hayes, 2015), consistent with the approach 
adopted  in  Study  1.  As  in  Study  1,  we  hypothesised  a  significant  effect  of  partnership– 
crisis consistency on the dependent variables through the mediation of perceived hypoc-
risy  and  for-profit  brand  equity.  We  performed  a  distinct  analysis  for  each  dependent 
variable.

The  presence  of  a  crisis  in  the  same  domain  as  the  partnership  (partnership–crisis 
consistency) does not induce any negative direct effect on the intention to buy the for- 
profit brand’s products, while the effect is mediated by perceived hypocrisy and for-profit 
brand equity. The hypothesised mediation model is supported with regard to intention to 

22

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

buy the brand’s products (indirect effect = −.05; LLCI = −.10; ULCI = −.05) and intention to 
spread  negative  word  of  mouth  (indirect  effect  =  .02;  LLCI  =  .00;  ULCI  =  .05).  All  path 
coefficients  in  the  model  were  consistent  with  H2a  and  H2b  (see  Table  5  for  each  path 
coefficient  estimation).  Consistent  with  Study  1,  the  hypothesised  mediation  model  is 
verified for intention to buy (H2c) and intention to spread negative word of mouth (H2d).

Discussion

This  research  is  the  first  attempt  to  merge  the  literature  on  CRM  and  brand  crises, 
investigating  the  effects  of  a  values-related  crisis  within  a  CRM  framework.  Previous 
studies have focused on co-branding involving for-profit companies. Some sparse litera-
ture  on  brand  scandals  has  considered  co-branding  between  a  for-profit  company  and 
a  different  entity 
individual  brands,  suppliers),  but  non-profit- 
organisations remain understudied.

(e.g.,  endorsers, 

Two  studies  were  conducted  to  understand  what  happens  within  a  co-branding 
alliance  between  a  for-profit  and  a  non-profit  brand  when  the  former  is  involved  in 
a  brand  crisis  after  the  implementation  of  the  partnership.  The  present  research  offers 
a parallel investigation, considering not only the effects on the for-profit brand but also 
those on the non-profit. The study represents the effects with regard to perceptive (brand 
hypocrisy),  cognitive  (brand  equity)  and  behavioural  (intention  to  buy/donate  and  to 
spread negative word of mouth) variables. Our analysis focused not only on the perspec-
tive  of  the  for-profit  brand  (which  was  directly  involved  in  the  scandal)  but  also  on  the 
non-profit one (which was not directly involved in the scandal).

The first study adopted  fictitious brands in experimental conditions. It was limited to 
one behavioural dependent variable: the intention to buy the for-profit brand’s products 
or to donate to the non-profit brand. In the second study, the same hypothesised model 
was applied to well-known brands and was extended to another dependent variable: the 
intention  to  activate  negative  word  of  mouth  against  the  brands  (non-profit  and  for- 
profit).  The  conceptual  framework  was  based  on  perceived  consistency  in  consumers’ 
mental  processes  between  the  partnership  domain  and  the  crisis  domain,  comparing 
a scenario of a crisis in the same domain as the partnership (presence of partnership–crisis 
consistency) with a scenario of a crisis in a different domain (absence of partnership–crisis 
consistency).  Results  showed  that  a  values-related  crisis  involving  a  for-profit  brand  did 
not  differently  affect  the  non-profit  brand  partnered  with  it:  consumers’  intentions  to 
donate  to  the  non-profit  organisation  were  not  statistically  different  in  the  event  of 
a partner scandal in the same versus a different domain compared with the partnership.
These  results  are  in  line  with  the  co-branding  literature  (Ahluwalia  et  al.,  2001; 
Choudhury  &  Kakati,  2014;  Singh  et  al.,  2020),  which  indicates  that  partner  misconduct 
can negatively affect a co-brand despite its lack of involvement in the crisis. This research 
confirms this effect in a context (CRM) that has been unexplored to date. As in Votolato 
and  Unnava  (2006),  the  present  study  corroborates  the  existence  of  the  negative  crisis 
effect  within  a  partnership  between  a  company  and  an  entity  of  a  different  nature  (in 
Votolato and Unnava, an endorser), confirming that, when the partner is not faulty, this 
negative  effect  is  unrelated  to  the  partnership–crisis  consistency.  However,  the  present 
study  investigates  a  more  specific  case  of  consistency  than  in  Votolato  and  Unnava 
(2006)  –  namely,  an  intra-type  consistency  (presence  vs  absence  of  consistency  within 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

23

a  values-based  crisis)  rather  than  an  inter-type  consistency  (performance-related  vs 
values-related  crisis)  –  and  extends  the  perspective  to  include  an  holistic  dependent 
variable: brand equity (rather than attitude).

For well-known brands, this homogenous effect is also registered for the intention to 
spread  negative  word  of  mouth.  Moreover,  for  well-known  brands,  our  results  allow  for 
the  observation  that  non-profit  dependent  variables  are  systematically  and  significantly 
lower  after  the  for-profit  crisis,  regardless  of  the  specific  moral  crisis  domain:  in  other 
words,  a  negative  spillover  effect  on  the  non-profit  brand  occurs,  regardless  of  partner-
ship–crisis consistency. This result is in line with the assumption of injury as a result of the 
warmth  stereotype,  which  has  been  demonstrated  in  other  contexts  (Fan  et  al.,  2019; 
J.  L.  Aaker  et  al.,  2012),  inducing  a  negative  effect  irrespective  of  the  partnership–crisis 
consistency.

On  the  contrary,  the  independent  variable  (partnership–crisis  consistency)  has 
a  significant  effect  on  the  for-profit  brand.  A  crisis  in  the  same  domain  as  the  cause- 
related  partnership  induces  a stronger  effect  in terms  of  perceptions  of  for-profit  brand 
hypocrisy, which in turn affects for-profit brand equity and the intention to buy the for- 
profit  brand’s  products.  The  hypothesised  mediation  model  is  confirmed.  This  result 
confirms  the  findings  of  Jeon  and  Baeck  (2016)  in  the  link  between  the  negative  effect 
of a crisis and the salience of information in consumers’ minds and extends this evidence 
to CRM co-branding activities.

The emerged effects are robust – as Study 2 confirmed Study 1’s findings in the context 
of well-known brands – as well as wide, as the same effects were also registered in Study 2 
for  the  added  dependent  variable  (intention  to  spread  negative  word  of  mouth)  in  line 
with the attribution–affect–intention theoretical model (Alicke, 2000).

Theoretical and managerial implications

A  partnership  with  a  non-profit  brand  is  a  feasible  and  effective  way  for  a  company  to 
implement a CSR brand image, but it entails a certain degree of risk. A moral scandal may 
occur  in  the  same  domain  (as  described  earlier  in  the  cases  of  H&M  and  Burberry)  or 
a  different  domain  (as  detailed  earlier  in  the  case  of  Uber).  In  particular,  in  the  event  of 
a  scandal  involving  the  same  values  domain  as  the  partnership,  the  existence  of 
a previous CSR alliance might work against the for-profit brand. Being seen as a socially 
responsible  brand  thanks  to  an  alliance  with  a  non-profit  organisation  exposes  the  for- 
profit  brand  to  the  risk  of  being  deemed  hypocritical.  The  shame  of  being  perceived  as 
a  brand  that  is  not  authentically  aware  of  ethical,  social  or  environmental  issues,  but 
rather takes advantage of such concerns for its own image and profit, is an actual risk. An 
air of greenwashing lingers on those brands and particularly takes shape in the event of 
a values-related brand crisis.

Moreover, our results show that the risk of hypocrisy is a significant negative effect, as it 
deteriorates  an  intangible  asset:  brand  equity.  That  is,  it  not  only  induces  a  temporary 
effect  on  consumers’  intentions  to  punish  the  brand  by  refraining  from  buying  its 
products  but  implies  a revision  of  consumers’ holistic  evaluations of  the  brand  in terms 
of brand equity, as well. Study 2 demonstrated the risk for well-known companies, despite 
their  brand  awareness  and  cause-related  practice,  as  consumers  are  even  prone  to 

24

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

actively  and  consciously  involving  other  people  by  spreading  negative  word  of  mouth 
about the brand.

From  a  managerial  point  of  view,  a  co-branding  CRM  activity  has  both  upsides  and 
downsides:  in  the  event  of  honest  conduct,  it  effectively  feeds  brand  value,  but  in  the 
event  of misconduct, it might backfire on the for-profit brand, regardless of the brand’s 
intentions.  In  the  present  study,  the  intentionality  of  the  brand  was  not  manipulated. 
Thus,  one  relevant  managerial  implication  for  companies  is  that  a  co-branding  CRM 
activity must be coupled with strong monitoring of the ethical domain, as the for-profit 
brand  must  absolutely  prevent  even  an  unintentional  scandal  (especially  in  the  same 
domain).  Unfortunately,  many  companies  misunderstand  these  co-branding  CRM  activ-
ities; some of them seem to interpret such programmes as a sort of parachute in case of 
any  misconduct.  The  results  of  the  present  studies  demonstrate  that  CRM  programmes 
are  not  a  way  to  immunise  the  brand  against  negative  reactions;  on  the  contrary,  the 
tumble from a higher CSR standpoint could be very violent.

Moreover,  the  present  research  reveals  that  CRM  alliances  might  be  very  harmful  to 
non-profit  brands,  as  any  values-related  crisis  involving  the  for-profit  brand  may  have 
strong  negative  effects  on  the  non-profit  brand.  Results  showed  a  dangerous  asymme-
trical frame: the non-profit brand contributes to the alliance with its warmth but suffers 
from  this  stereotype,  exposing  itself  to  a  strong  spillover  effect  in  the  event  of  any 
misbehaviour  by  the  non-profit  partner.  In  contrast,  the  for-profit  brand  is  particularly 
harmed by its misbehaviour only when it is related to the same partnership domain. This 
has relevant implications for non-profit organisations: for-profit partners are strongly able 
to  jeopardise  non-profit  organisations,  even  with  misbehaviours  extraneous  to  the  alli-
ance.  Indeed,  as  argued  by  Bower  and  Grau  (2009),  if  a  non-profit  is  linked  to  a  brand, 
a consumer may assume that surely it would have performed due diligence, particularly 
given its expertise and motivation in the social domain.

From a theoretical point of view, this study intended to fill literature gaps in four ways: 
(1)  investigating  brand  crises  in  a  new  context  (CRM  co-branding);  (2)  offering  a  more 
complete point of observation, investigating the effects on the non-profit organisation as 
well  as on the for-profit  brand; (3) deepening  the investigation by  adopting  an intra-type 
manipulation  versus  inter-type  crisis  consistency;  and  (4)  broadening  the  perspective  on 
the phenomenon by investigating a wider spectrum of dependent variables (brand equity, 
willingness to buy/donate, negative word of mouth) with respect to the state of the art.

The  vulnerability  of  a  non-profit  brand  to  a  partner’s  moral  misconduct  corroborates 
the  assumption  that  CRM  activities  are  a  particular  form  of  co-branding  alliance  (as  in 
Bower & Grau, 2009). In addition to confirming the homogeneous effect of different kinds 
of moral crises outside the non-profit brand’s control (as in Votolato & Unnava, 2006), the 
present  study reveals  the  spillover effect resulting  from the  contrast between the  situa-
tion and the non-profit brand’s warmth stereotype (as in Fan et al., 2019).

Moreover, the present research deepens the analysis of co-branding CRM activities by 
adopting  a  micro-perspective,  analysing  consistency  within  one  category  of  crisis  (i.e. 
values-related  crises)  and  introducing  for  the  first  time  the  concept  of  intra-category 
pertinence  (the  presence  or  absence  of  consistency  between  the  values-related scandal 
domain  and  the  partnership  domain).  This  is  the  first  study  to  investigate  crisis  consis-
tency within the context of a specific kind of scandal, as opposed to comparing compe-
tence-related  versus  moral  scandals.  Thus,  our  results  confirm  the  appropriateness  of 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

25

a  mental  accounting  approach  in  co-branding  investigations.  Although  consumers  are 
strongly  resistant  to  revising  their  beliefs,  in  the  event  of  a  for-profit  crisis  in  the  same 
domain as a previous salient partnership, they react by combining this pertinent informa-
tion  with  their  previous  mental  associations  regarding  the  brand.  That  is,  the  previous 
alliance  establishes new informational nodes in consumers’ minds related to the ethical 
profile  of  the  brand.  Paradoxically,  this  makes  the  for-profit  brand  more  vulnerable  to 
being hurt by a scandal conflicting with this salient belief.

Finally, the evidence of the present study contributes to the co-branding framework for 
CRM activities, going beyond previous research by offering a different level of activation 
investigation. In particular, previous research has focused on a perceptual level (attitude), 
while the present study included the analysis of effects on a multi-dimensional dependent 
variable  (brand  equity)  and  on  different  behavioural  effects  related  to  the  individual 
(willingness to buy/donate) and to this individual’s embeddedness in a reference group 
(intention to spread negative word of mouth).

Limitations and future directions

This section addresses some limitations of our two studies and suggests related paths for 
future  research.  Our  first  limitation  is  that  our  sample  is  limited  to  Italian  consumers.  In 
light  of  previous  studies,  this  sample  might  not  favour  our  results,  as  Italian  consumers 
belong  to  an  individualistic  culture.  The  literature  on  brand  crises  demonstrates  that 
individualistic  cultures  are  less  sensitive  to  values-related  crises  than  performance- 
related  ones  (Baghi  &  Gabrielli,  2019).  Therefore,  by  manipulating  a  values-related  crisis 
within an individualistic sample, we might have undercut the effect of partnership–crisis 
consistency. Future research is encouraged to investigate the same issue in a collectivistic 
culture that is more sensitive to values-related misconduct, where results are likely to be 
stronger.

Another  limitation  is  linked  to  the  CRM  co-branding  activity  used  as  a  stimulus.  We 
described a tactical co-branding alliance. However, this experimental scenario might not 
favour our  results, as  this is the  lightest form of  co-branding. Future  research  is encour-
aged  to  investigate  a  for-profit  scandal  in  the  context  of  a  stronger  form  of  CRM  co- 
branding  (e.g.,  a  co-designed  product  linked  to  a  social  cause).  The  effects  within  such 
a  stronger  co-branding  are  likely  to  be  even  higher,  as  the  mental  association  transfer 
between  the  two  partners  might  be  more  intense.  Besides  employing  a  different  co- 
branding setting, the manipulation of different crises might be managed as well in order 
to corroborate the generalisability of our findings.

Finally,  our  investigation  is  a  first  attempt  to  highlights  the  effects  of  brand  crisis  on 
several  variables.  We  analysed  brand  equity  as  a  whole,  but  future  research  might  inves-
tigate the effects on each component  of this relevant intangible asset  (Keller, 1993, 2002, 
2003): prominence, performance, imagery, judgements, sensations and resonance.

Notes

1.  https://www.unicef.org/partnerships/hm-and-hm-foundation.
2.  https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2019/feb/08/courting-controversy-from-hms-coolest- 

monkey-to-guccis-blackface-jumper.

26

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

3.  https://www.uber.com/blog/new-york-city/give-meaning-to-your-commute-ride-for 
-a-cause/#:~:text=Follow%20these%20simple%20steps%20to,Ride%20for%20a%20cause!.

4.  https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jun/18/uber-travis-kalanick-scandal-pr- 

disaster-timeline.

5.  https://walmart.org/diversity-equity-and-inclusion/centre-for-racial-equity.
6.  https://laborrights.org/publications/walmart-effect-child-and-worker-rights-violations- 

narong-seafood.

7.  https://www.burberryplc.com/en/news/corporate/2020/burberry-announces-initiative-to- 

support-youth-around-the-world-.html.

8.  https://www.moodiedavittreport.com/montblanc-signs-off-a-new-charity-initiative-111209/.
9.  https://www.red.org/impact.

Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Notes on contributors

Veronica  Gabrielli, PhD, is Associate Professor of Marketing at the Department of Communication 
and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy). She obtained her PhD in Business 
Administration  at  the  University  of  Venice  (Italy).  Her  research  interests  include  branding  and 
marketing  communications.  She  has  published  in  academic  journals,  including  the  Journal  of 
Brand Management, Journal of Product and Brand Management and Journal of Consumer Marketing.

Ilaria  Baghi,  PhD,  is  Associate  Professor  of  Marketing  at  the  Department  of  Communication  and 
Economics,  University  of  Modena  and  Reggio  Emilia  (Italy).  She  obtained  her  PhD  in  Business 
Administration  at  the  University  of  Venice  (Italy).  She  teaches  Strategic  Marketing  and 
International Marketing, and her research interests focus mainly on consumer behaviour and social 
marketing. She has published in the European Journal of Marketing, Journal  of Business Ethics.

Francesca Bergianti, is a PhD student in at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Marco Biagi 
Foundation  (Italy).  She  obtained  her  degree  in  2019  and  she  is  now  involved  with  a  research 
contract  for  an  interdisciplinary  study  funded  by  the  Italian  Government.  Her  research  interests 
focus on ethical consumption and CSR activities.

References

Aaker, D. (1991). Managing brand equity. The Free Press.
Aaker, D. A. (1992). The value of brand equity. Journal of Business Strategy, 13(4), 27–32. https://doi. 

org/10.1108/eb039503 

Aaker,  D.  A.  (1996).  Measuring  brand  equity  across  products  and  markets.  California  Management 

Review, 38(3), 3. https://doi.org/10.2307/41165845 
Aaker, D. A. (2004). Brand portfolio management. Springer.
Aaker,  D.  A.  (2006).  Brand  portfolio  strategy.  Strategic  Direction,  22(10).  https://doi.org/10.1108/sd. 

2006.05622jae.001 

Aaker,  J.,  Vohs,  K.  D.,  &  Mogilner,  C.  (2010).  Nonprofits  are  seen  as  warm  and  for-profits  as 
competent:  Firm  stereotypes  matter.  Journal  of  Consumer  Research,  37(2),  224–237.  https://doi. 
org/10.1086/651566 

Aaker,  J.  L.,  Garbinsky,  E.  N.,  &  Vohs,  K.  D.  (2012).  Cultivating  admiration  in  brands:  Warmth, 
competence,  and  landing  in  the  “golden  quadrant”.  Journal  of  Consumer  Psychology,  22(2), 
191–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2011.11.012 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

27

Ahluwalia, R., Burnkrant, R. E., & Unnava, H. R. (2000). Consumer response to negative publicity: The 
moderating role of commitment. Journal  of  Marketing  Research, 37(2), 203–214. https://doi.org/ 
10.1509/jmkr.37.2.203.18734 

Ahluwalia, R., Unnava, H. R., & Burnkrant, R. E. (2001). The moderating role of commitment on the 
spillover  effect  of  marketing  communications.  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  38(4),  458–470. 
https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.38.4.458.18903 

Alicke,  M.,  Gordon,  E.,  &  Rose,  D.  (2012).  Hypocrisy:  What  counts?  Philosophical  Psychology,  26(5), 

673–701. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2012.677397 

Alicke,  M.  D.  (2000).  Culpable  control  and  the  psychology  of  blame.  Psychological  Bulletin,  126(4), 

556–574. https://doi.org/10.1037W0033-2909.126.4.556 

Antonetti,  P.,  &  Maklan,  S.  (2016).  An  extended  model  of  moral  outrage  at  corporate  social 
irresponsibility.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics,  135(3),  429–444.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014- 
2487-y 

Anuar,  M.  M.,  &  Mohamad,  O.  (2012).  Effects  of  skepticism  on  consumer  response  toward 
cause-related  marketing  in  Malaysia.  International  Business  Research,  5(9),  506–537.  https://doi. 
org/10.5539/ibr.v5n9p98 

Arora, N., & Henderson, T. (2007). Embedded premium promotion: Why it works and how to make it 

more effective. Marketing Science, 26(4), 514–531. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.1060.0247 

Baghi, I., & Antoetti, P. (2017). High-fit charitable initiatives increase hedonic consumption through 
guilt  reduction.  European  Journal  of  Marketing,  51(11),  2030–2053.  https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM- 
12-2016-0723 

Baghi, I., & Gabrielli, V. (2013). Co-branded cause-related marketing campaigns: The importance of 
linking two strong brands. International  Review  on  Public  and  Nonprofit  Marketing, 10(1), 13–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12208-012-0086-0 

Baghi,  I.,  &  Gabrielli,  V.  (2018).  Brand  prominence  in  cause-related  marketing:  Luxury  versus 
non-luxury.  Journal  of  Product  &  Brand  Management,  27(6),  713–731.  https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
JPBM-07-2017-1512 

Baghi,  I.,  &  Gabrielli,  V.  (2019).  The  role  of  crisis  typology  and  cultural  belongingness  in  shaping 
consumers’ negative responses towards a faulty brand. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 
28(5), 653–670. https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-03-2018-1806 

Baghi, I., & Gabrielli, V. (2021). The role of betrayal in the response to value and performance brand 

crisis. Marketing Letters, 1–15.

Baghi, I., Rubaltelli, E., & Tedeschi, M. (2009). A strategy to communicate corporate social responsi-
bility: Cause related marketing and its dark side. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental 
Management, 16(1), 15–26. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.174 

Barone,  M.  J.,  Norman,  A.  T.,  &  Miyazaki,  A.  D.  (2007).  Consumer  response  to  retailer  use  of 
cause-related  marketing:  Is  more  fit  better?  Journal  of  Retailing,  83(4),  437–445.  https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jretai.2007.03.006 

Bechwati, N. N., & Morrin, M. (2003). Outraged consumers: Getting even at the expense of getting 
a  good  deal.  Journal  of  Consumer  Psychology,  13(4),  440–453.  https://doi.org/10.1207/ 
S15327663JCP1304_11 

Boenigk,  S.,  &  Schuchardt,  V.  (2013).  Cause-related  marketing  campaigns  with  luxury  firms:  An 
experimental  study  of  campaign  characteristics,  attitudes,  and  donations.  International  Journal 
of Nonprofit and Voluntary  Sector  Marketing, 18(2), 101–121. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1452 
Boush, D. M., & Loken, B. (1991). A process-tracing study of brand extension evaluation. Journal  of 

Marketing Research, 28(1), 16–28. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224379102800102 

Bower, A. B., & Grau, L. (2009). Explicit donations and inferred endorsements. Journal of Advertising, 

38(3), 113–126. https://www.jstor.org/stable/27749650 

Bower, A. B., & Grau, L. (2009). Explicit donations and inferred endorsements. Journal of Advertising, 

38(3), 113–126. https://doi.org/10.2753/JOA0091-3367380308 

Brønn,  P.  S., &  Vrioni, A.  B. (2001). Corporate  social  responsibility  and cause-related  marketing:  An 
overview. International  Journal  of  Advertising, 20(2), 207–222. https://doi.org/10.1080/02650487. 
2001.11104887 

28

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Brown,  T.  J.,  &  Dacin,  P.  A.  (1997).  The  company  and  the  product:  Corporate  associations  and 
consumer  product  responses.  Journal  of  Marketing,  61(1),  68–84.  https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
002224299706100106 

Brunk, K. H. (2012). Un/ethical company and brand perceptions: Conceptualising and operationalis-
ing  consumer  meanings.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics,  111(4),  551–565.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10551-012-1339-x 

Brunk,  K. H.,  & De  Boer, C.  (2020). How do consumers  reconcile  positive  and negative CSR-related 
information  to  form  an  ethical  brand  perception?  A  mixed  method  inquiry.  Journal  of  Business 
Ethics, 12(2), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-018-3973-4 

Carrigan,  M.,  &  Attalla,  A.  (2001).  The  myth  of  the  ethical  consumer–do  ethics  matter  in  purchase 
behaviour?  Journal  of  Consumer  Marketing,  18(7),  560–577.  https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
07363760110410263 

Carrillat,  F.  A.,  d’Astous,  A.,  &  Christianis,  H.  (2014).  Guilty  by  association:  The  perils  of  celebrity 
endorsement for endorsed brands and their direct competitors. Psychology  &  Marketing, 31(11), 
1024–1039. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20750 

Carrillat,  F.  A.,  D’astous,  A.,  &  Lazure,  J.  (2013).  For  better,  for  worse?:  What  to  do  when  celebrity 
endorsements go bad. Journal of Advertising Research, 53(1), 15–30. https://doi.org/10.2501/JAR- 
53-1-015-030 

Chang, C. T. (2008). To donate or not to donate? Product characteristics and framing effects of cause- 
related marketing on consumer purchase behavior. Psychology  &  Marketing, 25(12), 1089–1110. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20255 

Chang,  C.  T.,  &  Cheng,  Z.  H.  (2015).  Tugging  on  heartstrings:  Shopping  orientation,  mindset,  and 
consumer  responses  to  cause-related  marketing.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics,  127(2),  337–350. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014-2048-4 

Choi, B., & La, S. (2013). The impact of corporate social responsibility (CSR) and customer trust on the 
restoration  of  loyalty  after  service  failure  and  recovery.  Journal  of  Services  Marketing,  27(3), 
223–233. https://doi.org/10.1108/08876041311330717 

Choudhury,  S.,  &  Kakati,  R.  P.  (2014).  An  analytical  study  of  spillover  effect  of  different  branding 
elements on customer-based brand equity. IUP  Journal  of  Brand  Management, 11(1), 30. https:// 
ssrn.com/abstract=2498380 

Cobb-Walgren, C. J., Ruble, C. A., & Donthu, N. (1995). Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase 
intent. Journal of Advertising, 24(3), 25–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1995.10673481 
Connelly,  B.  L.,  Certo,  S.  T.,  Ireland,  R.  D.,  &  Reutzel,  C.  R.  (2011).  Signaling  theory:  A  review  and 
assessment. Journal of Management, 37(1), 39–67. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310388419 
Coombs, W. T., & Holladay, S. J. (1996). Communication and attributions in a crisis: An experimental 
study in crisis communication. Journal of Public Relations Research, 8(4), 279–295. https://doi.org/ 
10.1207/s1532754xjprr0804_04 

Dawar,  N.,  &  Lei,  J.  (2009).  Brand  crises:  The  roles  of  brand  familiarity  and  crisis  relevance  in 
determining  the  impact  on  brand  evaluations.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  62(4),  509–516. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2008.02.001 

Dawar, N., & Pillutla, M. M. (2000). Impact of product-harm crises on brand equity: The moderating 
role of consumer expectations. Journal of Marketing Research, 37(2), 215–226. https://doi.org/10. 
1509/jmkr.37.2.215.18729 

Decker,  C.,  &  Baade,  A.  (2016).  Consumer  perceptions  of  co-branding  alliances:  Organizational 
dissimilarity  signals  and  brand  fit.  Journal  of  Brand  Management,  23(6),  648–665.  https://doi. 
org/10.1057/s41262-016-0013-5 

Dutta, S., & Pullig, C. (2011). Effectiveness of corporate responses to brand crises: The role of crisis 
type and response strategies. Journal of Business Research, 64(12), 1281–1287. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jbusres.2011.01.013 

Eisingerich, A. B., Rubera, G., Seifert, M., & Bhardwaj, G. (2011). Doing good and doing better despite 
negative  information?:  The  role  of  corporate  social  responsibility  in  consumer  resistance  to 
negative  information.  Journal  of  Service  Research,  14(1),  60–75.  https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1094670510389164 

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

29

Fan, B., Li, C., & Jin, J. (2019). The brand scandal spillover effect at the country level: Evidence from 
event-related potentials. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.01426 
Folkes,  V.  S.  (1984).  Consumer  reactions  to  product  failure:  An  attributional  approach.  Journal  of 

Consumer Research, 10(4), 398–409. https://doi.org/10.1086/208978 

Folse, J. A. G., Niedrich, R. W., & Grau, S. L. (2010). Cause-relating marketing: The effects of purchase 
quantity and firm donation amount on consumer inferences and participation intentions. Journal 
of Retailing, 86(4), 295–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2010.02.005 

Fombrun,  C.  J.,  &  Gardberg,  N.  (2000).  Who’s  tops  in  corporate  reputation?  Corporate  Reputation 

Review, 3(1), 13–17. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.crr.1540095 

Frijda, N. H. (2000). The psychologists’ point of view. In Handbook of emotions (Vol. 2, pp. 59–74). The 

Guilford Press.

Gill, M. S., & Dawra, J. (2010). Evaluating Aaker’s sources of brand equity and the mediating role of 
brand  image.  Journal  of  Targeting,  Measurement  and  Analysis  for  Marketing,  18(3–4),  189–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/jt.2010.11 

Gistri,  G.,  Corciolani,  M.,  &  Pace,  S.  (2019).  Does  the  perception  of  incongruence  hurt  more? 
Customers’  responses  to  CSR  crises  affecting  the  main  reputation  dimension  of  a  company. 
Journal  of  Marketing  Management,  35(7–8),  605–633.  https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2019. 
1580761 

Godfrey,  P.  C.  (2005).  The  relationship  between  corporate  philanthropy  and  shareholder  wealth: 
A risk management perspective. Academy of Management Review, 30(4), 777–798. https://doi.org/ 
10.5465/amr.2005.18378878 

Grappi,  S.,  Romani,  S.,  &  Bagozzi,  R.  P.  (2013).  Consumer  response  to  corporate  irresponsible 
behavior:  Moral  emotions  and  virtues.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  66(10),  1814–1821.  https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2013.02.002 

Grau,  S.  L.,  Garretson,  J.  A.,  &  Pirsch,  J.  (2007).  Cause-related  marketing:  An  exploratory  study  of 
campaign donation structures issues. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 18(2), 69–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J054v18n02_04 

Grewal,  D.,  Krishnan,  R.,  Baker,  J.,  &  Borin,  N.  A.  (1998).  The effect  of  store  name,  brand  name  and 
price  discounts  on  consumers’  evaluations  and  purchase  intentions.  Journal  of  Retailing,  74(3), 
331. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-4359(99)80099-2 

Griffin,  M.,  Babin,  B.  J.,  &  Attaway,  J.  S.  (1991).  An  empirical  investigation  of  the  impact  of  negative 

public publicity  on consumer  attitudes and  intentions. ACR North American Advances.

Gupta, S., & Pirsch, J. (2006). The company-cause-customer fit decision in cause-related marketing. 
Journal of Consumer  Marketing, 18(2), 234–276. https://doi.org/10.1108/07363760610701850 
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2011). Multivariate data analysis (7th ed.). China 

Machine Press.

Halkias, G., & Diamantopoulos, A. (2020). Universal dimensions of individuals’ perception: Revisiting 
the operationalization of warmth and competence with a mixed-method approach. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 37(4), 714–736. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2020.02.004 
Hayes,  A.  F.  (2012).  PROCESS:  A  versatile  computational  tool  for  observed  variable  mediation, 

moderation, and conditional process modeling.

Hayes, A. F. (2015). Hacking PROCESS for estimation and probing of linear moderation of quadratic 
effects  and  quadratic  moderation  of  linear  effects  (Unpublished  White  Paper).  Ohio  State 
University.

Helmig,  B.,  Huber,  J.  A.,  &  Leeflang,  P.  S.  (2008).  Co-branding:  The  state  of  the  art.  Schmalenbach 

Business Review, 60(4), 359–377. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03396775 

Hillyer,  C.,  &  Tikoo,  S.  (1995).  Effect  of  cobranding  on  consumer  product  evaluations.  Advances  in 
Consumer Research, 22, 1–6. https://www.acrwebsite.org/volumes/7683/volumes/v22/NA-22 
Hoeffler,  S.,  &  Keller,  K.  L.  (2002).  Building  brand  equity  through  corporate  societal  marketing. 
Journal of Public  Policy & Marketing, 21(1), 78–89. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.21.1.78.17600 
Jalilvand,  M.  R.,  &  Samiei,  N.  (2012).  The  effect  of  electronic  word  of  mouth  on  brand  image  and 
purchase  intention.  Marketing  Intelligence  &  Planning,  12(2),  123–133.  https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
02634501211231946 

30

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Jeon,  J.  O.,  &  Baeck,  S.  (2016).  What  drives  consumer’s  responses  to  brand  crisis?  The  moderating 
roles of brand associations and brand-customer relationship strength. Journal of Product & Brand 
Management, 13(2), 133–145. https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-10-2014-0725 

Johnston, L., & Hewstone, M. (1992). Cognitive models of stereotype change: 3. Subtyping and the 
perceived typicality of disconfirming group members. Journal of  Experimental  Social  Psychology, 
28(4), 360–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(92)90051-K 

Jorgensen,  B.  K.  (1994).  Consumer  reaction  to  company-related  disasters:  The  effect  of  multiple 

versus single explanations. Advances in Consumer  Research, 21, 348–351.

Kang, M., Shin, D. H., & Gong, T. (2016). The role of personalization, engagement, and trust in online 
communities.  Information  Technology  &  People,  29(3),  580–596.  https://doi.org/10.1108/ITP-01- 
2015-0023 

Keller,  K.  L.  (1993).  Conceptualizing,  measuring,  and  managing  customer-based  brand  equity. 

Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299305700101 

Keller, K. L. (2002). Branding and brand equity. In B. A. Weitz & R. Wensley (Eds.), Marketing handbook 

(pp. 151–178). SAGE Publications.

Keller,  K.  L.  (2003).  Brand  synthesis:  The  multidimensionality  of  brand  knowledge.  Journal  of 

Consumer Research, 29(4), 595–600. https://doi.org/10.1086/346254 

Keller, K. L., & Aaker, D. A. (1992). The effects of sequential introduction of brand extensions. Journal 

of Marketing Research, 29(1), 35–50. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224379202900104 

Keller, K. L., & Sood, S. (2003). Brand equity dilution. MIT Sloan Management  Review, 45(1), 12.
Kim,  J.  E.,  &  Johnson,  K.  K.  (2013).  The  impact  of  moral  emotions  on  cause-related  marketing 
campaigns:  A  cross-cultural  examination.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics,  112(1),  79–90.  https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10551-012-1233-6 

Kim,  J.  H.,  &  Jang,  S.  S.  (2014).  A  scenario-based  experiment  and  a  field  study:  A  comparative 
examination  for  service  failure  and  recovery.  International  Journal  of  Hospitality  Management, 
41, 125–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhm.2014.05.004 

Kim,  Y.  J.,  &  Lee,  W.  N.  (2009).  Overcoming  consumer  skepticism  in  cause-related  marketing:  The 
effects of corporate social responsibility and donation size claim objectivity. Journal of Promotion 
Management, 15(4), 465–483. https://doi.org/10.1080/10496490903270232 

Klein, J., & Dawar, N. (2004). Corporate social responsibility and consumers’ attributions and brand 
evaluations  in  a  product–harm  crisis.  International  Journal  of  Research  in  Marketing,  21(3), 
203–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2003.12.003 

Koschate-Fischer,  N.,  Diamantopoulos,  A.,  &  Oldenkotte,  K.  (2012).  Are  consumers  really  willing  to 
pay  more  for  a  favorable  country  image?  A  study  of  country-of-origin  effects  on  willingness  to 
pay. Journal of International Marketing, 20(1), 19–41. https://doi.org/10.1509/jim.10.0140 

Kotler, P., & Lee, N. (2005). Best of breed: When it comes to gaining a market edge while supporting 
a  social  cause,“corporate  social  marketing”  leads  the  pack.  Social  Marketing  Quarterly,  11(3–4), 
91–103. https://doi.org/10.1080/15245000500414480 

Lafferty, B. A., Lueth, A. K., & McCafferty, R. (2016). An evolutionary process model of cause-related 
marketing  and  systematic  review  of  the  empirical  literature.  Psychology  &  Marketing,  33(11), 
951–970. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20930 

Laurent,  S.  M.,  Clark,  B.  A.,  Walker,  S.,  &  Wiseman,  K.  D.  (2014).  Punishing  hypocrisy:  The  roles  of 
hypocrisy  and  moral  emotions  in  deciding  culpability  and  punishment  of  criminal  and  civil 
moral transgressors. Cognition  &  Emotion, 28(1), 59–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2013. 
801339 

Lee, E. M., Park, S. Y., Rapert, M. I., & Newman, C. L. (2012). Does perceived consumer fit matter  in 
corporate social responsibility issues? Journal of Business Research, 65(11), 1558–1564. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.02.040 

Lenz, I., Wetzel, H. A., & Hammerschmidt, M. (2017). Can doing good lead to doing poorly? Firm value 
implications of CSR in the face of CSI. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 45(5), 677–697. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-016-0510-9 

Levin,  A.  M.,  Davis,  J.  C.,  &  Levin,  I.  (1996).  Theoretical  and  empirical  linkages  between  consumers’ 

responses to different branding  strategies. ACR North American Advances.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

31

Loken,  B., & John,  D. R. (1993). Diluting  brand  beliefs:  When do brand  extensions  have a negative 

impact? Journal of Marketing, 57(3), 71–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299305700305 

Michel,  G.,  &  Rieunier,  S.  (2012).  Nonprofit  brand  image  and  typicality  influences  on  charitable 
giving.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  65(5),  701–707.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.04. 
002 

Muller,  D.,  Judd,  C.  M.,  &  Yzerbyt,  V.  Y.  (2005).  When  moderation  is  mediated  and  mediation  is 
moderated. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6), 852. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022- 
3514.89.6.852 

Newell, S. J., & Goldsmith, R. E. (2001). The development of a scale to measure perceived corporate 
credibility.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  52(3),  235–247.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(99) 
00104-6 

Ohlwein,  M.,  &  Schiele,  T.  P.  (1994).  Co-branding.  Wirtschaftswissenschaftliches  Studium,  23(11), 

577–578.

Olsen,  G.  D.,  Pracejus,  J.  W.,  &  Brown,  N.  R.  (2003).  When  profit  equals  price:  Consumer  confusion 
about donation amounts in cause-related marketing. Journal  of  Public  Policy  &  Marketing, 22(2), 
170–180. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.22.2.170.17641 

Pashupati, K., Arpan, L., & Nikolaev, A. (2002). Corporate advertising as inoculation against negative 
news: An experimental investigation of efficacy and presentation order effects. Journal of Current 
Issues & Research in  Advertising, 24(2), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/10641734.2002.10505131 
Peloza,  J.  (2006).  Using  corporate  social  responsibility  as  insurance  for  financial  performance. 

California Management  Review, 48(2), 52–72. https://doi.org/10.2307/41166338 

Polonsky, M. J., & MacDonald, E. K. (2000). Exploring the link between cause related marketing and 
brand  building.  International  Journal  of  Nonprofit  and  Voluntary  Sector  Marketing,  5(1),  46–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.96 

Pullig,  C.,  Simmons,  C.  J.,  &  Netemeyer,  R.  G.  (2006).  Brand  dilution:  When  do  new  brands  hurt 

existing brands? Journal of Marketing, 70(2), 52–66. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.70.2.052 

Queller, S., & Smith, E. R. (2002). Subtyping versus bookkeeping in stereotype learning and change: 
Connectionist simulations and empirical findings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82 
(3), 300. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.82.3.300 

Rao, A. R. (1997). Strategic brand alliances. Journal of Brand Management, 5(2), 111–119. https://doi. 

org/10.1057/bm.1997.37 

Richins,  M.  L.  (1983).  Negative  word-of-mouth  by  dissatisfied  consumers:  A  pilot  study.  Journal  of 

Marketing, 47(1), 68–78. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224298304700107 

Roehm,  M.  L.,  &  Tybout,  A.  M.  (2006).  When  will  a  brand  scandal  spill  over,  and  how  should 
competitors  respond?  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  43(3),  366–373.  https://doi.org/10.1509/ 
jmkr.43.3.366 

Romani, S., Grappi, S., & Bagozzi, R. P. A. (2013). Explaining consumer reactions to corporate social 
responsibility:  The  role  of  gratitude  and  altruistic  values.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics,  114(2), 
193–206. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-012-1337-z 

Savary,  J.,  Goldsmith,  K.,  &  Dhar,  R.  (2015).  Giving  against  the  odds:  When  tempting  alternatives 
increase  willingness  to  donate.  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  52(1),  27–38.  https://doi.org/10. 
1509/jmr.13.0244 

Schendler, D. E., & Hofer, C. W. (1979). Strategic management. Little Brown.
Sen,  S.,  &  Bhattacharya,  C.  B.  (2001).  Does  doing  good  always  lead  to  doing  better?  Consumer 
reactions to corporate social responsibility. Journal of Marketing Research, 38(2), 225–243. https:// 
doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.38.2.225.18838 

Senthilnathan,  S.  (2012).  The  relationship  of  brand  equity  to  purchase  intention.  IUP  Journal  of 

Marketing Management, May.

Simonin,  B.  L.,  &  Ruth,  J.  A.  (1998).  Is  a  company  known  by  the  company  it  keeps?  Assessing  the 
spillover effects of brand alliances on consumer brand attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research, 35 
(1), 30–42. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224379803500105 

Singh, J., Crisafulli, B., & Quamina, L. T. (2020). ‘Corporate image at stake’: The impact of crises and 
response  strategies  on  consumer  perceptions  of  corporate  brand  alliances.  Journal  of  Business 
Research, 117, 839–849. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.01.014 

32

V. GABRIELLI ET AL.

Spence, A. M. (1974). Market  signaling:  Information  transfer  in  hiring  and  related  processes. Harvard 

University Press.

Strahilevitz, M. (1999). The effects of product type and donation magnitude on willingness to pay 
more for a charity-linked brand. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 8(3), 215–241. https://doi.org/10. 
1207/s15327663jcp0803_02 

Stuart, E. W., Shimp, T. A., & Engle, R. W. (1987). Classical conditioning of consumer attitudes: Four 
experiments in an advertising context. Journal of Consumer Research, 14(3), 334–349. https://doi. 
org/10.1086/209117 

Swaminathan,  V.,  &  Reddy,  S.  K.  (2004).  Assessing  the  spillover  effects  of  ingredient  branded 

strategies (Working paper).

Thomas,  V.  L.,  &  Fowler,  K.  (2016).  Examining  the  impact  of  brand  transgressions  onconsumers’ 
perceptions of celebrity endorsers. Journal of Advertising, 45(4), 377–390. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00913367.2016.1172385 

Till, B. D., & Nowak, L. I. (2000). Toward effective use of cause-related marketing alliances. Journal of 

Product & Brand Management, 9(7), 472–484. https://doi.org/10.1108/10610420010351394 

Till, B. D., & Shimp, T. A. (1998). Endorsers in advertising: The case of negative celebrity information. 

Journal of Advertising, 27(1), 67–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1998.10673543 

Trump,  R.  K.  (2014).  Connected  consumers’  responses  to  negative  brand  actions:  The  roles  of 
transgression  self-relevance  and  domain.  Journal  of  Business  Research,  67(9),  1824–1830. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2013.12.007 

Trump,  R.  K.,  &  Newman,  K.  P.  (2017).  When  do  unethical  brand  perceptions  spill  over  to 

competitors? Marketing Letters, 28(2), 219–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-016-9409-y 

Vanhamme,  J.,  Swaen,  V.,  Berens,  G.,  &  Janssen,  C.  (2015).  Playing  with  fire:  Aggravating  and 
buffering effects of ex ante CSR communication campaigns for companies facing allegations of 
social  irresponsibility.  Marketing  Letters,  26(4),  565–578.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-014- 
9290-5 

Votolato, N. L., & Unnava, H. R. (2006). Spillover of Negative Information on Brand Alliances. Journal 

of Consumer  Psychology, 16(2), 196. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327663jcp1602_10 

Wagner,  T., Lutz, R.  J.,  & Weitz,  B.  A. (2009).  Corporate hypocrisy:  Overcoming the  threat of incon-
sistent corporate social responsibility perceptions. Journal of Marketing, 73(6), 77–91. https://doi. 
org/10.1509/jmkg.73.6.77 

Wang, Y. (2016). Brand crisis communication through social media. Corporate  Communications:  An 

International Journal, 21(1), 56–72. https://doi.org/10.1108/CCIJ-10-2014-0065 

Washburn, J. H., Till, B. D., & Priluck, R. (2000). Co-branding: Brand equity and trial effects. Journal of 

Consumer Marketing, 17(7), 591–604. https://doi.org/10.1108/07363760010357796 

Webb,  D.  J.,  &  Mohr,  L.  A.  (1998).  A  typology  of  consumer  responses  to  cause-related  marketing: 
From skeptics to socially concerned. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 17(2), 226–238. https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/074391569801700207 

Weber, R., & Crocker, J. (1983). Cognitive processes in the revision of stereotypic beliefs. Journal  of 

Personality and  Social Psychology, 45(5), 961. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.45.5.961 

Weiner, B. (1980). A cognitive (attribution)-emotion-action model of motivated behavior: An analysis 
of judgments of help-giving. Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology, 39(2), 186. https://doi. 
org/10.1037/0022-3514.39.2.186 

Whitler,  K.  A.,  Besharat,  A.,  &  Kashmiri,  S.  (2021).  Exogenous  brand  crises:  Brand  infection  and 
contamination. Marketing Letters, 32, 129–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-020-09554-4 
Wymer,  W.,  &  Sargeant,  A.  (2006).  Insights  from  a  review  of  the  literature  on  cause  marketing. 

International Review on Public and  Non Profit  Marketing, 3(1), 9–15.

Yuan,  D.,  Cui,  G.,  &  Lai,  L.  (2016).  Sorry  seems  to  be  the  hardest  word:  Consumer  reactions  to 
self-attributions  by  firms  apologizing  for  a  brand  crisis.  Journal  of  Consumer  Marketing,  33(4), 
281–291. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCM-02-2015-1306