Old Dominion University

ODU Digital Commons
School of Public Service Theses & Dissertations

School of Public Service

Summer 2012

Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity Saliency
and Relationship Satisfaction
Jennifer Anne Taylor
Old Dominion University

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/publicservice_etds
Part of the Marketing Commons, Nonprofit Administration and Management Commons, and the
Public Administration Commons

Recommended Citation
Taylor, Jennifer A.. "Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity Saliency and Relationship
Satisfaction" (2012). Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), Dissertation, , Old Dominion University, DOI: 10.25777/
zwea-t882
https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/publicservice_etds/39

This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Public Service at ODU Digital
Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in School of Public Service Theses & Dissertations by an authorized
administrator of ODU Digital Commons. For more information, please contact digitalcommons@odu.edu.

RELATIONAL EXCHANGE IN NONPROFITS:
THE ROLE OF IDENTITY SALIENCY
AND RELATIONSHIP SATISFACTION

by

Jennifer Anne Taylor
B.A., August 1995, University of South Carolina
M.A., May 1998, The Ohio State University

A Dissertation Submitted to the Faculty of
Old Dominion University in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND URBAN POLICY
OLD DOMINION UNIVERSITY
August 2012

Approved by:

Colle

sum, Ph.D., Dean
usiness and Public Administration

JqKn\C. Morris, Ph.D.
Graduate Program Director
Professor of Public Administration
and Urban Studies

William M. Leavitt, Ph.D. (Director)
Associate Professor of Public
Administration and Urban Studies

John M Ford, Ph.D. (Member)
Professor of Marketing and
International Business

KatMna M. Steven^JMemberj
Assistant Professor of Public
Administration and Urban Studies

ABSTRACT
RELATIONAL EXCHANGE IN NONPROFITS:
THE ROLE OF IDENTITY SALIENCY AND RELATIONSHIP SATISFACTION

Jennifer Anne Taylor
Old Dominion University, 2012
Director: Dr. William M. Leavitt

Research and practice in nonprofit fundraising has increasingly been focused on
the benefits of relational exchange. This dissertation examines relationships between
donors and nonprofit organizations and their impact on the charitable giving levels using
identity salience and relationship satisfaction as key mediators of nonprofit relational
exchange. Previous research has shown that there are a plethora of charitable giving
motivations that contribute to supportive behaviors in the nonprofit context; however, this
research does not provide a comprehensive understanding of the intervening variables.
This study modified previous studies by introducing relationship satisfaction in addition
to identity saliency, as mediating constructs. Results confirm that both identity saliency
and relationship satisfaction partially mediate charitable giving motivations and
charitable giving. Additionally, perceived organizational performance, emotional utility,
and parental socialization and youth participation were significantly related to identity
salience. Finally, perceived organizational performance, emotional utility, and
satisfaction with the solicitation process were found to significantly related to
relationship satisfaction.

This dissertation is dedicated to the Settlement Women who came before me in public
service who witnessed wicked problems in the world and worked tirelessly to solve them
and to the transformational public servants who I hope to mentor and teach.

V

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This dissertation is the beginning of what I hope to be a long career of scholarly
work, which will support transformation in public service, how we implement change in
the world and how we view public service in government and the nonprofit sectors. This
work was developed with enormous support from friends and colleagues in university
and practitioner environments, as well as, personal friends and my family.
First, I would like to thank Dr. William Leavitt, my dissertation advisor for
recognizing the gamble that a stay-at-home mother of three and military spouse
represented and betting on me anyway. Your detailed editing and willingness to oversee
a methodologically complex charitable giving dissertation is appreciated. I am also
deeply indebted to Dr. John B. Ford, my cognate advisor, methodologist, and content area
expert on this dissertation, for recognizing and encouraging my potential as a nonprofit
scholar and reaffirming the value I bring to the academy. I am also grateful for the
support of Dr. Katrina Miller Stevens, not only for guiding me as a dissertation
committee member but also for her sage advice and motivation to just keep swimming.
There were several other faculty members in the Ph.D. program who taught and
guided me through the program deserving recognition: Dr. John C. Morris, whose early
questions and support developed the core of the proposed model in this study; Dr. John
R. Lombard, for helping me to understand methodological concepts and processes; and
Dr. Mohamad G. Alkadry, who encouraged me to think differently and to ask hard
questions, even if unpopular. I must also recognize the significant contribution of my

tenth grade English teacher, Mrs. Kirkley, for demanding us to memorize the rules of
comma usage.
I am deeply grateful to my colleagues and friends in the Ph.D. program with
whom I studied, with whom I coauthored research, with whom I shared the passion for
public service, and with whom I consumed a lot of wine. Most especially, I am grateful
to the other mothers with whom I shared the blessing of managing a family and pursuing
a Ph.D., simultaneously. You kept me swimming.
I am indebted to my family for their love and support of this long mission to
complete my doctorate, make a career change, and uproot our family once more for a
new life in the Shenandoah Valley. My husband, Asa, who knew twenty years ago that I
would be a college professor, was extremely supportive of this endeavor in ways most
cannot imagine - renting hotel rooms for the weekend so I could finish papers and take
comprehensive exams, being Super Dad to three young children, and for following me in
this transition. Thank you for believing in me.
Finally, I am indebted to the time I spent with Linda Davidson, Regional Vice
President of the Florida Division of the American Cancer Society. In the short time that I
worked with you, I witnessed firsthand the power of combining active listening, bonding
with donors, and relationship management as tools of nonprofit fundraising strategy.
You helped me to understand donors and volunteers as unique individuals, who shared
with me, the desire to make real change in the world. From this practical foundation
grew the seeds of what is transformational giving.

vii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
LIST OF TABLES

ix

LIST OF FIGURES

xi

Chapter
I. INTRODUCTION
Statement of the Problem
Purpose of the Study
Research Questions
Theoretical Framework
Significance of the Study
Organization of this Dissertation

1
4
5
6
7
10
11

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
Definition of Terms
Theoretical Framework
Charitable Giving Behavior
Proposed Model
Hypotheses

12
12
14
17
38
59
60

III. METHODOLOGY
Introduction
Research Questions
Research Design
Stage One Qualitative
Stage Two Quantitative..
Limitations
Summary

62
62
62
63
65
67
81
82

IV. RESULTS
Introduction
Stage One Qualitative
Stage Two Quantitative
Summary

83
83
83
87
114

V. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Discussion of the Findings
Managerial Implications and Suggestions for Future Research

117
117
127

Limitations of the Study
Closing Remarks

REFERENCES

134
135

138

APPENDICES
A. Individual Giving Survey Instrument
162
B. Hypotheses and Constructs
168
C. Moderator's Guide
170
D. Informed Consent for Focus Groups
173
E. Recruitment Flyer
176
F. Recruitment Flyer
177
G. Focus Group Codebook
177
H. IRB Certificate Approval
179
I. Proposed Measurement Model
180
J. Revised Measurement Model
181
K. Proposed Structural Model
182
L. Structural Model without Identity Saliency and Relationship Satisfaction....183
M. Structural Model with only Identity Saliency
184
N. Structural Model with only Relationship Satisfaction
185
VITA

186

LIST OF TABLES

#
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21

Table
Procedure for Validating Constructs
Charitable Giving
Intention to Donate
Identity Saliency
Relationship Satisfaction
Trust
Perceived Need
Perceived Organizational Performance
Perceived Benefits: Demonstrable Utility
Perceived Benefits: Emotional Utility
Perceived Benefits: Familial Utility
Solicitation
Parental Socialization & Youth Participation
Keywords & Statements in Focus Groups
Age
Gender
Race
Annual Household Income
Educational Attainment Level
Amount of Family Members with a Military Affiliation
Attendance at religious services, church, or other place of worship
Type of Nonprofit Organization
Size of Nonprofit Organization
Self-reported Estimate of Annual Charitable Giving in U.S. Dollars
Frequency of Charitable Giving
Length of time having been a donor
Model Fit Indices Recommended Thresholds
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Proposed
Measurement Model
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Revised
Measurement Model
Variance Explained by Endogenous Constructs
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Proposed Structural
Model
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model
without Identity Saliency and Relationship Satisfaction
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model
with only Identity Saliency
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model
with only Relationship Satisfaction

Page
64
72
73
73
74
76
77
77
78
78
78
79
79
86
89
89
89
90
90
90
91
92
92
93
93
94
95
97
100
102
103
111
112
113

LIST OF FIGURES

#
1.1
2.1
2.2

2.3
4.1
5.1
5.2

Figure
Mediating Relational Exchange in the Donor-Nonprofit Relationship
Schervish Havens Identification Model
Arnett, German, & Hunt Identity Salience Model of Relationship
Marketing Success
Proposed Model of Individual Charitable Giving
Proposed Structural Model Results
An Evolving Understanding of Marketing
An Evolving Understanding of Fundraising

Page
6
26
27
59
102
129
130

1

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

A significant social and economic force, the nonprofit sector is experiencing
unprecedented growth while shouldering the impact of the recession (Key, 2009;
Talansky and Deshmukh, 2011). Consequently, the increased competition for financial
resources is requiring new and improved approaches to fundraising. Since 1995, when
this data was first tracked, the number of nonprofit organizations registered with the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has increased 68% percent, numbering over 1.5 million in
2011 (Roeger, Blackwood and Pettijohn, 2011). Supported by several recent studies of
the state of the nonprofit sector, the impact of the demand for services during the
recession can also be attributed to an increase in unemployment, poverty, and
government budget cuts.
Increased demand for services and increased competition for resources are
consistent refrains in nonprofits in recent years. In a survey of 1,935 nonprofit
organizations by the Nonprofit Finance Fund (NFF), eighty-seven percent of
organizations surveyed report that current economic conditions continue to impact their
operations and eighty-five percent anticipate that demand will continue to increase this
year (Talansky and Deshmukh, 2011). Less than half of the nonprofits are able to meet
the increased demand for services and sixty percent have less than three months of
operating expenses put aside. In a separate study by the Nonprofit Research
Collaborative, results also detail concerns over increased demand for services. A
majority of nonprofit respondents cite increased demand for services over the past eight

2

years, while seeing either a decline in funding or very modest growth in funding
(Nonprofit Research Collaborative, 2011).
At the same time, charitable giving levels have decreased. In 2010, total private
giving by individuals, foundations, and corporations was estimated to be $290.89 billion,
down 3.0 percent from 2008 (Nonprofit Research Collaborative, 2011). Individual giving
is the largest revenue source for most nonprofit organizations and accounted for $234.6
billion in 2010. These charitable contributions account for about eighty-one percent of
total contributions, which demonstrates the importance of individual giving for nonprofit
organizations in generating revenues (Nonprofit Research Collaborative, 2011). While
nonprofits are facing limited resources to meet significant increases in demand, they are
also looking at new fundraising strategies and opportunities for more meaningful
relationships with supporters.
Research and practice in nonprofit marketing has increasingly been focused on
the benefits of relational exchange, but only in the donor relationship mediated by donor
identification with the charity or by donor satisfaction with the value exchange. In
practice, nonprofits have long known the value of maintaining relationships with donors
over time, that it is easier to retain donors and upgrade them than to constantly recruit
new donors (Wilson and Pimm, 1996). However, recommended donor management,
retention strategies, and tactics are not widespread practice in the sector (Sargeant, 2001;
Hager and Brudney, 2004).
Philanthropic behaviors are similar to prosocial behaviors in that they share a
concern for others and influence philanthropic acts. Philanthropic behaviors are
voluntary action for the common good, including charitable giving, volunteering, and

3

association (Martin, 1994). Whereas, prosocial behaviors are "voluntary actions that are
intended to help or benefit another individual or group of individuals" (Eisenberg and
Mussen, 1989, p. 3). They comprise actions that help the public good involving helping,
sharing, donating, cooperating, and volunteering (Brief and Motowidlo, 1986). Likewise,
both prosocial behavior and philanthropic action are inspired by a mix of both altruistic
and self-interested motivations (Burlingame, 1993). This study explores one type of
philanthropic behavior - donating.
The primary theories explored in this study are relationship marketing and
identity saliency. Kotler and Armstrong's (1999) definition of relationship marketing
"involves creating, maintaining and enhancing strong relationships with customers and
other stakeholders. Relationship marketing is orientated towards the long-term. The goal
is to deliver long-term value to customers and the measure of success is long-term
customer satisfaction" (p. 50). Relationship marketing in nonprofits primarily focuses on
the donor-nonprofit relationship; however, other stakeholders can include volunteers,
vendors, funders, and elected officials, among others. Often called donor cultivation or
stewardship, relationship marketing in the nonprofit context seeks to concretize
relationships with stakeholders for the long-term.
Based in microsociology, a branch of sociology that focuses on the daily human
interactions, identity theory investigates people's identity related behaviors through the
associations between the self, individual roles, society, social structure, and role
performance (Hogg, Terry, and White, 1995). These identity related behaviors influence
the choices and decisions people make. Identity salience, the prominence of one identity
over another, provides an understanding of the attraction of donors to a particular cause

4

(Arnett, German, and Hunt, 2003). These two theories serve as the theoretical framework
for this study.

Statement of the Problem
This research investigates relationship marketing in an emerging sector of interest
and influence - nonprofit. Creating and cultivating long-term relationships with key
stakeholders is the crux of relationship marketing. Most research in marketing has
examined the relationships that are economic in nature, business to business, and in forprofit firms (Arnett, German, and Hunt, 2003). Only recently has the theory of
relationship marketing been extended to the nonprofit context in nonprofit to donor
relationships (Arnett et al., 2003; Bendapudi, Singh, and Bendapudi, 1996; Bhattacharya,
Hayagreeva and Glynn, 1995). These studies conclude that by shifting the focus in
practice from transactional exchange to relational exchange with donors, the nonprofit's
organizational capacity will develop and be sustainable over the long-term.
The challenges faced by managers in the nonprofit sector are similar to those of
the private sector. The nonprofit sector is challenged by the intense competition for
resources and business management practices like accounting, public relations, strategic
planning, human resources, and staff burn out; however, nonprofits are dependent on
volunteer labor, contributions, and are held accountable to a mission that is public in
nature. Increasingly, it is more difficult for nonprofit organizations to gain donor support
because they are continuing to face increased competition from other charitable causes
and organizations and diminishing government support (Bendapudi, Singh, and
Bendapudi, 1996). Nonprofit organizations compete for limited resources while demand

5

for services continues to rise. In response, both theorists and practitioners have adopted
private sector marketing strategies to the nonprofit sector (Kotler and Levy, 1969; Kotler,
1979; Smith and Beik, 1982; Lovelock and Wineberg, 1984; Harvey, 1990; Kotler and
Andreasen, 1991; Kotler, 1994; Keegan, Moriarity, and Duncan, 1995).
Developing a competitive advantage is achieved through market segmentation
and targeting, as well as, positioning the organization. In relationship marketing, the key
to success is the identification of relationship inducing and influencing factors of
relational exchange and leveraging them to benefit of the organization (Morgan and
Hunt, 1994). The sustainability of resources - donated time and labor, and financial
support - in the nonprofit context is best achieved through relationship marketing
approach.

Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this research is to support and extend recent nonprofit relationship
marketing research, which has sought to explain the antecedents to successful
relationships with nonprofit donors and the effects of identity saliency and donor
satisfaction in nonprofit relationship marketing success. The thesis of this research is that
two key relational factors, "identity saliency," drawn from social psychology and
organizational behavior, and "relationship satisfaction," drawn from social exchange
theory, mediate relationship exchange in the nonprofit context (Figure 1.1). In summary,
this study explores relationship marketing in the nonprofit context by (1) positing that
identity saliency and relationship satisfaction mediate relational exchange in the nonprofit

6

context and (2) by investigating several relationship-inducing factors that influence
identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

Research Questions
This study investigates relational exchange between nonprofits and donors, in
which financial and in-kind donations are given. The goal of this research is to provide
nonprofit organizations with a means to evaluate their marketing strategy and make
adjustments to streamline and focus their efforts with a relational approach to developing
donor engagement and support. This research addresses the following questions:
(1)

To what extent do identity saliency and relationship satisfaction mediate
relational exchange between nonprofits and donors?

(2)

What are the charitable giving motivations that influence identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction in relational exchange between nonprofits and
donors?

Figure 1.1

Mediating Relational Exchange in the Donor-Nonprofit Relationship

Identity
Saliency
Charitable
Giving
Motivations

Philanthropic
^ Behavior:
Donating

7

Theoretical Framework
Identity salience is a subfield of identity theory, which holds that people have
several "identities," or understandings of themselves, that are arranged hierarchically
(Burke, 1980; Laverie, Kleine, and Kleine, 2002). The more salient or prominent the
identity, the more likely it is to affect behavior like donating. For example, a person can
possess several identities like mother, wife, citizen, environmentalist, volunteer,
university alumnus, arts enthusiast, and cancer survivor. In any given situation the
identities move around in the hierarchy, rising and falling in salience. Arnett et al. (2003)
found that alumni who were actively involved as students in organizations or groups were
more likely to give years later as alumni. That is, they identify more with the university
and that identity is stronger or more salient when they were involved, authentically as a
student.
Social exchange theory becomes a theoretical foundation for measuring success in
relationship marketing (Anderson and Narus, 1990; Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh, 1987;
Morgan and Hunt, 1994). In business-to-business relationships, trust and commitment
play a larger role than identity saliency (Morgan and Hunt, 1994; Arnett et al., 2003). In
contrast, identity saliency plays a crucial role in contexts that have social exchange and
benefits where participants derive complex personal, emotional, and non-economic
benefits (Dwyer et al., 1987). Each partner in the social exchange earns rewards that
support the development of trust and a commitment to each other (Blau, 1964; Dwyer et
al., 1987; Homans, 1958). In the nonprofit context, relationship marketing success is
measured by generating supporting behaviors from "key stakeholders" (Mael and
Ashworth, 1992) or donors.

8

Philanthropic behaviors can be conceptualized as a relational exchange rather than
a simple transaction. Transactional marketing is focused on capturing customers for a
one-time purchase or transaction while relationship marketing envisions the first sale or
transaction as the beginning of a long-term relationship. With the goal of constantly
acquiring new customers, transactional marketing concentrates on price, short-term
benefits, and product performance with limited service. It is generally thought of as an
exchange of money for something of value like products or services. After Kotler and
Levy (1969) broadened the definition of marketing to include charitable activities, Kotler
(1972) broadened the concept of transaction by defining it as an exchange of something
of value between each party. In doing so, the criterion for exchange can be anything of
value; for example, a donation or volunteer service in exchange for a warm, glowing
feeling or gratification. Relationship marketing is centered on repeat sales, positive
customer interactions, and a quality experience. Relationship marketing is customer
centric, implying that the customer does not buy a product or service; but instead buys a
complete solution for a specific problem or need. Accordingly, if the need is satisfied
and the company can establish and cultivate a relationship with the customer, then the
company will gain repeat sales.. In the nonprofit context, successful relational exchanges
with repeat donors, volunteers, and other stakeholders enable an organization's resources
to grow and be more sustainable over the long-term (Brudney and Meijs, 2009).
Relationship marketing is about developing and nurturing long-term relationships
with key stakeholders. The focus of nonprofit marketing research has been on the
transactional goals of understanding donor motivations, predictors of charitable giving,
and the recruitment of new donors. However, philanthropic behaviors differ from other

9

marketing exchanges. Donors who donate money or in-kind gifts of products or services
receive non-economic or monetary benefits. The reward of these motivating, intangible
benefits is valued most in the relational exchange between donor and the nonprofit
organization (Arnett et al., 2003). The two partners in the relational exchange of values
invest time, money, commitment, and an emotional element (Rentschler, Radbourne,
Carr and Rickard, 2002). Philanthropic relational exchange can be intensely personal
where supporters donate for emotional reasons. The relationship marketing paradigm is
more conducive than transactional exchange to developing philanthropic behaviors as
"relationship marketing is about healthy relationships characterized by concern, trust,
commitment, and service" (Buttle, 1996, p. 8). Having long-term relationships with
donors enable nonprofit organizations to renew charitable giving and build sustainable
financial and volunteer resources (Brudney and Meijs, 2009).
Arnett et al. (2003) propose that relationship marketing is a worthwhile strategy
for relationships with "high levels of social exchange" like business to consumer and
nonprofit marketing. However, in their research they hypothesize that the context of the
relationship may require different relationship characteristics than those for-profit
relationships that are purely economic in nature and include business-to-business
transactions. They understand relationship marketing to be a strategic option that enables
firms to gain a competitive edge with economic and noneconomic benefits.
Organizations are then competing for the warm, fuzzy feeling or other intrinsic
motivations evoked in the social exchange relationship. In their study of higher
education fundraising, results confirm that upon the implementation of relationship
marketing strategies donors become partners in the success of the nonprofit mission

10

(Amett et al., 2003). The process of interacting with donors becomes one of creating
value in the social exchange. The resulting partnerships or relationships with donors then
become tools to increase the nonprofit organization's ability to compete for financial
resources with other nonprofit organizations.

Significance of the Study
This research contributes to the literature of organization theory, relationship
marketing, and nonprofit management. The findings of this research provide nonprofit
organizations with a framework for nurturing existing donor relationships and attracting
new donors. Greater and deeper knowledge of the donor base allows for more targeted
strategies to attract and retain supporters, making the most efficient and effective use of
limited organizational resources. This research makes the following contributions:
(1)

A model of relational marketing for nonprofits using both identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction as mediating variables.

(2)

An exploration of relationship inducing factors for the
donor/nonprofit relationship is investigated, which can be used in
future scholarly research.

(3)

An understanding of and empirical support for the importance of a
more strategic approach conceptualized in relational exchange with
donors.

This research provides management implications for nonprofit executives,
development professionals, and public administrators as the public and nonprofit sectors

11

endeavor to understand how best to create and nurture a caring society and to build a
sustainable network of support.

Organization of this Dissertation
The dissertation is organized as follows. Chapter II presents an in-depth review of
the relevant literature related to identity saliency, relationship satisfaction, charitable
giving behavior, and the factors that influence giving. The conceptual model is discussed
in greater detail and the research hypotheses are presented. Chapter III presents the
methodology and a discussion of the various scales used to measure the constructs.
Chapter IV presents a discussion of the data collection process, an assessment of the
model constructs, how the structural equations model is run and the various hypotheses
are tested, and the findings. Chapter V presents a discussion of the findings, the
theoretical and managerial implications, limitations, and suggestions for future research.

CHAPTER II
LITERATURE REVIEW

Introduction
While there is a significant amount of research in philanthropy from multiple
disciplinary perspectives, philanthropy is a relatively new field of academic study
(Graddy, Ferris and Sohn, 2011). Only since the early 1980s has the study of
philanthropy developed into a distinct field (Katz, 1999; Graddy et al., 2011).
Accordingly, the definition of philanthropy has evolved since its first use by Sir Francis
Bacon in the 17th century as goodness beyond a level of humanity (Bacon and Pitcher,
1985). The modern definition of philanthropy has shifted from a singular focus on
"goodwill to fellow members of the human race" to a focus on the "active effort to
promote human welfare, an act or gift done or made for humanitarian purposes" or "an
organization distributing or supported by funds set aside for humanitarian purposes"
(Merriam-Webster Online, 2011). Here, the understanding of philanthropy develops
from the feeling of goodwill towards humanity to goodwill towards humanity put into
action. "Voluntary action for the public good" (Payton, 1988) through charitable giving is
the focus of this research.
Punctuated by periodic assessments of the literature, research about charitable
giving behavior and fundraising strategy has progressed into "substantive, objective
research rather than a casual acceptance of anecdotal evidence" (Lindahl and Conley,
2002, p. 91). Together with key scholars and fundraising practitioners, Carbone (1986)
set an agenda for fundraising research, suggesting additional research in the field around

13

three key areas: the philanthropic environment, the professional development of
fundraisers, and fundraising management. Within the philanthropic environment,
Carbone (1986) highlighted donor motivations as a key focus of future research,
understanding what motivates people to give. Since then, our knowledge about the
philanthropic environment and donor motivations has expanded significantly, supported
by empirical research and theoretical efforts as well as continued assessments and
meetings of scholars and practitioners to focus the line of inquiry.
Payton, Tempel, and Rosso (1991) and Bekkers and Wiepking (201 la, 201 lb)
suggest that theory building in philanthropy is best achieved through the use of a
multidisciplinary approach. The study of philanthropy is an applied social science like
business and public administration, borrowing heavily from the liberal arts and social
psychology, economics, marketing, and management. The philanthropic research agenda
was refined again, in 1995, to focus on the demographics of donors, predictors and
motivations of philanthropy, the management of nonprofits, the influence of government
and the impact of public policy, social equity, ethical practices, and the fundraising
profession (Burlingame, 1997).
Recently, the most thorough literature review to date on charitable giving
behavior was conducted by Bekkers and Wiepking (201 la, 201 lb). Reviewing over 550
empirical studies on charitable giving behavior, the authors propose a framework for
future research around eight key mechanisms that have been studied as antecedents to
charitable giving behavior: awareness of need, solicitation, cost and benefits, altruism,
reputation, psychological benefits, values, and efficacy. They cite that the strongest
limitation of previous research was because the primary focus had been on describing

14

charitable donors, who gives, which produced lots of predictive data on the characteristics
of donors and philanthropy; however, this descriptive research does not focus on
understanding why they give, an approach found in limited quantities in the reviewed
studies. "Knowledge on who gives what is of limited value to scholars who want to test
theories on philanthropy and to fundraisers who wonder how they should design
fundraising campaigns" (Bekkers and Wiepking, 2007, p. 19). These collaborative efforts
by both scholars and fundraising professionals to assess the research and state of
knowledge in our field and refine the future research agenda allows practitioners to base
"more of their efforts as fundraisers on informed inquiry," a primary goal of this
dissertation (Lindahl and Conley, 2002, p. 92).
This chapter focuses on the review of the literature and rationale for the
development of the theoretical model presented in this research. At first, a discussion of
the theoretical basis for charitable giving behavior and fundraising is presented. Next, the
focus moves to a review of the literature on identity saliency and relationship marketing.
Then the chapter discusses in detail the predictors of charitable giving and the
motivational factors that affect charitable giving behavior. Support for charitable giving
motivations is found both in the literature and in the results from the preliminary focus
group interviews conducted for this study. Finally, the theoretical model linking the
charitable giving motivations, identity saliency, relationship satisfaction, and level of
charitable giving is presented along with the related research hypotheses.

Definitions Of Terms
In order to provide some clarity, the following definitions are provided for the
terms used throughout the study.

15

Marketing
The definition of marketing by scholars and professionals has evolved based on
their understanding of marketing's role and function in an organization. The iterations
range from the long accepted exchange paradigm, "to create exchanges that satisfy
individual and organizational goals" (Lusch, 2007, para. 3; Alderson, 1957; Bagozzi,
1975; Houston and Gassenheimer, 1987; Hunt, 1976; Kotler and Levy, 1969) to an
understanding of marketing as one of delivering value through customer relationships to
value cocreation. Last revised in 2007, the American Marketing Association (AMA)
defines marketing as "the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating,
communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers,
clients, partners, and society at large" (AMA, 2011). Sheth and Uslay (2007, p. 302)
argue that this new definition of marketing is "not bold enough" and future revisions
should adopt a value cocreation approach where the firm and the consumer create value
together. This dissertation acknowledges that marketing "is now amidst a paradigm shift
from exchange (value in exchange) toward value cocreation (value for all stakeholders),
with an intermediate iteration at value creation (value in use and relationship marketing)"
(Sheth and Uslay, 2007, p. 305).

Philanthropy
Although the commonly accepted definition of philanthropy has changed over
time, "voluntary action for the public good" (Payton, 1988) is a succinct, yet
comprehensive, definition of philanthropy because it encompasses both a sense of
community and compassion. A sense of compassion includes nonprofit organizations

16

like soup kitchens and homeless shelters, while a sense of community involves hospitals,
schools, museums and most arts organizations (Lindahl, 2011).

Nonprofit
The nonprofit sector in the United States is comprised of institutions and
organizations that are neither business nor government. Other names given for this sector
are not-for-profit, the third sector, the independent sector, the philanthropic sector, the
voluntary sector, the charitable sector, and the social sector. While the sector is called
nonprofit, it does not mean that the organizations populating it cannot be profitable. It
simply means that accomplishing a charitable mission as opposed to profits is the primary
motivation (Board Source, 2011). The Association of Fundraising Professionals (AFP)
defines nonprofit as "that pertains to or provides services of benefit to the public without
financial incentive" (Association of Fundraising Professionals, 2011). In the United
States these types of organizations are regulated under section 501 (c) of the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) tax code, which outlines the more than 25 classifications of
nonprofits eligible for tax exemption. Also known as charities, 501 (c) 3 is the most
common type of nonprofit organization, which are those nonprofit organizations
receiving broad public support from multiple sources.

Charitable
"Giving to those in need, giving for benevolent purposes, for or pertaining to a
charity or charities" (Merriam-Webster, 2011). Charitable can be used to refer to giving
behaviors, giving motivations, and affiliation with a nonprofit.

17

Charitable gift or giving
AFP defines charitable giving as "a (usually tax-deductible) gift made to a notfor-profit organization" (Association of Fundraising Professionals, 2011). Charitable
giving can include several types of resources such as gifts of time, effort, money, or
goods and services; however, this study exclusively examines charitable gifts of money.
It is important to note here that charitable giving is often referred to as a philanthropic
behavior, which also includes the donation of several types of resources as listed above
(Martin, 1994).

Fundraising
While the term, fundraising, can be used to describe gathering financial resources
for political campaigns or for raising capital investment for business, this study is focused
exclusively on raising support for charitable nonprofit organizations. Fundraising is
defined as "the raising of assets and resources from various sources for the support of an
organization or a specific project" (Association of Fundraising Professionals, 2011).
Lindahl (2011, p. 4) defines charitable fundraising "within a marketing framework...as
the creation and ongoing development of relationships between a nonprofit organization
and its various donors for the purpose of increasing gift revenue."

Theoretical Framework
Two primary theoretical streams support relational exchange between nonprofits
and donors: social exchange and identity saliency. Social exchange is at the theoretical

18

heart of relationship marketing and identity saliency is increasingly being used as a
moderating construct in charitable giving (Callero, 1985; Callero, Howard, and Piliavin,
1987; Lee, Piliavin, and Call 1999, Arnett et al., 2003). The following section describes
these theories and their application in understanding charitable giving behavior.

Social exchange
Originating in economics, psychology, and sociology, social exchange theory
builds upon the theoretical foundations of systems theory (Lindahl, 2011). The balancing
act of managing internal and external components of a system within the nonprofit
fundraising environment is the purview of professional fundraisers. In the donornonprofit relationship, the donors make a contribution and the organization responds,
providing both tangible and intangible rewards to the donors. As this pattern of behavior
repeats, it takes on the appearance of relationship marketing or as Burnett (1988) calls it,
relationship fundraising. Lindahl (2011) places professional fundraisers in the role of
joining together donors and nonprofits in a mutually beneficial relationship (exchange).
Fundraisers must "realize that every gift comes with a relationship that needs to be
monitored and nourished" (p. 89).
First mentioned by Aristotle (1999, 1162a34-l 163a24) in the context of gift
giving, the theory of social exchange as an explanation for human behavior has been
discussed in a number of different time periods. Aristotle compared gift giving to loans
because it is "not based on stated terras, but the gift or other service is given as to a
friend, although the giver expects to receive an equivalent or greater return, as though it
had not been a free gift but a loan" (1999, 1162a34-l 163a24).

19

However, it was Homans (1958) who developed the first systematic theory to
better explain the social behavior of humans in economic situations with tangible and
intangible benefits.
Social behavior is an exchange of goods, material goods but also non-material
ones, such as the symbols of approval or prestige. Persons that give much to
others try to get much from them, and persons that get much from others are
under pressure to give much to them. This process of influence tends to work out
at equilibrium to a balance in the exchanges. For a person in an exchange, what he
gives may be a cost to him, just as what he gets may be a reward, and his behavior
changes less as the difference of the two, profit, tends to a maximum, (p. 606)

Social exchange, as understood by Blau (1964) and later incorporated into marketing
theory by Bagozzi (1974), is "the voluntary actions of individuals that are motivated by
the returns they are expected to bring and typically do in fact bring from others" (Blau,
1964, p. 91).
Separate from his treatise on the self-interested economic exchange, Adam Smith
(1759) developed a moral theory, which focused on the understanding of two competing
concepts: individual self-love and a social whole. In The Theory of Moral Sentiments, he
suggested that there are intangible benefits from social exchange. Smith (1759)
examined approval in social exchange, noting that people give approval aware of its
diffuse return. "Kindness is the parent of kindness; and if to be beloved by our brethren
be the great object of our ambition, the surest way of obtaining it is by our conduct to
show that we really love them" (p. 22). Nord (1973) argued that contemporary social
exchange theory has its origins in Smith's work but was largely ignored by latter theorists
because it was overshadowed by Smith's economic volume, The Wealth of Nations
(1776).

Influenced by the work of B.F. Skinner and the Behavioral Psychologists,
Homans (1961) attempted to reduce human behavior to a series of equations, formulating
five propositions of social exchange: success, stimulus, value, aggression/approval, and
rationality. (1) The success proposition suggests that for all actions taken by people, the
more often a particular action is rewarded the more likely the person is to continue that
action. (2) If the stimulus is similar to successful social exchanges in the past, the more
likely the person is to perform the action. (3) The more valuable the rewards, the more
likely the person repeats the action. (4) When expected returns go unawarded, anger
begets aggressive action. Likewise, unexpected rewards beget additional action. (5)
Finally, in choosing between alternative actions, a person will choose that which is
perceived to be more valuable and achievable.

Differences between social and economic exchange
Understanding social interaction as an exchange process is logical because people
are motivated by rewards in their social relations (Blau, 1968). There are three distinct
differences between social and economic exchange. First, the obligations incurred and
the return is not clearly specified in advance; one supplies .benefits and creates diffuse
future obligations (Blau, 1968, p. 454). Second, economic exchange can be enforced
while social exchange requires some measure of trust in the relationship, growing from
minor transactions to major transactions. For example, donors may make several smaller
gifts before making a major donation to a nonprofit after trust has been established.
Finally, the benefits received in social exchange are tied to the source unlike economic
benefits whose value can be modified by the significance of the relationship (p. 455).

21

The use of marketing in nonprofit and fundraising suggests that fundraisers
understand exchange as a continuum from a simple sales transaction to a gift transaction.
Lindahl (2011) suggested that donor expectations regarding exchange rewards in special
event dinners and corporate sponsorship differ from those of purely gift transactions.
There are limitations or boundaries to the applicability of exchange to explain all social
behavior. Social exchange refers to voluntary social actions that are dependent on
worthwhile benefits from others. These actions stop when the expected returns are not
forthcoming (Blau, 1968). In this manner, social interaction outside the economic sphere
is more similar to economic exchange where benefits rendered will yield returns. Miller
(2005) stated that one of the primary limitations of social exchange theory is that it
reduces social interaction to a rational process. If purely rational, then social exchange
cannot explain altruistic actions or purely selfless acts, which sometimes occur in
charitable giving behavior.
The use of social exchange theory in the explanation of charitable giving behavior
is widespread. Mixer (1993) applied social exchange theory in fundraising:
The process of giving involves a circumstance in which individual prospects and
donors have needs and desires that can be defined as internal motivations and that
can be activated or channeled by external influences. The circumstance also
includes recipients - individuals or organizations - with desires and needs that
can be met in part by gifts. The transactions between the givers and the recipients
are triggered by an argument or case for support, and result in what Blau (1968)
calls social exchange, (p. 9)

Donors make a charitable gift and are rewarded with tangible and intangible
benefits, however diffuse, in the exchange. Scholars have discussed the exchange of
benefits or returns to the donor in a number of different ways: altruistic and nonaltruistic
(Andreoni, 1990; Radley and Kennedy, 1995; Feldman and Feldman, 1985; Fultz,

22

Batson, Fortenbach, McCarthy, and Varney, 1986), emotional and economic (Olson,
1965; Kottasz, 2004; Webber, 2004; Cialdini, 1987; Mathur, 1996; Kottasz, 2004;
Sargeant, Ford, and West 2006), extrinsic and intrinsic (Sargeant et al., 2006). Perhaps
the most comprehensive framework for understanding social exchange benefits in
charitable giving behavior is 'perceived benefits,' encompassing demonstrable,
emotional, and familial utilities (Sargeant et al., 2006). In this evolution from
transactional exchange into donor-nonprofit relationships, social exchange theory
becomes a theoretical foundation for measuring success (Anderson and Narus, 1990;
Dwyer et al., 1987; Morgan and Hunt, 1994).

Identity theory and identity salience
Originating in microsociology, a branch of sociology focused on the different
kinds of human social interactions, identity theory relates attitudes about the self to the
role relationships and role-related behavior of individuals (Stryker, 1968). Identities are
defined as "internalized sets of role expectations, with the person having as many
identities as she or he plays roles in distinct sets of social relationships" (Stryker, 1980, p.
46). Identity theorists posit that the self consists of an assemblage of identities, each of
which plays a particular role (Stryker, 1968, 1980; Callero, 1985; Greenwood, 1994;
Stryker and Burke, 2000). The more salient or prominent the identity, the more likely it is
to affect behavior like donating. For example, a person can possess several identities like
father, husband, citizen, volunteer, university alumnus, and veteran. In any given
situation the identities move around in the salience hierarchy, rising and falling in
salience. The influence of identity salience is significant..because the salience we

23

attach to our identities influences how much effort we put into each role and how well we
perform in each role" (Andreassi, Desrochers, and Thompson, 2004, p. 61).
Burke and Reitzes (1981) articulated three characteristics of an identity. First,
identities are formed through the social processes of identifying with social groups or
categories, social interaction with others, and the influence of role environments.
Second, identities are understandings of the self, formed in specific circumstances, and
organized hierarchically. Lastly, "identities are symbolic and reflexive" whose self
meanings are understood by the individual through interaction with others (p. 84).
The different roles one plays in social relations are an example of identities
(Stryker and Serpe, 1982). Suitably, these role identities affect behavior because each
role has related expectations (Burke and Reitzes, 1981). Over time, the self internalizes a
particular identity. The role corresponding to the identity also personalizes the identity,
which in turn creates ownership of the identity and influences human behavior, in this
case charitable giving.
It is important to distinguish between identity theory and social identity theory.
Social identity theory focuses on group process and intergroup relationship instead of role
behavior. Social identity theory suggests that the groups to which people belong (e.g.,
theatre subscriber, religious denomination, nationality) help define who they are (Hogg et
al., 1995). Identity theory focuses on the individual, encompassing the multiple roles or
identities a person plays (e.g., wife, mother, daughter, teacher, artist).
Although they evolve, identities are relatively stable over time because they are
influenced by beliefs, principles, and commitments of the individual, which are also
relatively constant throughout lives (Serpe, 1987; Kihlstrom and Cantor, 1984;

24

Rosenberg, 1979). These beliefs, principles, and commitments are a significant part of
understanding intentional behavior of individuals, what we care about, and how we react
emotionally in social interaction (Greenwood, 1994).
An example of a stable identity is military service. The feelings associated with
military service tend to reflect what their feelings were when they left the service.
Veterans may remember feelings of pride in wearing the uniform and in belonging to an
elite group, and they may feel intense patriotism from serving their country and a sense of
accomplishment regarding their promotions and awards, as well as, an appreciation for
the values that military service cultivates. "Indeed the relationship between identity (self)
and behavior is complex and probably reciprocal" (Burke and Reitzes, 1981, p. 88).
Although these experiences are in the past, they contribute to the stability of the person's
"veteran" identity and influence their behavior. Burke and Reitzes (1981) suggested that
individuals are motivated to act based on actions that strengthen and confirm their
identity.
Understanding the "self' and the "identities" associated with the self are key to
understanding the decision process leading to charitable giving (German, 1997). Given
that individuals often act based on behavior that reinforces, supports, and confirms their
identities, as a nonprofit organization, it is important to recognize the impact of
identification on charitable giving. Schervish and Havens (1997) also developed a theory
of identification, the Identification Theory of Care, as it relates to charitable giving
behavior based on research performed about wealth and philanthropy (Schervish, 1992;
Schervish and Havens, 1997) that presented an identification model which includes five
factors that induce philanthropic commitment. (Figure 2.1). It focuses on the intricacies

25

of where, why, and how much people choose to give. The stronger the identification is,
the greater the level of care and the greater the level of commitment. In contrast to the
altruistic model of giving, the identification model suggests that research on charitable
giving behavior should consider the "presence of the self and, in particular, the factors
inducing the identification of self with the needs and aspirations of others" (Schervish
and Havens, 1997, p. 236). They compare their identification theory to other scholars
with similar contributions to the theory of identification (Martin, 1994; Jackson,
Bachmeier, Wood, and Craft, 1995; Piliavian and Callero, 1991; Jenks, 1999; Coleman,
1990; Hornstein, 1972, 1976; and Staub, 1978). "The organisations in which we
participate, the cultural frameworks we embrace, the pleas to which we are attuned and
the resources we deem able to give are inextricably linked" (Schervish and Havens, 1997,
p. 242). Voluntary philanthropic behavior motivated by the needs of others "is a central
determinant of helping and results from the combination of personal beliefs and
associational ties that bring the needs of others into one's purview" (p. 239). Their
Identification Theory of Care suggests that individuals give to causes with which they
personally identify.

26

Figure 2.1

Schervish Havens Identification Model

Youthful
Experiences

Framework of
Consciousness

Community
Participation

Identification

Charitable
Giving

Urgency and
Effectiveness

Invitations to
Participate

Source: Adapted from Social participation and charitable giving: A multivariate analysis by P. G.
Schervish and J. Havens, (1997), Voluntas,8(3), 235-260.

Arnett, German, and Hunt (2003) found support for the Identity Salience Model
of Relationship Marketing which suggested that alumni donors are more likely to support
their alma mater if their identity salience, their personal connection or identification, with
the university is high (see Figure 2.2). Identity salience was measured using an
adaptation of an identity salience scale developed by Callero (1985) in blood donating.
The authors identify four relationship inducing factors that influence the rise of identity
salience and donating and promoting behaviors: participation in university activities
while attending the college, reciprocity in the relationship, prestige of university, and
satisfaction with their university experience. Two non-relationship inducing factors were

27

controlled for: perceived financial need of the school and level of income of the donors.
With a sample of 953 alumni from a large southwestern university, seven of the eight
paths were supported in the model. Participation, prestige, and satisfaction were
significantly related with identity salience. Both of the non-relationship inducing factors
were also related significantly to donating behavior. Accordingly, identity salience was
significantly related to donating and promoting behaviors. Their results provide support
Figure 2.2 Arnett, German, & Hunt Identity Salience Model of Relationship Marketing Success

Income
Participation
Perceived
Need
Reciprocity

Donating

Identity
Salience
Prestige

Satisfaction

Promoting

Path included in respecified model

Source: The Identity Salience Model of relationship marketing success: the case of nonprofit marketing by D.
B. Amett, S. D. German, & S. D. Hunt. (2003).Journal of Marketing, 67 (2) (Apr., 2003), pp. 89-105.

for identity salience playing a central role in nonprofit relationship marketing by
mediating the relationships between relationship-inducing factors or charitable giving
motivations (participation, prestige, and satisfaction) and supportive behaviors (donating
and promoting).

As such, hypothesis 1 is:
Hl:The greater the identity saliency of a donor, the greater the level of charitable
giving of the donor.

Relationship marketing
Relationship marketing is gaining credibility with practitioners and researchers
alike, a paradigmatic shift in marketing strategy (Kotler, 1991; Gronroos, 1994;
Parvatiyar, Sheth, and Whittington, 1992; Sheth and Parvatiyar, 1995). Practitioners
have embraced this shift to the relationship concept, eager to believe every customer
interaction, even by direct mail, as part of the "relationship" (Barnes, 2000). While there
are several factors that contributed to the paradigm shift from transactional to relational
exchange, the relationship focus is a rebirth, or return to pre-industrial age marketing
when producers and users engaged each other in the marketplace (Sheth and Parvatiyar,
2000). The definition of marketing has evolved from transactional exchange to a more
ubiquitous understanding of marketing as one of delivering value to customers through
the building and maintenance of relationships (Payne and Holt, 2001; Polonsky, 1995;
Polonsky, Schuppisser, and Beldona, 2002) and on building closer customer connections
(Berry, 1983; Barnes, 2000). The implementation of a relationship marketing strategy is
an opportunity to develop deep, meaningful relationships with customers (Barnes, 2000;
Bhattacharya and Sen, 2003).
The shift in the focus of marketing from transactional exchange to relational
exchange originated in the work of MacNeil (1978, 1980), the first to consider the longterm impact of relationships in contracts; however, Berry (1983) coined the phrase,
"relationship marketing" and gave it meaning.

Attracting, maintaining and ... enhancing customer relationships.
Servicing and selling existing customers is viewed to be just as important
to long-term marketing success as acquiring new customers. Getting new
customers "is the first step in the marketing process. Cementing the
relationship, transforming indifferent customers into loyal ones, serving
customers as clients - this is marketing too. (p. 25)

Subsequent understandings of relationship marketing recognize the shift in the
exchange component as one moving from mere transactions to long-term relational
exchanges. Likewise, Morgan and Hunt (1994, p. 22) referred to relationship marketing
as "...all marketing activities directed toward establishing, developing, and maintaining
successful relational exchanges." Gronroos (1991) identified and incorporated profitable
outcomes for both the buyer and seller by proposing that relationship marketing act to
"establish, maintain and enhance relationships with customers and other parties at a profit
so that the objectives of the parties involved are met. This is done by mutual exchange
and fulfillment of promises (p. 8)." Not only does Gronroos incorporate outcomes in this
definition, but he also explicitly described the existence of expectations in the
relationship. Thus, relationship marketing is based on the successful execution of a
promise between buyer and seller. Furthermore, Gronroos (1991) identified the twosided nature of relationship and incorporated the customer perspective into the marketing
definition.
Gronroos' (1991) understanding of relationship marketing is a foundation on
which to base this study's proposed relationship marketing framework. All exchange
participants and potential partners must be free to identify, establish, maintain, enhance,
and terminate a relationship at any given point during the relational experience. The
fulfillment of expectations implicitly draws upon some aspects of the two key principles

30

within this study - social exchange theory and identity theory. Although the Gronroos
definition of relationship marketing is designed to encapsulate a broader stakeholder
perspective, it effectively captures the donor-nonprofit bond as relational exchange.
Hennig-Thurau and Hansen (2000) described three, distinct theoretical
approaches to relationship marketing: behavioral perspective, network approach, and the
new institutional economics approach. The behavioral perspective comprises most
relationship marketing research including the constructs of trust, commitment,
satisfaction, and customer retention. Network theory takes an inter-organizational
approach, emphasizing the business-to-business relationship interactions, where firms are
engaged in several long-term, complex social arrangements and networks of relationships
(Hennig-Thurau and Hansen, 2000; Low, 1996). The new institutional economics
approach to relationship marketing uses modern economic theories, such as transactional
cost analysis (Adolphs and Buschken 1996; Sollner, 1994) and agency theory
(Kleinaltenkamp, 1994; Mishra, Heide and Cort, 1998) to explain the formation and
failure of relationships. The behavioral approach to relationship marketing, with its focus
on trust, satisfaction, and commitment, best explains the donor-nonprofit relationship.
Early research in relationship marketing stressed the need for constant reselling in
services or intangibles (Levitt, 1981), cultivating customer loyalty (Ryans and Wittink,
1977), and for developing the quality of service personnel as means of keeping customers
(Berry, 1980; George, 1977). A satisfied customer has no incentive to switch to another
competitor if the selling experience is a positive one.
Berry (1983) gave three conditions for relationship marketing: ongoing or
periodic desire for service, customer choice of supplier, and an availability of alternative.

31

suppliers (p. 25). When customers are more likely to do repeat business with a firm and
choose one firm over competitors, this creates an opportunity for a relationship to exist
and for a firm to differentiate itself among competitive offerings.
In this seminal article, Berry developed five relationship marketing strategies,
which have become common practice in firms utilizing a relationship marketing
approach: (1) core service strategy, (2) relationship customization, (3) service
augmentation, (4) relationship pricing, and (5) internal marketing. First, a core service
strategy draws new customers through a quality experience and opens the door for
reselling. Second, the service is tailored to the customer at hand based on in-depth
knowledge of the individual needs of customers. Third, organizations should develop
meaningful service differentiation; offer the current customer something no other
competitor has. Fourth, organizations should encourage customer loyalty by rewarding
loyalty with a special relationship price. Lastly, internal marketing strategies should be
used to attract and retain the best service personnel. Happy, satisfied employees make
the customer experience one they will want to return to. The common thread in all
relationship marketing strategies is to give the customer a reason not to switch to a
competitor (p. 28).
These strategies are particularly applicable in the nonprofit context as donors are
more likely to renew a gift if they are satisfied with the giving experience. Sargeant
(2001), in a survey often thousand donors in the U.K., found that the role of "quality of
service offered to the donor" and donor perceptions about the nonprofit were critical in
the retention of donors and that this is an area that effective relationship marketing
strategies can positively impact.

32

Relationship marketing is considered to be a more profitable marketing strategy
by emphasizing customer retention and satisfaction, rather than a focus on sales
transactions or the recruitment of new customers. Buchanan and Gilles (1990) gave
seven factors that lead to cost savings when marketing emphasizes customer retention.
(1) Acquisition costs are incurred at the beginning of a relationship, the longer the
relationship, the lower the amortized cost. (2) The cost of managing the account declines
as a percentage of total costs or total revenue. (3) Long-term customers are less likely to
switch and are less sensitive to price. (4) Long-term customers generate free word of
mouth and referral marketing. (5) Long-term customers are more likely to purchase
related products. (6) Satisfied customers are less likely to switch to a competitor, thereby
reducing competitors' potential market share. (7) And lastly, regular customers need less
education about the product or service and know what they want. A "virtuous circle" can
be created through increased customer satisfaction, customer retention, and happy
employees (Buchanan and Gilles, 1990, p. 524).
Understanding the costs of new customer acquisition, several companies have
focused instead on creating exceptionally loyal customers, e.g., Harley Davidson, BMW,
Apple, and Southwest Airlines. Attracting new customers is more costly than the
retention of current clients (Congram, 1987). Supported by several studies, it is five
times more expensive to solicit new customers, as it is to continue relationships with
current customers (Harley, 1984; Petersen, 1997). Satisfied customers can be repeat
customers as well as a marketing tool for new business.
Also true in the nonprofit sector, the comparison of new donor acquisition and
current donor development activities presents a stark contrast. Donor development

33

activities generate a 5:1 return on investment (Sargeant and Kaehler, 1998), which means
that focusing efforts on growing the current donor base is more profitable.
Morgan and Hunt (1994) developed the commitment-trust theory of relationship
marketing where commitment and trust are an integral part of the relational exchange
because:
...they encourage marketers to (1) work at preserving relationship investments by
cooperating with exchange partners, (2) resist attractive short-term alternatives in
favor of the expected long-term benefits of staying with existing partners, and (3)
view potentially high-risk actions as being prudent because of the belief that their
partners will not act opportunistically. Therefore when both commitment and
trust- not just one or the other - are present, they produce outcomes that promote
efficiency, productivity, and effectiveness, (p.22)

Commitment and trust are required for relationships that distinguish successful,
productive relational exchanges from nonproductive ones. Commitment is defined by
Moorman, Zaltman, and Deshpande (1992) as "an enduring desire to maintain a value
relationship" (p. 316). Relationship commitment is a central construct in the social
exchange body of research (Blau, 1964; Thibaut and Kelley, 1959; Cook and Emerson,
1978); in the marriage literature (McDonald, 1981); in organizational buyer and behavior
(Becker, 1960; Reichers, 1985) and of course, commitment has been a central focus in
the services relationship marketing literature where relationships are based upon mutual
commitment (Berry and Parasuraman, 1991). The exact nature and definition of
commitment has been debated in the relationship marketing literature. Measuring
commitment by customer retention, repeat purchases, or customer loyalty. The
customer's orientation towards the long-term relationship is based on emotional
connections, such as affective commitment (Geyskens, Steenkamp, Scheer, and Kumar,

34

1996; Moorman et al., 1992) and remaining in the relationship will produce greater
benefits than the relationship's termination costs (Geyskens et al.. 1996; Sollner, 1994).
In the donor-nonprofit relationship, donor commitment is more than donor
retention and repeat giving. Commitment is about an increasing level of engagement
with the nonprofit or as Sargeant (2001) coined it, donor loyalty. Donors want to feel
like their gift is making an impact. In his survey of donors in the U.K., Sargeant found
that the primary reason for lapsed donors was that the donors found other causes to be
more worthy of their support, 26.5%, an indication of donor dissatisfaction with the
service quality. In order to increase donor loyalty (commitment), nonprofit organizations
"need to improve both the quality of their communications and the choice they offer in
that respect" (p. 189).
Trust, as defined by Moorman, Deshpande, and Zaltman (1993, p. 81) is "a
willingness to rely on an exchange partner in whom one has confidence." The customer
trusts the service provider if the service is reliable and the firm has a high degree of
integrity (Moorman et al., 1992; Morgan and Hunt, 1994). Trust is particularly
significant in relationship marketing when there is more uncertainty present (Gronroos,
1994) and when there is more risk involved with the transaction (Sheth and Parvatiyar,
1995).
The relationship between trust and commitment is inextricably linked. Sargeant
(1999) argued that donors with a higher level of trust in a nonprofit have a greater
willingness to become a donor, give more money, and establish a relationship with the
nonprofit. Those without trust in the nonprofit, are unlikely to make charitable gifts.
Trust is an antecedent to commitment (Sargeant and Lee, 2004). Sargeant et al., (2006)

35

found a positive causal link between trust in a nonprofit and the degree of commitment to
that organization. These results confirm that trust precedes commitment because people
are unlikely to be committed unless a level of trust has been previously established.
As the reigning paradigm in marketing, the large body of research in relationship
marketing and its application in the donor-nonprofit relationship has not been fully
explored. While trust, commitment, and relationship satisfaction have been investigated
in the donor-nonprofit relationship, as Sheth and Parvatiyar (2000) advocated, the focus
of the research should be on the factors that induce relationships and the variables that
moderate the subtle nuances of trust, commitment, and relationship satisfaction in
voluntary association.

Relationship fundraising
Relationship marketing explains much of the social interaction in the nonprofit
sector with internal and external stakeholders. Burnett (1992) was the first to use the
phrase, "relationship fundraising" and he advocated for a more holistic approach to
relationships with donors that recognized the individual value of each donor, their unique
motivations, and their expectations of nonprofits. He argued that fundraising
management should take into account the perceived value of the donor relationship. In
other words, understanding the value that can be derived from this donor relationship in
the future.
The practice of relationship fundraising is widespread, especially when it comes
to the solicitation of major gifts. Sargeant and McKenzie (1998) found that nonprofits in
the U.K. typically lose about 40-50% percent of new donors and annually thereafter at a

36

rate of 30%. This is also the case in fundraising practice in the U.S. with about 35% of
new donors not renewing. Sargeant (2001) found that communications and
organizational performance were strongly correlated with increased donor loyalty.
Sargeant et al. (2006) later tested the perceptual determinants of charitable giving in
which perceived efficiency and effectiveness of the nonprofit factored heavily in a
donor's decision to give.

Relationship satisfaction
Service quality and customer retention has been a major focus of the for-profit
literature. Understanding the significance of service quality (Bitner, 1990; Boulding,
Kalra, Staelin, and Zeithaml, 1993) is key to maintaining a long-term relationship with
customers. Developed by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry (1988), SERVQUAL was
first used for assessing the perceptions of service quality. Service quality is an abstract
construct that is more difficult to measure than the quality of tangible goods (Brown and
Swartz, 1989; Carman, 1990; Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry, 1985). The perception
of service quality comes from a comparison of customer expectations from the service
provider with their perceptions of the actual service performance. Customers assessed
service quality in ten dimensions: tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, communication,
credibility, security, competence, courtesy, understanding/knowing the customer, and
access. The SERVQUAL instrument was designed to be used in wide-ranging set of
service businesses and the instrument

. .can be adapted and supplemented to fit the

needs of a particular organization" (Parasuraman et al., 1985, p. 6).

37

Cronin and Taylor (1992) explored the relationship between service quality,
consumer satisfaction, and purchase intentions and that consumer satisfaction has a
significant effect on purchase intentions, more so than service quality, confirming
previous research that overall service satisfaction matters (Crosby and Stephens, 1987).
Jones and Sasser (1995) measured satisfaction with delivered service quality and found
differences in commitment among customer groups. Their research found that very
satisfied customers were more likely to be repeat customers than those who were merely
satisfied. Application in the nonprofit context would suggest that relationship satisfaction
in the donor-nonprofit relationship is very significant in continued charitable giving.
Relationship fundraising success is measured in donor renewal, retention, and
donor loyalty. Sargeant (2001) found that more than 26% of donors lapse because they
believe other causes to be more worthy of their support. Nonprofits "need to find ways
of improving satisfaction and deepening the bonds that exist between them and their
supporters" (p. 188). Sargeant posited that the differentiating factor between lapsed
donors and active donors is the quality of the relationship. Using an adaptation of
SERVQUAL, for the donor-nonprofit relationship, Sargeant (2001) argued that service
satisfaction is as important in the nonprofit sector as it is in the private sector, suggesting
that lapsed donors are more dissatisfied with the service quality the nonprofit provides as
compared with active donors.
Sargeant (2001) noted that in service relationships, there are only two reasons for
defection: natural (finite amount of customer demand) and unnatural (caused by
dissatisfaction with service quality). In the nonprofit context, the latter is what can most
easily be impacted through the employment of relationship fundraising strategies.

38

As such, hypotheses 2 and 3 are:
H2:The greater the relationship satisfaction of a donor, the greater the level of
charitable giving of the donor.
H3:The greater the identity saliency and the relationship satisfaction, the greater the
level of charitable giving of the donor.

Charitable Giving Behavior
This section reviews the extant literature on the predictors of charitable giving and
charitable giving motivations, and incorporates support for these motivations with
qualitative data from preliminary focus group interviews. Answering the questions of
"who gives" (predictors of charitable giving) and "why they give" (giving motivations) is
of critical importance to practitioners, scholars, and public policy makers because the
answers to these deceptively simple questions inform decision making in nonprofit
marketing strategy, philanthropic research, and public policy making (Bekkers and
Wiepking, 201 la). Understanding the characteristics of who gives enables nonprofits to
target their solicitations for support and understanding why they give enables them the
opportunity to deeply engage donors in their mission; and for scholars to test theories
about charitable giving. Understanding the who and why of charitable giving is also
important to public policy makers as they endeavor how to best incentivize philanthropy
to help solve or address public problems.

Predictors of charitable giving behavior
Bekkers and Wiepking (201 la) described charitable giving motivations as
explaining the pathways or the relationships between the predictors of charitable giving
and charitable giving behaviors. Predictors of charitable giving are the individual or

39

household characteristics found to correlate with donating behaviors (Bekkers and
Wiepking, 201 lb); whereas, charitable giving motivations are the possible explanations
for an individual's decision to give. Below is a review of the literature investigating these
predictive individual and household characteristics of charitable donors beginning with
those attributes most frequently studied by scholars: age, income, education, and
religiosity.

Age
Overwhelmingly, the literature reveals a positive relationship between age and
philanthropy;1 finding an age window in which the likelihood of donating increases
significantly, above age 40 and decreases after age 65 (Belfield and Beney, 2000;
Danesvary and Luksetich, 1997; Landry, Lange, Price and Rupp, 2006; Midlarsky and
Hannah, 1989; Wu, Huang, and Kao, 2004). There have been other studies that reveal a

1 See Bekkers and Wiepking, 2011b for an exhaustive discussion of age as a predicting variable of

charitable giving behavior (Abrams and Schmitz, 1978; Abrams and Schmitz, 1984; Andreoni, 1988;
Andreoni and Miller, 2002; Apinunmahakul and Devlin, 2004; Auten, Cilke, and Randolph, 1992;
Auten and Rudney, 1990; Banks and Tanner, 1999; Barrett 1991; Bekkers, 2003; Bekkers, 2006b;
Bekkers, 2007b; Bekkers and Schuyt, 2005; Bekkers and Wiepking, 2006; Belfield and Beney, 2000;
Bielefeld, Rooney, and Steinberg, 2005; Brooks, 2002; Brooks, 2005; Brown and Lankford, 1992;
Carman, 2006; Chang, 2005a; Choe and Jeong, 1993; Chua and Wong, 1999; Clotfelter, 1980;
Daneshvary and Luksetich, 1997; Eaton, 2001; Farmer and Fedor, 2001; Feenberg, 1987; Feldstein,
1975a; Feldstein, 1975b; Feldstein and Clotfelter, 1976; Feldstein and Taylor, 1976; Glenday, Gupta,
and Pawlak, 1986; Greenwood, 1993; Gruber, 2004; Havens etal., 2007; Hood et al., 1977; Houston,
2006; Hrung, 2004; James and Sharpe, 2007; Jones and Posnett, 1991a; Jones and Posnett, 1991b;
Kingma, 1989; Knoke, 1990; Lankford and Wyckoff, 1991; Long, 2000; Lunn etal., 2001; Lyons and
Nivison-Smith, 2006; Lyons and Passey, 2005; Marx, 2000; Matsunaga, 2006; McClelland and
Kokoski, 1994; Mesch etal., 2006; O'Neill et al., 1996; Okten and Osili, 2004; Okunade and Berl, 1997;
Olson and Caddell, 1994; Pharoah and Tanner, 1997; Reece 1979; Reece and Zieschang, 1985; Reece
and Zieschang, 1989; Reed and Selbee, 2002; Regnerus et al., 1998; Ricketts and Westfall, 1993;
Robinson, 1990; Rooney et al., 2005; Schervish and Havens, 1995a; Schervish and Havens, 1995b;
Schervish and Havens, 1998b; Schervish and Havens, 2003; Schiff, 1990; Schlegelmilch et al., 1997a;
Schwartz, 1970; Slemrod, 1989; Sokolowski, 1996; Srnka etal., 2003; Sullivan, 1985; Tiehen, 2001;
Todd and Lawson, 1999; Van Slyke and Brooks, 2005; Wilhelm et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2004; Yamauchi
and Yokoyama, 2005; Yen, 2002).

40

decrease in charitable giving after age 75 (Andreoni, 2001; Hodgkinson and Weitzman,
1996) and after age 84 (Auten and Joulfaian, 1996).
Life cycle effects and generational differences may explain the relationship
between age and philanthropy because older donors have more disposable income
(Wilhelm, Rooney, and Tempel, 2007), attend church more regularly (Oslon and Caddell,
1994; Bekkers and Schuyt, 2008; Wilhelm, Rooney, and Tempel, 2007), are less
concerned about their children's future and exhibit more altruistic values (Auten and
Joulfaian, 1996), and are closer to death than younger donors (Bekkers and Wiepking,
201 lb). In survey research, age differences can be partially explained by the life stage or
generation to which one belongs (Alwin and Krosnick, 1991). Older people attend
church more regularly and have more disposable income as they age. Their children are
often well established, alleviating parental concern for their financial future and creating
space for the concern for the wellbeing of others or the greater good (Auten and
Joulfaian, 1996).

Income
The relationship between level of household income and the amount of charitable
donations is positive; however, there is a negative relationship with proportion of income
to philanthropy. People with less income give a higher proportionate share of their
income than people with higher income. Several scholars have found support for people
with higher incomes as more likely to help organizations that help the poor (Regnerus,
Smith, and Sikkink, 1998; Banks and Tanner, 1999; McClelland and Brooks, 2004; and
Schervish and Havens, 1995a), suggesting that the wealthy have a moral obligation to

41

help the less fortunate (Schervish, 2006). The positive relationship between income and
charitable giving could also be explained by the cost of giving decreasing as income
increases when donations are tax-deductible (Bekkers and Wiepking, 2011b); however,
tax deductibility is not a motivation according to most major donors (Panas, 2007). If the
psychological benefits of giving, often called "the joy of giving," are in the act of giving;
then, giving a higher amount does not necessarily correlate with more joy (Andreoni,
1990; Wiepking and Heijen, 2010).

42

Education
The level of education of charitable donors also has a positive relationship with
charitable giving.2 Donors with a higher level of education have also been shown to give
a higher proportion of income (Schervish and Havens, 1997). There are a number of
possible reasons for the positive correlation between education and charitable giving.
Brown and Ferris (2007) connected education and giving through additional membership
and generalized social trust. "People who are more trusting of others are likely to have
more confidence in charitable organisations, suggesting a role for ...efficacy [of
nonprofits]" (Bekkers and Wiepking, 2007, p. 35). In addition to generalized social trust
and enhanced confidence in nonprofit organizations, Bekkers (2006a) also found that
higher education is related to giving through higher verbal intelligence and higher
income.

Religiosity
Bekkers and Wiepking (201 lb, p. 5) describe religious involvement as "the first
ubiquitous correlate of charitable giving" with studies finding support for church
membership and church attendance in both secular and religious philanthropy.3

2 See Bekkers and Wiepking, (201 lb) for an exhaustive discussion of education as a predicting variable of

charitable giving (Apinunmahakul and Devlin, 2004; Banks and Tanner, 1999; Bekkers, 2003; Bekkers,
2006b; Bekkers and De Graaf, 2006; Bielefeld et al., 2005; Brooks, 2004; Brown, 2005; Brown and Ferris,
2007; Brown and Lankford, 1992; Carroll, McCarthy, and Newman, 2006; Chang, 2005; Chua and Wong,
1999; Duncan, 1999; Eschholz and Van Slyke, 2002; Feldman, 2007; Gruber, 2004; Houston, 2006; Jones
and Posnett, 1991a; Kingma, 1989; Lyons and Nivison-Smith, 2006; Lyons and Passey, 2005; Matsunaga,
2006; McClelland and Kokoski, 1994; Mesch, Rooney, Steinberg, and Denton, 2006; Olson and Caddell,
1994; Pharoah and Tanner, 1997; Reece and Zieschang 1985; Reed and Selbee, 2002; Rooney, Steinberg,
and Schervish, 2001; Schiff, 1990; Schlegelmilch, Diamantopoulos, and Love, 1997a; Sokolowski, 1996;
Tiehen, 2001; Todd and Lawson, 1999; Van Slyke and Brooks, 2005; Wiepking and Maas, 2006; Wilhelm,
Brown, Rooney, and Steinberg, 2006; Yamauchi and Yokoyama, 2005; Yavas, Riecken, and
Parameswaran, 1981).
3 (Bekkers, 2003; Bekkers and Schuyt ,2005; Bennett and Kottasz, 2000; Bielefeld et al., 2005; Brooks,
2003; Brooks, 2004; Brown and Ferris, 2007; Bryant, Slaughter, Kang, and Tax, 2003; Chang, 2005;

43

However, there are mixed results in the relationship between charitable giving and
religious socialization, denomination, and religious beliefs. Not all religious faiths have
been considered in charitable giving research; although, in several studies, Protestants
give more than Catholics in the U.S., Canada, and Netherlands (Bekkers and Schuyt,
2008; Chaves, 2002; Forbes and Zampelli, 1997, Hoge and Yang, 1994; Reed and Selbee,
2001; and Zaleski and Zech, 1992, 1994). Bekkers and Wiepking (201 lb) suggested the
following as possible influencing factors in the connection between religiosity and
charitable giving: the religious give to uphold their reputation; to support their religious
values (Bekkers and Schuyt, 2008; Lunn et al., 2001; Sullivan, 1985; Bekkers and
Wiepking, 2010a), to be socially responsible (Bekkers and Schuyt, 2008), and in response
to different solicitation methods such as tithing, annual pledges, and collections baskets
(Hoge and Yang, 1994; Zaleski and Zech, 1994; Zaleski et al., 1994).
In this study, a focus group participant discussed the influence of religion that
confirms the previous research in charitable giving and religion:
"I've been given so much in my life, in my life, [sic] that I need to give back. And
because I'm a Christian and that's what I have been taught in my church."
Other predictors of charitable giving include gender, marital status, having
children, employment, home ownership, perceived financial position, and ethnicity/race.
These are not included in the proposed model due to their confounding relationships to
the previous, more salient predictors of charitable giving - age, income, education, and
religion (Bekkers and Wiepking, 201 la).
Chaves, 2002; Davidson and Pyle, 1994; Eckel and Grossman, 2003; Eschholz and Van Slyke, 2002;
Feidman, 2007; Forbes and Zampelli, 1997; Hoge and Yang, 1994; Hunter, Jones, and Boger, 1999;
Jackson and Mathews, 1995; Lee and Farrell, 2003; Lunn, Klay, and Douglass, 2001; Lyons and NivisonSmith, 2006; Lyons and Passey, 2005; Olson and Caddell, 1994; Park and Park, 2004; Reed and Selbee,
2001; Reed and Selbee, 2002; Regnerus et al., 1998; Schiff, 1990; Schlegelmilch et al., 1997a; Sokolowski,
1996; Sullivan, 1985; Tiehen, 2001; Van Slyke and Brooks, 2005; Zaleski and Zech, 1992; Zaleski and
Zech, 1994)

44

Charitable giving motivations
Bekkers and Wiepking (201 la) stated that while the knowledge gained by
exploring the common characteristics of "who gives" is useful information, it has limited
value in testing theories about philanthropy because knowledge about who gives does not
investigate the underlying motivations for giving - "why they give. " "Few studies have
included measures of the mechanisms [motivations] that may explain relationships
between predictors and charitable giving. Without these measures, we are often left with
several possible explanations that are not mutually exclusive" (Bekkers and Wiepking,
201 la, p. 928). This study heeds their call to explore more fully why some give more
than others, why they continue to give, and the distinct nature of the relationship between
donors and nonprofit organizations.
As demonstrated thus far in the literature, a great deal of progress has been made
in understanding the characteristics of who gives and important theoretical steps have
been made in understanding why they give - motivations. Lindahl and Conley (2002)
submitted that nonprofit strategy must be based on "informed inquiry," which Bekkers
and Wiepking (201 la) argued can only be achieved through the comprehensive
investigation of charitable giving motivations and moderating variables; thereby, yielding
an elegant model of charitable giving.
Research on charitable giving motivations thus far has produced an overwhelming
number of reasons why individuals make charitable gifts and the motivations have been
organized in a number of different ways: mechanisms or motivations, altruistic and nonaltruistic, psychological motivations and sociological influences, emotional and
economic, and extrinsic and intrinsic. In the exhaustive review of empirical research on

45

charitable giving by Bekkers and Wiepking (201 la), they developed eight 'mechanisms'
of charitable giving behavior. The term, 'mechanisms' is used as a synonym for
motivations, focusing on how motivations can influence charitable giving support. The
following section reviews the literature on charitable giving motivations and is supported
by the preliminary focus group interviews.4

Trust
Trust is very important in sectors, such as the nonprofit sector, requiring
individual trust and support to succeed (Gaskin, 1999). Due to the nature of the
relationship between nonprofits and individual donors, the relationship, in most cases, is
not based on a formal contract between individuals, but rather an implied social contract
based upon trust. From this perspective, trust is the foundation for voluntary association
within the nonprofit sector (Tonkiss and Passey, 2001). Sargeant et al. (2006, p. 156)
define trust as referring "to the extent of donor belief that a charity will behave as
expected and fulfill its obligations."
Tonkiss and Passey (2001) describe three key factors to building and maintaining
individual donor trust in the nonprofit sector. (1) Unlike the private sector, nonprofits
must identify themselves as such, so that relationships are not defined by contract; but
instead, are secured by trust. (2) Trust is established through shared values between the
nonprofit and donors. These shared values form the basis of trust and should be exhibited
in the daily operations of the nonprofit. (3) Relationships based on trust in the nonprofit
4 Two focus groups were held in September 2011 to investigate, qualitatively, the variables in the proposed

model. The results of these focus group interviews confirm and corroborate previous studies in charitable
giving and provide empirical support for the proposed model. Results from these focus group interviews
are used in Chapter II to provide support for the hypotheses and the development of the proposed model.
Additionally, in Chapter IV, the results are used to illustrate the statistical results.

46

sector are different from confidence-based relationships from the private sector. Many
nonprofit organizations must balance the need for greater efficiency (confidence-based)
and maintaining donor trust. Increased provision of public goods and services by the
nonprofit sector has put increased attention on private sector values like efficiency.
Tonkiss and Passey (2001, p. 272) posit that this balance is the most challenging for
nonprofits because of the shift in focus from "wider outcomes (trust relations based on
shared evaluations of social good) to specific outputs (confidence relations based on
target-driven contracts)."
There are two types of trust in social exchange: transactional trust and relational
trust. Transactional trust involves a single, short-term exchange over a specific period of
time. Many interactions involving transactional trust are infrequent; more formal in
nature, and where emotions are less significant (Gundlach and Murphy, 1993).
Relational trust builds over time based on repeated exchanges, the history of interactions,
and on the nonprofit meeting a donor's expectations (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, and
Camerer, 1998). In contrast with transactional trust, relational trust has a long-term,
strategic orientation, involves large investments with high switching costs, and complex
outcomes.
Sargeant et al. (2006) found that the degree of trust in a charitable organization is
causally linked to the level of commitment and commitment is causally linked to the
average charitable donation. They tested drivers of trust in charitable organizations:
responsiveness, performance of the charity, and communications. Both the
organizational performance and the communications from the charity were causally

47

linked as drivers of trust whereas the relationship between responsiveness of the charity
and trust was not significant.
As such, hypothesis 4 is:
H4:Donors with a higher level of trust in a nonprofit organization will be more
satisfied with the relationship with the nonprofit organization.

Perceptions of charities
Perceptions of charities have been found to impact charitable giving behavior
(Sargeant et al., 2006). Several factors create an individual's perception of a nonprofit
organization and are used in the making the decision to donate. Several studies (Sargeant
et al., 2004; Sargeant and Woodcliffe, 2005; Bennett and Savani, 2003; and
Schlegelmilch et al., 1997b) have revealed perceived need, organizational efficiency,
organizational effectiveness, and perceived benefits, as major factors influencing the
formation of individual perceptions of charities and subsequently, charitable giving.

Perceived need
Donors must first become aware of the need for support before making a
charitable gift and this can happen through solicitation communications, personal
experience, familial connection, coverage in mass media, and charity brand awareness.
Tangible, social, or psychological needs of people are met through people asking for help
and nonprofit organizations making the case for support. Social psychology has
documented the effects of perceived need in which prosocial behaviors were studied
(Berkowitz, 1968; Berkowitz and Daniels, 1964; Schwartz, 1975). Largely, the

48

perception of need is positively related to the likelihood that help will be given (Levitt
and Kornhaber, 1977; Schwartz, 1974; Staub and Baer, 1974).
Subjective perceptions of need relate positively to increased donations (Wagner
and Wheeler, 1969). Accordingly, those who give more generously perceive a higher
need for support (Diamond and Kashyap, 1997; Weerts and Ronca, 2007); those who
volunteer believe that there is a greater demand for volunteers (Unger, 1991); those who
perceive the need for support of panhandlers give more money (Lee and Farrell, 2003);
and those who know someone in need, similarly, give to others in need (Small and
Simonsohn, 2006). These subjective, perceptions of need could be related to the
development of pro-social values and empathy.
Consequently, having knowledge of need personally inspires donations
(Polonsky, Shelley, and Voola, 2002; Radley and Kennedy, 1995). The perception of
need is higher when donors have a personal experience with it through family members
or beneficiaries of the organization. In United Way workplace giving campaigns, people
who know someone who has benefitted from a United Way agency are more probable
donors (Pitts and Skelly, 1984), which makes a strong case for the employee giving
campaign fundraising strategy employed. The link between familial connection,
perceived need, and charitable giving is most obvious in giving to disease related
organizations. People who have a relative with that disease are more likely to donate to
nonprofits working in those areas (Bekkers, 2008; Burgoyne, Young, and Walker, 2005).
More common diseases demonstrate more common need, affect more people, and
subsequently generate more support (Olsen and Eidem, 2003).

49

Nonprofit communications are designed to increase the perception of need. As
nonprofits build awareness of their "brand," and a network of volunteers, donors, and
beneficiaries, the increased perception of need generates donations. In a study of Spanish
development aid organizations, Marcuello and Salas, (2000, 2001) found that newer
organizations receive far less support and volunteers than older ones, which have a larger
volunteer base.
The perception of need is also heightened by extended coverage by the mass
media, especially in disaster and relief appeals (Simon, 1997). The strength of this
association between extended media coverage, perceived need, and charitable giving is
dependent on the number of people affected, and the identification between donors and
the people affected (Adams, 1986; Simon, 1997). Interestingly, Bennett and Kottasz
(2000) find that increased television watching is positively related to relief donations.
When the perception of need is more salient, people are motivated to give.
In the preliminary focus groups, the perception of need was a primary motivation
for giving that confirms the previous research in charitable giving and perceived need:

"[one participant said she gives because] ...there's a need and because my
needs... are taken care of."
As such hypotheses 5 and 6 are:
H5:The greater the perceived financial need of the nonprofit organization, the higher
the identity salience for the donor.
H6:The greater the perceived financial need of the nonprofit organization, the higher
the relationship satisfaction for the donor.

50

Perceived organizational performance
Perceived performance of the charitable sector and of individual organizations is
also a motivating factor for charitable giving. When donors perceive that their
contributions make a difference to the cause they are supporting, they perceive the
organization to be more effective. Sargeant, West, and Ford (2004) define effectiveness
as "the extent to which charities achieve useful goals for society and are thus seen to be
fulfilling their mission" (p.23). Conversely, when people perceive that their donation will
not make an impact, they are less likely to donate (Radley and Kennedy, 1992; Mathur,
1996; Diamond and Kashyap, 1997; Duncan, 2004; Arumi, Wooden, Johnson, Farkas,
Duffett, and Ott, 2005; and Smith and McSweeney, 2007).
Nonprofit communications relating to organizational performance influence donor
perceptions of efficacy. In experimental studies, communications demonstrating the
impact of donations had a positive influence on charitable giving (Jackson and Mathews,
1995; Parsons, 2003, 2007); as well as the disclosure of financial data in organization
communications (Parsons, 2007). As discussed earlier, communications and
organizational performance are drivers of trust in nonprofits, when donors have trust they
increase their commitment to the organization (Sargeant et al., 2006). The role of
communications and organizational performance in charitable giving was supported in
the focus groups for this study that confirms the previous research in charitable giving
and perceived organizational performance:
"I mean I feel like what they 're doing is effective and it's making a difference.
And one of the things that they do, is they do a goodjob of keeping me updated on
what they are doing and how my donations are being utilized."

51

Leadership giving is affected by perceived efficacy (List and Lucking-Reiley,
2002; Bac and Bag, 2003; List and Rondeau, 2003; Andreoni and Petrie, 2004; Potters,
Sefton, and Vesterlund, 2005; Chen, Li, and MacKie-Mason, 2006; Landry, Lange, List,
Price, and Rupp, 2006). Leadership gifts or endorsement by a person with high status
help to legitimize nonprofit organizations and inspire confidence and trust in the
perceived efficacy of a particular nonprofit (Bryan and Test, 1967; Lincoln, 1977;
Reingen, 1982). This is supported by field experiments in which solicitations signed by a
professor in health research raised donations by 2.4% (Vriens, Scheer, Hoekstra, and
Bult, 1998) and in a lab experiment which linked high status donors to leading others to
give (Kumru and Vesterlund, 2005).
Perceptions of efficacy are associated with "charitable confidence and perceptions
of overhead and fundraising costs" (Bekkers and Wiepking, 2007, p. 36). Confidence
and trust in nonprofit organizations and beliefs about their effectiveness promote
charitable giving (Bekkers, 2006a; Bennett, 2003; Bennett and Gabriel, 2003; Bowman,
2006; Keyt, Yavas, and Riecken, 2002; Parsons, 2003; Sargeant et al., 2006; Schervish
and Havens, 2002; SchlegeLmilch et al., 1997a; Yavas, Riecken, and Parameswaran,
1981). Donors who have more confidence in general about nonprofit organizations
believe their donations are less likely to be spent on administrative overhead (Bekkers,
2006a; Sargeant et al., 2006) and have a higher perceived efficacy of the nonprofit sector.
The perception of a nonprofit's efficiency also influences charitable giving
(Callen, 1994; Sargeant, 2004; Trussell and Parsons, 2007). Being efficient with
resources is a significant factor in the decision to donate (Glaser, 1994; Harvey and
McCrohan, 1988). Likewise, perceived inefficiencies (Bennet and Savani, 2002) and

52

perceived mismanagement (Sargeant, 2000) can impact charitable giving. Perceptions of
a nonprofit organization's management and fundraising efficiency can significantly
influence a donor's overall perception of the organization as well as their willingness to
give (Sargeant, 2000).
Several studies show that donors are acutely aware of expensive marketing and
fundraising materials (Sargeant and Woodliffe, 2005; Schervish and Havens, 2002;
Bekkers and Crutzen, 2007). While well designed fundraising materials are noticed by
donors (Diamond and Gooding-Williams, 2002), in field experiments, more plainly and
thriftily designed materials actually generated increased charitable giving (Warwick,
2001; Vriens et al., 1998; Bekkers and Crutzen, 2007).
As such hypotheses 7 and 8 are:
H7: The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the
identity salience of the donor.
H8: The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.

Perceived benefits
Social exchange theory explains charitable giving that is motivated by an
anticipated return from donation efforts (Amos, 1982; Bar-Tel, 1976; Krebs, 1982).
Sargeant et al. (2006) discuss three categories of benefits: demonstrable, emotional, and
familial.
Demonstrable benefits are the tangible benefits received as a result of the process
of giving with "selfish economic considerations" suggesting that individual donors are
motivated by benefits received previously or promised in the future (Sargeant et al., 2006,
p. 3). Charitable raffles or lotteries are the most obvious example of demonstrable

53

benefits, where individual donors purchase a ticket for the chance to win prizes.
Charitable donations through sponsorship, special events, performances, special access,
or other "selective incentives" are also motivated by demonstrable (tangible) benefits in
the exchange.
Donors often receive demonstrable benefits for different levels of giving, which
increase giving levels overall (Buraschi and Cornelli, 2002; Andreoni and Petrie, 2004).
For instance, a $5,000 gift at a regional professional theatre will gain the donor access to
the artistic process during the production of the play or musical. They dine with the
production staff and give their opinion on the artistic product, ultimately feeling
ownership in the end product, which in turn results in donor renewal and retention or as
Sargeant (2001) described it, "donor loyalty." Offering special access or tangible items
can be characterized as "consumption philanthropy" because motivations are based in
consumption and cloaks buying in the disguise of charitable giving.
Consumption philanthropy turns helpfulness and prosocial behaviors into
exchange where donors expect value for money. Eikenberry (2009) argues that the shortterm benefits of consumption philanthropy contradict the long-term hidden costs "individualizing solutions to collective problems; replacing virtuous action with mindless
buying; and hiding how markets create many social problems..(p. 51).
Desmet (1998) found that charities offering products for sale encounter lower
donations. Other examples of demonstrable benefits are gifts included with donation
(Alpizar et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2006; Edlund, Sagarin, and Johnson, 2007; Harris,
Liguori, and Stack, 1973), personal profit from exchange (Marr, Mullin, and Siegfried,

54

2005; Schervish and Havens, 2002), and donations in anticipation of need for the
nonprofit's services in the future (Burgoyne et al., 2005).
In this study's focus groups, participants made note of the tangible benefits and
special treatment they receive:
"...and each time you go up, you know, you get certain extra things."
One of the more pervasive motivations for charitable giving is the perceived
emotional benefit of donating (Andreoni, 2001), yielding both social and psychological
benefits of emotional association. Social benefits include recognition (Kottasz, 2004),
reputation, respect and prestige (Kotler and Andreasen, 1991; Haggberg, 1992; Komter,
1996), in some cases donors feel social pressure to contribute. Psychological benefits
include, warm feeling or glow (Andreoni, 1990), empathy, sympathy, guilt, fear, pity
(Feldman, 1985; Fultz et al., 1986), a desire to bring about social change (Radley and
Kennedy, 1995), self-esteem (Mathur, 1996), and diffusion of negative feelings (Cialdini,
1987). Several focus group participants made note of the psychological benefits of
giving:
"[the more you donate, gives you]... a status, like you feel like more important in
a way, even though it's kind of, you know, it's false in a way, and it's kind of silly,
but you do feel like more important because you are like in the director's circle
now."

One participant noted the social pressure to donate as an executive in a Fortune 500
company,
"I can tell you that there are corporate influences that come into play too... there's
nobody saying you have to do this but you can't help but notice in the company —
if you join certain Boards, or you're asked to do certain things, that you're
expected as a component of that, to be heavily involved in the gifting process and
that's associated with your role at the corporation. So I want to be careful to say

55

that no one has ever said to me, that you have to do this, but it just kind of comes
along with it - corporate pressure is an element of how the process works. "

Emotional utility is often referred to as "personal mood management" where
donors have an emotional experience resulting from the giving process (Andreoni, 2001;
Bendapudi et al., 1996; Cialdini et al., 1987; Wegener and Petty, 1994). Even in purely
altruistic motivations, there exists some form of emotional utility as a result of the giving
process.
Familial utility can be described as a personal familial connection or experience
that inspires (Bruce, 1998; Sargeant, 1999) a "need to assist or demonstrate an affinity
with one's friends or loved ones" (Sargeant et al., 2006, p. 3). Healthcare and disease
related nonprofits are particularly adept at maximizing donations from personal familial
linkages to a cause (Kotler and Clarke, 1987). For example, a focus group participant for
this study said:
"My father has Alzheimer's, so I've been a contributor to the Alzheimer's
Association for the last eight years and I will continue until he passes and
probably well onto that. You know, just because there's that direct connection,
it's influencing me, and so I will do anything, I will give as much as I can for
research."

Sargeant et al. (2006) developed these three categories of perceived benefits in the
social exchange of charitable giving, suggesting that nonprofits able to supply the
appropriate combination of benefits for donors are able to build trust and commitment
with the donors. Their study found that emotional and familial utilities are significant in
developing donor commitment and trust does not mediate the relationship. In fact, their
study concluded that trust is unrelated to the direct donor benefits and in the nonprofit

56

context is built through providing service to beneficiaries of the nonprofit and through
communications with the donors (2006, p. 9).
The following hypotheses are therefore offered:
H9:

Reciprocity in demonstrable utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

H10: Reciprocity in emotional utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.
HI 1: Reciprocity in familial utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

Solicitation
One of the most significant factors that influence charitable giving motivations is
solicitation, the experience of being asked to donate. Studies reveal that most donations
are received after being asked (Bryant et al., 2003) and usually occur within two weeks of
being asked to give (Bekkers, 2005a). Increased giving is associated with donors who are
directly solicited as opposed to being presented with passive opportunities to donate
(Bekkers, 2005a; Lee and Farrell, 2003; Simmons and Emanuele, 2004; Tiehen, 2001).
The frequency of solicitations can have an adverse effect on charitable giving.
There is marginal utility in repeat solicitations; studies have found that the average gift
decreases and asking too frequently can cause donor fatigue (Leslie and Ramey, 1988;
Van Diepen, Donkers, and Franses, 2009; Wiepking, 2008). The relationship between
repeat solicitations and charitable giving was discussed in the focus groups for this study:
"... in addition to getting a letter thanking me, and having the statement for your
IRS tax purposes, there's a follow up almost immediately, like within a week or
month, of additional solicitations. And it's, that to me is a sign of inefficiency. If
you — I understand why they would solicit, but you would think that if someone
just gave you a gift, you would wait at least, I would think, make it an annual
request, right?"

57

Larger donors report receiving more fundraising appeals (Bekkers, 2005a; Van
Diepen et al., 2009). Once they make a gift or two in response to solicitations, it attracts
new solicitations. Supported in this study's focus groups, a donor noted, "once your name
gets out there as having given to, well then your name gets out there. And then
that.. .creates problems.. .more solicitations from all over the place...1 would prefer it [his
name] not be in there [symphony program]."
The manner or mode in which donors are asked also influences the effectiveness
of the solicitation. Generally, people try to thwart solicitations (Pancer, McMullen,
Kabatoff, Johnson, and Pond, 1979) and because of growing number and frequency of
"asks for contributions," most people tend to reject the solicitation (Diamond and Noble,
2001).
In the focus groups held for this study, repeat solicitations and gifts with donation
were seen as wasteful:
"...that money could be better spent on what the organization is."
Also figuring prominent in the focus group discussion was the use of telemarketing and
professional call centers providing additional support for the previous research on
charitable giving and the experience of being solicited for support:
"The amount of money that they collected, most of it went to the collection people,
or the marketing agents. And they [nonprofits] have to do that to an extent, but ...
it really puts you off when they call, it does decrease your motivation to
give ...because you know those people don't have any stake in that [in the cause].
It decreases your trust in that charity."

58

As such, hypotheses 12 and 13 are:
H12: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the identity
saliency of the donor.
HI3: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.

Parental socialization and youth participation
Few studies have investigated the influence of parental socialization or modeling
of prosocial behaviors and subsequent charitable giving; however, it is likely that the
influence of parental modeling does impact future charitable giving behavior of children.
Prosocial behaviors can be defined as "voluntary actions that are intended to help or
benefit another individual or group of individuals" (Eisenberg and Mussen, 1989, p. 3).
Along with volunteering, helping, sharing, and cooperating, charitable giving is
considered a prosocial behavior (Batson, 1998).
The modeling of parental volunteering and charitable giving and its influence on
future charitable giving by children has produced ambivalent results. Concurrent
charitable giving by parents and children in the U.S. are strongly related (Wilhelm,
Brown, Rooney, and Steinberg, 2008). Bekkers (2005) found that higher levels of
parental education, parental religious involvement, and parental volunteering are related
to higher amounts donated by children. Logically, the financial situation and stability of
families also has an impact on charitable giving; lower income and family instability in
childhood is related to lower charitable giving in adulthood (Bandy and Wilhelm, 2007).
Schervish and Havens (1997) found no relationship between parental volunteering and
the proportion of income donated. Bryant et al. (2003) also found no relationship
between prosocial behaviors and charitable giving; whereas, Feldman (2007) did find that

59

prosocial behaviors and the likelihood of donating to be related. Eisenberg (2000) finds
that parental encouragement of prosocial values leads to charitable giving. Having a
positive relationship with parents who modeled altruistic behaviors was significantly
related to volunteer commitment (Clary and Miller, 1986). Bekkers (2005) found that
"charity begins at home" where, parental modeling of philanthropic behaviors
encouraged giving and volunteering of children as adults; youth participation in nonprofit
organizations is positively related to current giving and volunteering; parental modeling
and youth participation foster charitable giving because they support the development of
prosocial behaviors and values and build social capital.
A focus group participant discussed the role of parental socialization and youth
participation, providing corroboration for the previous research on charitable giving and
parental socialization and youth participation:
"The other reason why, I think a lot of us have this tendency to be generous is
because of our home life. And circumstances were that we weren't, we 're very
middle class, is what I came from. But we always saw, either through my family,
like my mom and dad, or with the school, because the school had a big influence,
elementary school, I didn't go to a preschool, in which we were asked, you know,
pass the hat, so to speak. So this really was sort of brought to me by our culture,
our society, as well as family values."
And another participant referred to the role of parental modeling,
"When I was growing up, we had very little money ...however, like both my
parents were in education, they were teachers, and they were very passionate
about trying to help others...and doing some volunteering. "

As such, hypotheses 14 and 15 are:
HI4: The greater the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
identity saliency of the donor.
HI5: The greater the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.

60

Proposed Model
Based on the literature discussed above and the preliminary data from the focus
groups in this study, the charitable giving motivations examined in this research are trust,
perceived need, perceived organizational performance, perceived benefits, solicitation,
and parental socialization and youth participation; and the mediating factors are identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction. The proposed model of charitable giving behavior
adds to the literature on charitable giving by: (1) including both identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction as mediating variables in a random sample of charitable donors
and (2) exploring and testing a selection of charitable giving motivations. Figure 2.3
depicts the proposed model.
Figure 2.3

Proposed Model of Individual Charitable Giving

61

Conclusion
This dissertation is built on the premise that the extant relationship marketing and
charitable giving literature, while rich in theoretical and empirical contributions, is still
limited in its ability to capture the full nature and scope of donor-nonprofit relationships.
Nonprofits have to know who to ask, when to ask, and how to ask donors for support,
which necessitates a deep knowledge of and a relationship with individual donors.

Hypotheses
As depicted in Figure 2.3 above, this new model of Individual Charitable Giving
will test the following hypotheses:
HI: The greater the identity saliency of a donor, the greater the level of charitable
giving of the donor.
H2: The greater the relationship satisfaction of a donor, the greater the level of
charitable giving of the donor.
H3: The greater the identity saliency and the relationship satisfaction, the greater the
level of charitable giving of the donor.
H4: Donors with a higher level of trust in a nonprofit organization will be more
satisfied with the relationship with the nonprofit organization.
H5: The greater the perceived financial need of the nonprofit organization, the
higher the identity salience for the donor.
H6: The greater the perceived financial need of the nonprofit organization, the
higher the relationship satisfaction for the donor.
H7: The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the identity
salience of the donor.
H8: The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.
H9: Reciprocity in demonstrable utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

62

H10: Reciprocity in emotional utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.
HI 1: Reciprocity in familial utility will relate positively to charitable giving mediated
by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.
H12: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the identity
saliency of the donor.
H13: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.
HI4: The greater the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
identity saliency of the donor.
HI 5: The greater .the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.

63

CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY

Introduction
Chapter I of this dissertation presented an introduction to identity saliency theory
and relationship marketing theory and provided justification for the importance of this
research study. The literature review and theory development in Chapter II then provided
insight into the findings of past research on charitable giving behavior, explicating past
research on the predictors of charitable giving and the motivations for charitable giving
and offered a theoretical foundation for the model which is tested in this study. This
chapter will present the methodology, the data collection, the instrument and associated
constructs, and the analytical procedures utilized to answer the two research questions
and test the 15 research hypotheses in the research design.
This chapter begins with a discussion of the research questions and purpose of the
research, the design and methodology, and then explains the sampling frame and
mechanisms for each stage of the data collection. The qualitative phase of data collection
is reviewed, followed by a presentation of the quantitative data collection; including, the
survey instrument and the scales measuring the various constructs. Finally, the method
of quantitative data analysis will be reviewed and a summary section presented.

Research Questions
The purpose of this research is to examine charitable giving motivations, and to
test and extend recent nonprofit relationship marketing research, which has sought to
explain the antecedents to successful relationships with nonprofit donors and to clarify

64

the role of identity saliency and donor relationship satisfaction in nonprofit relationship
marketing success. The thesis of this research is that two key relational factors, "identity
saliency," drawn from social psychology and organizational behavior, and "relationship
satisfaction," drawn from social exchange theory, mediate relational exchange in the
nonprofit context (See Figure 1.1). This study explores relationship marketing in the
nonprofit context by (1) positing that identity saliency and relationship satisfaction
mediate relational exchange in the nonprofit context and (2) investigating several
charitable giving motivations that influence identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

Research Design
This study examines the relationship between charitable giving motivations and
charitable giving behavior, mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.
Eight constructs are examined as charitable giving motivations and two mediating
constructs (identity saliency and relationship satisfaction) are tested. The constructs and
scales used to measure them are discussed in more detail later in this chapter. The study
employed a sequential mixed methods research design, chosen for this research because
of its ability to strengthen the proposed individual charitable giving model and the survey
instrument design.
Using mixed methods is more than the simple combination of qualitative and
quantitative methods. It involves the use of both approaches to inquiry in a manner that
strengthens the study overall, given that the use of only qualitative or quantitative
research is less effective (Piano Clark, 2007). There are three general strategies for
mixing methods: sequential, concurrent, and combined (Creswell, 2009). This study

65

employed sequential mixed methods because, as described by Tashakkori and Teddlie
(2003), the first data collection method (focus group interviews) has informed the
development of the second data collection method (survey instrument). Similarly, the
transcripts from the focus group interviews are used to support the proposed model
(Creswell and Piano Clark, 2007). A pragmatic approach to research, the mixed methods
logic of inquiry uses "induction (or discovery of patterns), deduction (testing of theories
and hypotheses), and abduction (uncovering and relying on the best of a set of
explanations for understanding one's results)" (Onwuegbuzie and Johnson, 2004, p.17).
In this research, the sequencing of preliminary focus group interviews followed by a
cross-sectional survey of a larger sample allowed the researcher to find descriptive data
about the charitable giving motivations, perceptions about nonprofit organizations,
relationship satisfaction, and charitable giving behavior and to develop the proposed
model and survey instrument. Gilbert Churchill (1979) proposed aprocedure, Table 3.1,
for validating constructs that embraces a multi-method approach to inquiry and it has
guided the structure of this dissertation.
Table 3.1
Procedure for Validating Constructs
Stage 1
1. Specify the domain of the
constructs.

Literature search
Construct definition

2. Generate the initial sample of
items.

Literature search
Initial item sample
In-depth interviews
Expert input
Refined item sample

66

3. Collect data - pre-test.

Collect qualitative data
Qualitative focus
group interviews
Survey design

4. Purify the measures.

Reliability analysis
Confirmatory factor analysis
Revised item sample

5. Collect the data.

Collect quantitative data

6. Assess the reliability.

Reliability analysis

7. Assess validity.

Confirmatory factor analysis
Test construct validity
- Convergent
Discriminant

8. Develop norms.

Test nomological validity

Stage 2

Note. Adapted from "A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of
Marketing Constructs," by G. A. Churchhill, 1979, Journal of Marketing
Research 16 (February), p. 66.

Stage One Qualitative
After reviewing the literature on charitable giving, two focus groups were
convened for the purpose of exploring charitable giving motivations and charitable giving
behavior using a semi-structured interview protocol and techniques. A snowball sample
of individual donors, within the geographic area of Hampton Roads, was interviewed in
two small groups. A moderator's guide (Appendix C) structured the interviews
somewhat and freedom to deviate and return to the guide as the discussion progressed
was allowed. An outside observer, also an Old Dominion University doctoral student
from the Urban Studies and Public Administration Department, was used to take detailed

67

field notes during the focus groups. Both an audit trail and the use of member checking
were used as strategies to ensure the accuracy of the data collected.
Participation in the focus groups was completely voluntary and the participants in
the focus groups were asked to keep the discussion confidential within the members of
the group and by participating; they agreed to hold the information confidential. The
participants provided informed consent (Appendix D).
Participants for the focus groups were recruited using a snowball technique,
which is a type of purposive sampling where referrals for the focus groups were initiated
through social networks (Patton, 2002). First, area corporations (two Fortune 500
corporations and a large local realty) were contacted for solicitation as potential sites for
focus groups. One of the Fortune 500 corporations declined to participate due to a lack
of interest in the research topic by the company liaison. Next, a meeting was scheduled
with each company liaison in which the details of the research were discussed and their
commitment to participate, by helping with the recruitment of participants and provision
of a space, secured. Third, the two company liaisons were given a flyer (Appendices E,
F) summarizing the research activity to distribute as needed to potential participants. The
company liaison contacted potential participants by telephone, in person, and by email,
extending an invitation to participate in the focus groups. To qualify to participate in the
focus groups, participants must have made a charitable donation, cash or in-kind, in the
last 24 months. The focus groups were conducted in September 2011. The data collected
was considered sensitive because it had been obtained from identified participants;
however, any identifiers at the beginning of the focus group were deleted and discarded
from the analysis. The focus groups were recorded via digital audio and downloaded by

68

the principal investigator. The presence of audio recording of the discussion was
acknowledged both in the informed consent and verbally, at the beginning of each focus
group by the facilitator. Group members who were uncomfortable with being recorded
were given the opportunity to leave without embarrassment, although none did. The
transcripts for the focus groups were reviewed and coded by the principal investigator.
Moving from the general to the specific, the donors were asked a series of
questions followed by group discussion on giving motivations, repeat giving, barriers or
deterrents to giving, and attitudes about giving. Finally, the group members were asked
to share anything that might not have already been covered but that they felt was relevant
to the discussion. The interviews were designed to produce keywords and concepts and
provide insight in the proposed individual giving model, Figure 2.3. Recurring themes
and concepts, including variable additions/deletions and support for the variable linkages
in the proposed model were identified. The results of the qualitative stage were largely
supportive of the proposed model and an additional construct was added as a charitable
giving motivation. The models presented in Figures 1.1 and 2.3 were evaluated in terms
of the results of those interviews and discussions, as was the survey instrument
(Appendix A). A more detailed presentation of the qualitative stage of inquiry and
results is presented in Chapter IV.

Stage Two Quantitative
This study focuses on the charitable giving behaviors of individuals, and as such,
data was collected from individual donors to nonprofit organizations (those people who
have donated to charity in the last 24 months). A cross sectional web survey of an online

69

consumer panel was employed to gather information on a population at a single point in
time (Babbie, 1990). The survey instrument (Appendix A) tested 15 research hypotheses
through 83 questions.
The use of the Internet for surveys is increasing due to technological and cultural
changes in survey methods (Dillman et al., 2009; Couper, 2000). More people are using
the Internet and email as a primary workplace and communication tool. A new survey by
the Pew Research Center's Internet and American Life Project found that 75% of all
adults in the U.S. actively participate in a voluntary group or organization and of those,
Internet users are more likely to be active participants than those who do not use the
Internet (Rainie, Purcell, and Smith, 2011). Using a web-administered survey is an
appropriate choice for this target population.
Issues and Answers, Inc., a market research firm, was contracted to provide a
random sample of individual donors from the three largest MSAs in Virginia (ArlingtonAlexandria5, Richmond, and Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News). Use of a random
sample reduces the risk of sample bias in the survey results. The firm was asked to
provide a wide mix of demographic profiles as well as a mix of the type of charitable
organizations that the money was donated to and the donation amount.
Issues and Answers, Inc. secures its sample from a national online consumer
panel. In contrast to telephone surveys and random sample email surveys, online
consumer panels have been shown to produce more reliable results and are an acceptable
alternative to telephone surveys that produce high-quality research (Braunsberger et al.,
2007). The vast majority of the U.S. population can be reached by telephone, 98%
5 In this study, Arlington-Alexandria refers to the Virginia residents of the Washington-

Arlington-Alexandria MSA that encompasses residents from Maryland, Virginia, and the
District of Columbia.

70

(Smith, 2011) and the use of telephone survey methods has increased significantly (Link
and Oldenick 1999). Nevertheless, telephone surveys have several weaknesses that can
be overcome by the use of an online consumer panel in web surveys. The increase in
telemarketing, telemarketing fraud, and deceitful fundraising practices via telephone has
negatively impacted the response rate on telephone surveys (Council for Marketing and
Opinion Research, 2003; Fowler, 2009). Fraudulent fundraising practices via telephone
have made donors wary of discussing charitable giving over the telephone (Federal Trade
Commission, 2011). As such, more affluent households and those with older children are
screening telephone calls, utilizing Caller ID and other "gatekeeper technologies"
(Tucker and Oldenick, 1999). Telephone interviewers experience more hang-ups if the
call is perceived to be a telemarketer (Elving, 2000; Council for Marketing and Opinion
Research, 2003). Thus, response rates for telephone surveys are very low (Keeter et al.,
2000; Council for Marketing and Opinion Research, 2003) and the generalizability of
telephone survey results is often questionable (Strieber et al., 1986; Tucker and O'Neill,
2002).
The employment of web survey methods has made surveying potential
respondents quick and inexpensive. A web survey using an online consumer panel can
generate results very quickly. The costs associated with web surveys are significantly
less than telephone and traditional mail methods (Krasilovsky, 1996) and the pool of
potential respondents is higher (Couper, 2000). However, nonresponse rates can be
equally as high as telephone surveys and the coverage error may also be high (Couper,
2000). Web survey respondents may not be truthful in demographic information, which
can make the survey results inaccurate, and any conclusions drawn invalid (Braunsberger

71

et al., 2007). However, James (2003) suggested that the use of consumer panels
specifically enlisted for online research, like that, which is used in this study, could
overcome these limitations.
Some sources of potential error to consider in survey research are coverage error,
sampling error, non-response error, and measurement error. Coverage error occurs when
all members of the target population do not have a probable chance of being included in
the sample causing the results to not accurately reflect the target population (Fowler,
2009). Sampling error, or standard error, gives the researcher an understanding about the
precision of the statistical estimate generated from the survey results. Acquiring a large,
probability sample and inferring their responses to the population reduces sampling, or
standard error. Non-response error, the sample bias that occurs when a segment of the
population is not surveyed, is overcome by the use of a web-administered survey.
Measurement error is the bias or error that occurs when surveys do not measure the
intended construct due to problems with the survey instrument, question wording and
order, and response options (Fowler, 2009). Using previously validated construct scales
and pre-testing the final survey instrument has reduced the amount of measurement error
in this study. Finally, Fowler (2009) advocates that researchers use a level of rigor
appropriate to the project goals, deviating as necessary while maintaining, "precision,
accuracy, and credibility of survey estimates" (p. 175).

72

Survey Instrument
The survey instrument (Appendix A) contains 83 questions that test the 15
hypotheses of the proposed individual giving model. A complete table of how the
variables are operationalized is provided in Appendix B.
The unit of analysis is the individual respondent to the survey, drawn from a
random sample of charitable donors from the three largest MSAs in Virginia. In the
social sciences, the individual is the most typical unit of analysis (Babbie, 1990). Current
research on charitable giving guided the selection of the unit of analysis. Charitable
giving behavior is considered a household activity because the resources of a household
are pooled, and as such, is most often measured at the household level (Burgoyne et al.,
2005). However, because this study investigates individual charitable giving
motivations, an individual's identity saliency, and an individual's satisfaction with the
nonprofit relationship, it makes sense to then measure the dependent variable, charitable
giving, also at the individual level.

Charitable giving
Relationship fundraising success is measured by increased and renewed donations
and promoting behaviors (Arnett et al., 2003; Mael and Ashworth, 1992; Sargeant, 2001).
As such, the dependent variable of interest in this study is a measure of the level of
charitable giving. To test the dependent variable, charitable giving, Questions 4-9 asked
about donations in the past as well as the intention to donate in the future. (Table 3.2, 3.3)
Two large panel studies from the Netherlands and the United States use a series of selfreport questions about past charitable giving that focus on the details of the donations in

73

order to minimize error. Rooney et al. (2001) found that asking detailed questions about
donation history increases the frequency and amount of self-report data on charitable
donations. The method of questioning, however, does not apply in studies focusing on
gifts to one nonprofit organization.
In this study, respondents are asked to first identify the nonprofit organization
with which they have a relationship, the type of organization it is, and to estimate its size
(Questions 1-3). They are asked how much they gave in total with prompts for the
different kinds giving opportunities found in many nonprofits. The following questions
ask about the frequency of gifts and the length of time they had been a donor of the
organization (Table 3.2).
To measure intention to donate and promote, a four-item intention to donate scale
is used. Ranganathan and Henley (2007) adapted the Coyle and Thorson (2001)
behavioral intention scale (Table 3.3) to charitable giving intentions in a survey of 214
individuals with a Cronbach's alpha reliability coefficient of .89. This was adapted for
use in this study.
Table 3.2
Charitable giving
How much did you donate to (X) in the past year? Please include donations through
direct mail, online, tickets to special events, raffles, sponsorships, and team fundraising
events.
How frequent are your
donations to (X) in the
past year?

Once

2 or 3
times /
year

4 to 8
times /
year

Monthly

How long have you been a Less than 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5
donor of (X)?
1 year
years
Note. The nonprofit's name is inserted at X throughout the questionnaire.

Weekly

74

Table 3.3
Intention to donate
"Completely disagree" to "Completely agree", seven-point scale
I am likely to donate to the charity in question.
I will donate the next time.
I will definitely donate.
I will recommend the charity to others to donate
Note. Adapted from Ranganathan, S. and Henley, W.H. (2007). Determinants of
charitable donation intentions: A structural equation model. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 73(1), 1-11.

Identity salience
Identity salience refers to the self-relevance of role identities in an individual.
Identity saliency was measured using a seven-point scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 =
strongly agree) developed and tested by Callero (1985) with a Cronbach's alpha
reliability coefficient of .81. The extent to which the donor role-identity is a part of the
donor's self is operationalized by adapting the blood donor salience scale (Callero, 1985)
to charitable giving (Table 3.4).
Table 3.4
Identity Saliency
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
Donating to (X) is something I rarely think about.
I would feel a loss if I were forced to give up donating to (X).
I really don't have clear feelings about (X) donation.
For me, being a donor means more than just giving money.
Donating to (X) is an important part of who I am.
Note. The nonprofit name is inserted throughout the survey at X. Callero, P. L. (1985).
Role identity salience. Social Psychology Quarterly, 48(3), 203-215.

Relationship satisfaction
Donors were asked to assess the quality of the relationship with the nonprofit
organization in question and the quality of the service offered using a measurement
instrument, SERVQUAL (Parasuraman et al., 1988), which was adapted to charitable

75

giving by Sargeant (2001) using a seven-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 7 =
strongly agree) (Table 3.5).
Table 3.5
Relationship Satisfaction
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
I feel confident that X is using my monies appropriately.
X's communications are always courteous.
X's employees have the best interests of society at heart.
X is the charity most likely to have an impact on this cause.
When X promises to provide a service to society, it does so.
I feel safe in my transactions with X.
Their communications are visually appealing.
X keeps me informed about how my monies are being used.
Employees in X are always courteous
X's communications are always timely.
The behavior of X's employees instills confidence.
Employees in X have the knowledge to answer my questions.
X's employees have the best interests of their supporters at heart.
X makes me feel that it is always willing to help me if I have a query.
Employees at X are never too busy to speak with me.
X always responds promptly to requests I might have for information.
X gives me individual attention.
X writes to me at the times of the year I find most convenient.
Employees of X seem to understand my specific needs.
When I have a problem, X shows an interest in solving it.
Note. The name of the nonprofit is inserted at X throughout the questionnaire. Sargeant,
A. (2001). Relationship Fundraising: How to Keep Donors Loyal. Nonprofit Management
and Leadership, 12(2), 177.

Trust
Trust was measured using a scale developed by Sargeant and Lee (2004) and
subsequently used again in charitable giving behavior research by Sargeant et al. (2006).
Trust is defined as "the extent of donor belief that a charity will behave as expected and
fulfill its obligations" (Sargeant and Lee, 2004). The researchers measure trust in a fiveitem measure designed to capture the degree of trust in a nonprofit organization.
Respondents were asked to what extent they agreed with statements in a seven-point

76

Likert scale from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree." This was tested among 334
respondents by Sargeant and Lee (2004)) and was found to exhibit a Cronbach's alpha
coefficient reliability of 0.96 for trust in a nonprofit to which a donation has been made
(Table 3.6).
Table 3.6
Trust
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
I would trust this nonprofit to always act in the best interest of the cause.
I would trust this nonprofit to conduct their operations ethically.
I would trust this nonprofit to use donated funds appropriately.
I would trust this nonprofit not to exploit their donors.
I would trust this nonprofit to use fundraising techniques that are appropriate and
sensitive.
Source: Sargeant A, and Lee S. (2004). Donor trust and relationship commitment in the
U.K. charity sector: The impact on behavior. Nonprofit Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
33(2), 185-202.

Perceived need
Perceived need was measured using a scale developed by Arnett et al. (2003) in a
survey on alumni charitable giving behavior and relationship marketing. While a
subjective construct, the perception of need can be described as donors being aware of
the nonprofit organization's need for support. Arnett et al. (2003) measured perceived
need using three statements measured on a seven-point scale ("strongly disagree" to
"strongly agree"). This was tested among 953 respondents and was found to exhibit a
Cronbach's alpha coefficient reliability of 0.86 for perceived need of a nonprofit to which
a donation has been made. (Table 3.7)

77

Table 3.7
Perceived Need
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
(Nonprofit name)'s need for financial support from its donors will be even greater in the
future.
Nonprofit organizations that receive some public funding need the financial support of
their donors just as much as those nonprofits that do not.
(Nonprofit name) presently needs strong financial support from its donors.
Note. Arnett, D. B., German S. D., and Hunt, S. D. (2003). The identity salience model of
relationship marketing success: The case of nonprofit marketing. Journal of Marketing,
67(2), 89-105.

Perceived organizational performance
Perceived organizational performance was measured using a scale developed by
Sargeant et al. (2006) in a survey of charitable giving behavior in the U.S. Perceived
organizational performance can be described as donors understanding of the efficiency
and efficacy of a nonprofit organization's operations. Sargeant et al. (2006) measured
perceived organizational performance using two statements measured on a seven-point
•*
*
scale ("strongly disagree" to "strongly agree"). This was tested among 1,355 respondents
and was found to exhibit a Cronbach's alpha coefficient reliability of 0.83 for perceived
organizational performance of a nonprofit to which a donation has been made. (Table
3.8)
Table 3.8
Perceived Organizational Performance
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
This nonprofit is the nonprofit most likely to have an impact on this cause.
This nonprofit spends a high proportion of its income on this cause.
Note. Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual determinants of
nonprofit giving behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.

78

Perceived benefits
Perceived benefits were measured using three scale scales developed by Sargeant
et al. (2006) in a survey of charitable giving behavior in the U.S. They divided perceived
benefits, or anticipated returns from charitable giving, into three constructs: demonstrable
utility, emotional utility, and familial utility. Demonstrable benefits are the tangible
benefits received as a result of the process of giving with "selfish economic
considerations" suggesting that individual donors are motivated by benefits received
previously or promised in the future (Sargeant et al., 2006, p. 3). They measured
demonstrable utility using five statements measured on a seven-point scale ("strongly
disagree" to "strongly agree"), which was found to have a Cronbach's alpha coefficient
reliability of .71. (Table 3.9) Emotional utility is often referred to as "personal mood
management" where donors have an emotional experience resulting from the giving
process (Andreoni, 2001; Bendapudi et al., 1996; Cialdini et al., 1987; Wegener and
Petty, 1994). They measured emotional utility using two statements measured on a
seven-point scale ("strongly disagree" to "strongly agree"), which was found to have a
Cronbach's alpha coefficient reliability of .68. (Table 3.10) Familial utility can be
described as a personal familial connection or experience that inspires (Bruce, 1998;
Sargeant, 1999) a "need to assist or demonstrate an affinity with one's friends or loved
ones (Sargeant et al., 2006, p. 3). They measured familial utility using three statements
measured on a seven-point scale ("strongly disagree" to "strongly agree"), which was
found to have a Cronbach's alpha coefficient reliability of .72. (Table 3.11)

79

Table 3.9
Perceived Benefits: Demonstrable Utility
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
When I give to this nonprofit I receive some benefit in return for my donation.
I give to this nonprofit to gain local prestige.
I donate money to this nonprofit to receive their publications.
Contributing to this nonprofit enables me to obtain recognition.
I may one day benefit from the work this organization undertakes.
Source: Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual determinants of
nonprofit giving behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.

Table 3.10
Perceived Benefits: Emotional Utility
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
I often give to this nonprofit because I would guilty if I didn't.
If I never gave to this nonprofit I would feel bad about myself.
Source: Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual determinants of
nonprofit giving behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.

Table 3.11
Perceived Benefits: Familial Utility
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
I give money to this nonprofit in memory of a loved one.
I felt that someone I know might benefit from my support.
My family had a strong link to this nonprofit.
Source. Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual determinants of
nonprofit giving behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.

Solicitation
Solicitation was measured using a scale developed by Sargeant (2001) in a survey
of ten thousand individual donors in the U.K. In this study, solicitation is defined as the
degree of satisfaction with the solicitation process. This differs from relationship
satisfaction as it directly assesses the experience of being asked to donate. Sargeant
(2001) measured this using nine statements measured on a seven-point scale ("strongly
disagree" to "strongly agree"). (Table 3.12)

80

Table 3.12
Solicitation
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
Asking for appropriate levels of support.
Leaving it to me how much to donate.
Thanking me for my support.
Responding quickly when I contact them.
Demonstrating they care about their supporters.
Being polite in all their communications.
Informing me about how money is spent.
Not asking me for support too often.
Making me feel important.
Note. Sargeant, A. (2001). Relationship fundraising: How to keep donors loyal. Nonprofit
Management and Leadership, 12(2), 111.

Parental Socialization and Youth Participation
Parental socialization and youth participation were measured using a scale
developed by Perry (1997) in a survey testing the antecedents to public service
motivation. Peny (1997) adapted a parental socialization and youth participation scale
from Clary and Miller (1986), using eleven of the original fifteen statements with a
Cronbach's alpha coefficient reliability at .78. Parental modeling of pro-social behaviors
and youth participation, in particular volunteering and donating to charity, have been
shown to be strongly correlated to altruistic behavior in adulthood (Clary and Miller,
1986; Rosenhan, 1970; Bekkers, 2005). (Table 3.13)
Table 3.13
Parental Socialization and Youth Participation
"Strongly disagree" to "Strongly agree", seven-point scale
My parents rarely donated money to charitable causes.
My father treated his job as one in which he tried to help other people.
My parents actively participated in volunteer organizations (such as the Red Cross,
March of Dimes, etc.)
My mother treated her job (in home an/or out-of home) as one in which she helped other
people.
In my family, we always helped one another.

81

My parents very frequently donated money to people who collected money door to door
(Such as March of Dimes, Heart Fund, etc.)
Concerning strangers experiencing distress, my parents generally thought that it was
more important to "not to get involved."
My parents frequently discussed moral values with me (values like the "Golden Rule,"
etc.)
When I was growing up, my parents told me I should be willing to "lend a helping hand."
My parents often urged me to donate money to charities.
When I was younger, my parents very often urged me to get involved with volunteer
projects for children (for example, UNICEF, walkathons, etc.)
Note. Perry, J. (1997). Antecedents of public service motivation. Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory, 7(2), 181-197.

Data Analysis
The raw data was downloaded, formatted, and coded for transfer to SPSS and
AMOS for analysis.
Step 1:

Sample Profile
The survey sample was profiled for age, sex, race, education and income. While

the sample was skewed towards female and Caucasian, this is not inconsistent with
charitable giving. The sample was scrutinized for donor behaviors. The intent of this is
to reconfirm that the data is distributed widely.
Step 2:

Measurement Model
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted for all of the constructs using

AMOS. Next the modification indices were run which revealed any problematic items
and construct cross loadings. Items with low loadings were dropped and the fit of the
model was examined. Reliability for the latent constructs was determined using
Cronbach's alpha (SPSS).

82

Step 3:

Structural model
Once the CFA worked after refinements, structural equation modeling was

conducted using AMOS under the advisement of the methodologist member of the
committee. The model fit indices were analyzed along with the variance explained for
the endogenous constructs. The regression weights for the hypothesized links were tested
for statistical significance.
Step 4:

Data summarizing
The results of the sample profile analysis, the final list of scale items with the

standardized loadings, the fit indices of the measurement model, the standardized
weights, and statistical significance of the links in the structural model were summarized
in the form of tables and figures. The results of these analyses are presented in Chapter
IV.

Limitations
There are some limitations in survey research and specifically, charitable giving
research that should be addressed. While every attempt to has been made to strengthen
the research design, the use of a random sample from a consumer research panel may
present a threat to internal validity, selection bias, as the members of the panel have
agreed to membership for the purpose of surveys. However, it has been requested that
the random sample be reflective of the populations in those MSAs. Additionally, since
the population is limited to Virginia, the results cannot be generalized to other
populations. A limitation commonly found in charitable giving research is social
desirability (Hall, 2001). Some people may not want to admit how little they give or that
they do not give at all. In order to be perceived more socially desirable, they give more

83

socially desirable answers, such as reporting higher or more frequent charitable
donations. Dillman (2007) suggests that using a survey method that minimizes
interpersonal communication such as mail or web surveys reduces socially desirable
responses.

Summary
This chapter explained the proposed methodology for this research project, which
utilizes a sequential mixed methods research design using focus group interviews and a
cross sectional survey on a random sample of charitable donors in Arlington-Alexandria,
Richmond, and Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News MSAs. The purpose of the study
is to examine charitable giving motivations, and to test and extend recent nonprofit
relationship marketing research, which has sought to explain the antecedents to
successful relationships with nonprofit donors and to clarify the role of identity saliency
and donor relationship satisfaction in nonprofit relationship marketing. The next chapter
presents the collection and analysis of the data to answer the previously discussed
research questions.

84

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS OF THE STUDY

Introduction
Chapter III explained the data collection method for this study, introduced the
sample utilized in the study, recounted the hypotheses for the variables of interest,
described the survey instrument, and reviewed the analytic approaches. This chapter
presents the results of the sequential mixed methods study, presenting first the results of
the qualitative stage and second, the results of the quantitative stage. The hypotheses and
the resulting analytics are presented in numerical order according to the presentation for
the conceptual framework within the literature review in Chapter II.

Stage One - Qualitative
The qualitative stage of this study was comprised of two one-hour focus group
interviews for the purpose of exploring charitable giving motivations and charitable
giving behavior using a semi-structured interview protocol and techniques. The review
of the focus group transcripts generated several key findings that informed the
development of the survey instrument which are described below in terms of
commonalities with the semi-structured interview topics: charitable giving motivations,
barriers or deterrents to charitable giving, and repeat giving.
In-depth analysis of the transcripts for the two one-hour focus groups was
completed using a qualitative analysis worksheet. The researcher coded the transcripts
and then counted the frequencies to the qualitative worksheet. Keywords, statements,
and concepts were identified from the focus groups and similarities and differences were

85

noted between the two focus groups. The researcher was sensitive to interwoven
relationships of topics and constructs.
Among charitable giving motivations, the most prevalent reason noted by
participants as a reason for giving was identification with the cause of the nonprofit
organization. Almost all of the participants discussed how they understood the mission
of the nonprofit and that they felt a close connection with the cause and the organizations
they support. They shared personal stories of familial closeness to the cause and how
they might have been helped in the past, even expressing feelings of guilt if they did not
support the nonprofit.
Other charitable giving motivations discussed in order of their prevalence were:
perceived need, perceived organizational performance, giving back, parental socialization
and youth participation, recognition, altruism, perceived benefits, ease of giving,
religious influence, communications, making a difference, economic ability to give, peer
pressure, familial connection, spousal influence, tax deductibility, status, and prestige
(Table 4.1). The pursuit of prestige or societal status through charitable giving was not
very important to the focus group participants. In fact, several participants denied it as a
motivation for giving directly when the topic was brought up. Examples of those
responses included "I don't - I don't personally know anyone that gives for any of those
reasons" to "most of the people I know aren't going to donate enough to have a plaque."
However, when asked about donor recognition and expressions of thanks for their gifts,
there was general agreement that there are tangible and intangible benefits to giving:
examples of those included "each time you go up, you know, you get certain extra
things" and "they send quarterly newsletters" to "when you go to the symphony, that's

86

the first thing you do is go to the back of the program and look for your name and I feel
good when my name is in there."
Several participants noted the influence of past life experiences such as parental
modeling of pro-social behaviors like giving and volunteering and the participation in
charitable fundraising drives in their youth:
"When I was growing up, we had very little money, however, like both my parents
were in education, they were teachers, and they were very passionate about trying
to help others, and doing some volunteering, and so I saw that, and that kept
building and I expect my children, who will see me doing things, will be the same
way."

The focus group participants also discussed barriers and deterrents to charitable
giving. Mismanagement, scandal, and wasteful spending, especially in the fundraising
solicitation process were noted as major deterrents to giving. Regarding the experience
of being asked to donate, participants were turned off to telefunding campaigns, "notes to
neighbors," and direct mail solicitation that included a gift, such as return address labels,
stationary, magnets, or desk items etc. These methods were perceived as both annoying
and wasteful. Also, participants preferred to make charitable gifts to local organizations
that were perceived as more likely to make an impact in their community: "we tend to
give more of our giving to local organizations that we know specifically impact people in
this area."
Repeat giving among the participants was primarily motivated by knowing that
their gift was making an impact, most often communicated in publications, letters, and
newsletters from the nonprofit. Encouraged by the demonstration of the usefulness of
their donations, they indicated repeat giving: "one of the things that they do, is they do a
good job of keeping me updated on what they are doing and how my donations are being

87

utilized." However, what discouraged repeat giving was additional "asks" so quickly and
often after the first gift was made: "there's a follow up almost immediately, like within a
week or month, of additional solicitations...it's a sign of inefficiency."
The results of the focus groups and the review of the previous research in
charitable giving behavior informed the design of the survey instrument. Several
constructs from the literature review were confirmed in the focus groups as necessary for
inclusion: trust, perceived financial need, perceived organizational performance, and
perceived benefits (demonstrable utility, emotional utility, and familial utility). Two
more constructs emerged from the focus groups, directly informing the survey instrument
design and proposed model: satisfaction with the solicitation process and parental
socialization and youth participation. Table 4.1 present the keywords listed in order of
prevalence in the transcripts.
Table 4.1
Keywords & Statements in Focus Groups
Identification
Way in which asked and/or authenticity of ask
Perceived need
Organizational efficiency
Giving back
Parental socialization
Organizational effectiveness
Recognition
Altruism
Perceive benefits
Easy to give
Religion
Communications
Making a difference
Economic situation
Other cause
Peer pressure
Familial
Spouse
Tax deduction
Status
Prestige
Note: Listed in order of descending prevalence.

. .

.

88

Stage Two - Quantitative
Data Collection Process
Issues and Answers Network, Inc., located in Virginia Beach, was contracted to
collect the survey data from an online consumer panel. They were asked to provide 500
completed surveys from U.S. consumers located in the three largest metropolitan
statistical areas in the Commonwealth of Virginia (Arlington-Alexandria, Richmond, and
Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News) who had made two or more donations to the
same nonprofit organization in the last two years. Designed to be reflective of the U.S.
Census, the online consumer panel in these geographic areas contained 13,945 members.
The research agency utilized the following process for data collection. The total
panel was divided by the required sample size (500) to create a selection interval.
Records were chosen according to the selection interval. Once the end of the sampling
frame was reached, the software went back to the beginning for additional records to
fulfill the needed sample size. The resulting target sample was sorted randomly before
emailing, using a standard Oracle™ random sorting algorithm. When samples were
emailed, each group represented a smaller version of the entire sample, similar in
demographics and geography to other groups. For the current project 1,274 respondents
answered the first screening question and then 719 (56%) qualified as having donated
two or more times to the same charity in the last 2 years and completed the entire survey.
The invitations to participate in the study were sent to members of the panel sharing these
demographics: 18 years and older, mostly with annual household income over $30,000,
and representing a geographic spread over the three largest metropolitan statistical areas
in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The agency returned completed responses from 719

89

donors who made two or more donations to the same charity in the last two years. The
data was received in SPSS format.

Profile of survey respondents
The survey respondents were charitable donors from the three largest MSAs in
Virginia who had made two or more charitable donations of money to the same nonprofit
within the past two years. The total number of online surveys started was 1,274 of which
719 were utilized in analysis (N = 719). No surveys were excluded due to missing data.
Each question had the same number of valid responses. As mentioned earlier, the total
sampling frame is 13,945 and this survey captured about 5 percent of the sampling.
The data was checked for inconsistencies and frequencies for all scale items were
analyzed. The review indicated that there were no major issues, no missing data, and it
appeared to be balanced. The demographic profile of the respondents was also
scrutinized for representativeness and balance.
Tables 4.2 - 4.8 present the demographic profile of the respondents and 2010
census data for the Commonwealth of Virginia is also provided for comparison. A
detailed analysis of the respondents showed that there was a balanced break down on age.
(Table 4.2). The average age of the respondents was 48 years. Gender was skewed more
towards female (Table 4.3). The racial profile of the respondents was skewed more
towards Caucasians (Table 4.4). All income groups were represented in the sample
(Table 4.5). The respondents in the sample were educated, with 94.7% having completed
some college education or more (Table 4.6) and 57.2% of respondents had a military
affiliation, where someone in their immediate family is currently on active duty in the

90

U.S. Military or is a veteran, or retired military6 (Table 4.7). The respondents in the
sample were also evenly spread among avid churchgoers to non-church goers (Table 4.8).
Table 4.2
AS*
Survey
Virginia
Mean
48 years old
38.7 years old
Standard Deviation
14.515 years
Minimum
19 years old
Maximum
91 years old
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2009 American Community Survey, "Age" Retrieved
online at http://factfinder.census.gov.

Table 4.3
Gender
N
Percentage
Virginia
Male
272
37.8
49.1
Female
447
62.2
50.9
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2009 American Community Survey, "Gender" Retrieved
online at http://factfinder.census.gov.
Table 4.4
Race
N
Percentage
Virginia
White
583
81.1
71.5
Black or African American
57
7.9
19.7
American Indian or Alaskan Native
2
.3
.5
Asian
50
7.0
5.6
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander
4
.6
.3
From multiple races
23
3.2
2.4
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2009 American Community Survey, "Race" Retrieved
online at http://factfinder.census.gov.

6 While this might be initially perceived as high or skewed, this is representative of the estimated number
of veterans living in Virginia, 819,490 and includes all immediate family members ("State summary,"

2010).

91

Table 4.5
Annual Household Income
Percentage
N
Virginia
Under $25,000
60
8.3
19.4
$25,000 to $49,999
14.7
106
22.8
$50,000 to $74,999
120
16.7
18.4
$75,000 to $99,999
147
20.4
12.8
$100,000 to $149,999
20.7
149
14.1
$150,000 or more
137
19.1
12.2
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2009 American Community Survey, B19001, "Household
Income in the Past 12 Months" and B19013, "Median Household Income in the Past 12
Months (In 2009 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars)," Retrieved online at
http://factfinder.census.gov.

Table 4.6
Educational Attainment Level
N
Percentage
Virginia
Less than high school
3
.4
12.4
35
High school graduate or equivalent
4.9
30.7
Some college
129
17.9
26.5
Bachelor's degree
258
35.9
19.5
Master's degree
206
28.7
7.9
Professional degree (for example: M.D., D.D.S.,
56
7.8
1.5
D.V.M., L.L.B., J.D.)
Doctoral degree (for example: Ph.D., Ed.D.)
32
4.5
1.5
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2011 Current Population Survey, "Table 1. Educational
Attainment of the Population 18 Years and Over, by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic
Origin: 2011retrieved online at
http://www.census,gov/hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps/2011/tables.html.

Table 4.7
Amount of Family Members with a Military Affiliation
N
Percentage
194
27.0
1
109
15.2
2
53
7.4
3
4.3
31
4
13
1.8
5
11
1.5
6 or more
308
42.8
None

92

Table 4.8
Attendance at religious services, church, or other place of worship
N
Percentage
Virginia
61
More than once per week
8.5
3.9
166
Once a week
23.1
29.2
64
8.9
A couple of times per month
11.3
26
3.6
Once a month
41.6
44
6.1
Less than once a month
2.7
174
A couple of times a year
24.2
4.5
184
25.6
Never
6.7
Source: The Gallup Organization, 2011 Religion and Social Trends, "Church Attendance
Lowest in New England, Highest in South. Retrieved online at
http://www.gallup.com/poll/22579/church-attendance-lowest-new-england-highestsouth.aspx

Data Preparation
Prior to analyzing the data, some of the measures needed to be refined. Age was
calculated by subtracting the year of birth from the current calendar year (2012). Four
questions were reverse coded (questions 8 and 10 in identity salience; question 73 in
parental socialization and youth participation; question 65 in solicitation). Church
attendance was recoded so that higher values equal higher church attendance. The first
observed variable in the charitable giving latent construct was normalized because the
donation amount was positively skewed towards the lower range of charitable giving
amounts. Lastly, "not applicable" responses in parental socialization and youth
participation were recoded to "neither agree nor disagree."

Descriptive statistics
The following section presents the descriptive statistics for the type and size of
nonprofit organization and the dependent variables related to charitable giving.

93

Giving to health related nonprofit organizations was the most prevalent in this
study (23.8%), followed by giving to human services (19.1%), religious giving (15.9%),
public society-benefit-relief (9.2%), other (7.0%), education (6.4%), military support
organizations (6.3%), environment/animals (4.6%), foundation (4.2%), arts, culture, and
humanities (2.9%), and international affairs (.8%) (Table 4.9). The size of nonprofit
organizations was also well balanced with respondents reporting giving to large (53.8%),
medium (23.2%), and small (22.9%) nonprofit organizations (Table 4.10). In summary,
there was a good mix of types and sizes of nonprofit organizations in the sample.

Table 4.9
Type of Nonprofit Organization
N Percentage
Religious
15.9
114
Education
46
6.4
Foundation
30
4.2
Human services
137
19.1
171
23.8
Health
Public-society-benefit (relief)
66
9.2
Arts, culture, and humanities
2.9
21
International affairs
6
.8
33
4.6
Environment/animals
Military support organizations 45
6.3
50
7.0
Other

Table 4.10
Size of Nonprofit Organization
N
Percentage
Small
165
22.9
167
23.2
Medium
Large
387
53.8

Charitable giving amounts were skewed to the lower range of gifts; the mean gift
amount was $864.43, the median was $200.00, and the mode was $100, with 44.6% of

94

the respondents indicating donations of less than $100 and 14% with relatively large
amounts (more than $1,000) (Table 4.11). The frequency of those charitable gifts were
given two to three times per year (43%), once per year (27.4%), monthly (15.9%), four to
eight times per year (10.4%), and weekly (3.3%) (Table 4.12). In terms of the length of
time the respondents had been donating to that charitable organization, also referred to as
donor tenure, 47.4% of the respondents in the sample indicated that they had been giving
to that charitable organization for more than five years (Table 4.13). This implies that
they had a relationship over time with the charitable organization. This mix of types and
sizes of nonprofit organizations, donation amount, frequency of charitable giving, and
length of time as a donor also enhances the generalizability of the study's findings.
Table 4.11
Self-reported Estimate of Annual Charitable Giving in U.S. Dollars
Mean
Standard Deviation
Median
Mode
Minimum
Maximum

Table 4.12
Frequency o f Charitable Giving
N Percentage
Once
197
27.4
2 to 3 times per year 309
43.0
4 to 8 times per year 75
10.4
Monthly
114
15.9
Weekly
24
3.3

$864.43
$2,683.35
$200.00
$100.00
$10.00
$30,000.00

95

Table 4.13
Length of time having been a donor
N Percentage
Less than 1 year
36
5.0
1 to 3 years
190
26.4
3 to 5 years
152
21.1
More than 5 years 341
47.4

Data Analysis
Confirmatory factor analysis
An evaluation of the proposed theoretical model was performed using
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and hypothesis testing using AMOS 19.0 structural
equation modeling (SEM) software. First, using confirmatory factor analysis, the
proposed measurement model was evaluated and revised in order to gain a better model
fit, understanding how the observed variables relate to the latent constructs or factors
(Tabachnick and Fidell, 2001). Next, structural equation modeling (SEM) was performed
which provides an understanding of how well the structural relationships between the
latent constructs fit the data in the sample.
All of the eleven constructs measured in this study are unobservable or latent
constructs that may account for variation in the data or correlations between the observed
variables. These latent variables are constructed by observed variables that can be
directly measured (Dodge, 2003). Latent variables "represent 'shared' variance, or the
degree to which variables 'move' together" (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2001, p. 655).
Confirmatory factor analysis is a statistical method to measure the degree to which the
variables move together or co-vary.
The results from the confirmatory factor analysis of the proposed measurement

96

model were assessed following the guidance of Kline (2005) and Hooper, Coughlin, and
Mullen (2008), utilizing six fit indices in a thorough assessment strategy. All the utilized
model fit indices' recommended thresholds are summarized in Table 4.14. Threshold
values of the fit indices should be flexible enough to accommodate changes in sample
size, model complexity, and degrees of freedom in model specification to examine how
accurately various fit indices performed (Hair et al., 2010). More complex models and
larger samples should not be subject to as strict an evaluation than more simple models
and smaller samples.

Table 4.14
Model Fit Indices Recommended Thresholds
Threshold
Fit Indices

Source
Wheaton et al., 1977;
Tabachnick and Fidell, 1977

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

2.0-5.0

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

>.90

Hu and Bentler, 1999

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

> .95

Hu and Bentler, 1999

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

>.95

Hu and Bentler, 1999

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

>.95

Hu and Bentler, 1999

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.06-.07

Hu and Bentler, 1999; Steiger, 2007

In order to evaluate the measurement properties of the endogenous and exogenous
variables used in the study, a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was undertaken with all
eleven constructs evaluated simultaneously in a single CFA model with 72 items -trust (5

97

items), perceived need (3 items), perceived organizational performance (2 items),
demonstrable utility (4 items), emotional utility (3 items), familial utility (3 items),
solicitation (9 items), parental socialization and youth participation (11 items), identity
saliency (5 items), relationship satisfaction (20 items), and charitable giving (7 items).
The standardized regression weights were studied and a note was made of all the
items that had a standardized loading less than 0.50. For samples under 1,000, the
minimum acceptable loading is .70; however, for samples over 1,000, the commonly used
cut off is .32 (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2001). Modification indices were also run and
those error terms that had a high covariance (modification index > 20) with other error
terms were identified and noted. However, at this juncture no items were deleted from
any of the scales.
Several of the parental socialization and youth participation variables had very
low standardized values. All of the remaining indicator variables loaded successfully
onto their constructs - trust, perceived financial need, perceived organization
performance, demonstrable utility, emotional utility, familial utility, and solicitation;
although none were significant. The proposed measurement model did not show very
many positive correlation coefficients between the variables. The chi-square values and
fit indices are summarized in Table 4.15. The proposed measurement model shows a
mediocre fit (x2 (2280) = 8120, x2/df= 3.562, CFI = 0.84, IFI = 0.84, TLI = 0.83, GFI =
0.69, RMSEA = 0.06).

98

Table 4.15
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Proposed Measurement Model
Index

Proposed

Chi Square

8120.437

Degrees of Freedom

2280

Significance

0.00

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

3.562

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.69

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.83

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.84

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.84

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.06

Revised Measurement Model
Since the proposed measurement model did not fit the data well, the measurement
model was modified based on two criteria. First, only indicator variables with
standardized factor loadings above .50 were retained (Hair, Black, Babin, and Anderson,
2010); but indicator variables with loadings below .50 were retained if the construct
would have less than three indicator variables (as Kline, 2005, noted instability with twoindicator constructs). Second, indicator variables with high modification indices (MI)
were deleted, as this was an indication that the variables were cross loading onto other
constructs (Byrne, 2001). As such, standardized factor loadings less than .50 were SAL1
(.36), SAL3 (.40), CG2 (.18), and CG3 (.27). In the identity saliency construct, it is
important to note that SAL1 (Donating to (X) is something I rarely think about) and
SAL3 (I really don't have clear feelings about (X) donation) were negatively worded
statements. Two of the seven indicator variables from the dependent variable of

99

charitable giving, CG2 (frequency of donations) and CG3 (donor tenure) did not load
successfully onto the construct and were also dropped from the model.
Next, items with high modification indices were dropped from the model.
Relationship satisfaction, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth participation
were large scales with the number of scale items ranging from 9 to 20 items. The error
term of RSAT19 is highly correlated with error term of RSAT17 (MI = 103.79). RSAT19
loaded on highly to RSAT17 (MI = 46.06). The error term of RSAT18 highly correlated
with error term of RSAT 19 (MI = 103.64). RSAT18 loaded on highly to RSAT19 (MI =
45.97). The error term of RSAT16 highly correlated with error term of RSAT17 (MI =
75.97). RSAT16 loaded on highly to RSAT17 (MI = 28.92). The error term of RSAT15
highly correlated with error term of RSAT16 (MI = 139.22). RSAT15 loaded on highly
to RSAT16 (MI = 48.40). The error term of RSAT8 highly correlated with error term of
RSAT10 (MI = 82.27). RSAT8 loaded on highly to RSAT10 (MI = 41.78). The error
term of RSAT7 highly correlated with error term of RSAT8 (MI = 47.84). RSAT7
loaded on highly to RSAT8 (MI = 24.63). The error term of RSAT6 highly correlated
with error term of RSAT5 (MI = 157.16). RSAT6 loaded on highly to RSAT5 (MI =
61.20). The error term of RSAT5 highly correlated with error term of RSAT3 (MI =
110.82). RSAT5 loaded on highly to RSAT3 (MI = 36.78). The error term of RSAT4
highly correlated with error term of RSAT5 (MI = 125.02). RSAT4 loaded on highly to
RSAT5 (MI = 65.39). The error term of RSAT2 highly correlated with error term of
RSAT3 (MI = 76.11). RSAT2 loaded on highly to RSAT3 (MI = 31.73). The error term
of RSAT1 highly correlated with error term of RSAT5 (MI = 145.68). RSAT1 loaded on
highly to RSAT5 (MI = 56.30). The error term of SOL2 highly correlated with error

100

term of SOL3 (MI = 35.73). SOL2 loaded on highly to SOL5 (MI = 5.10). The error
term of SOL4 highly correlated with error term of RSAT16 (MI = 42.75). SOL4 loaded
on highly to RSAT16 (MI = 19.29). The error term of SOL7 highly correlated with error
term of RSAT8 (MI = 164.43). SOL7 loaded on highly to RSAT8 (MI = 94.05). The
error term of PSYP3 highly correlated with error term of PSYP5 (MI = 53.66). PSYP3
loaded on highly to PSYP5 (MI = 11.98). The error term of PSYP5 highly correlated
with error term of PSYP8 (MI = 33.14). PSYP5 loaded on highly to PSYP8 (MI =
18.19). The error term of PSYP11 highly correlated with error term of PSYP10 (MI =
58.60). PSYP11 loaded on highly to PSYP10 (MI = 30.10). .
The composite reliability and the average variance extracted were used to
measure the convergent validity of constructs. Constructs have convergent validity when
the composite reliability exceeds the criterion of .70 (Hair, et al., 2010) and the average
variance extracted is above .50 (Bagozzi, 1994). Familial utility had limited reliability:
although its average variance extracted (AVE) was .60, its composite reliability was only
.63.
Discriminant validity was assessed by comparing the absolute value of the
correlations between the constructs and the square root of the average variance extracted
by a construct. When the correlations are lower than the square root of the average
variance extracted by a construct, constructs are said to have discriminant validity
(Fornell and Larcker, 1981). The findings reveal that the square roots of the average
variance extracted for all the constructs (except perceived organizational performance)
were higher than their correlations with other constructs. Thus, except for the construct
of perceived organizational performance, all constructs had discriminant validity.

101

Table 4.16
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Revised Measurement Model
Index

Proposed

Chi Square

2674.533

Degrees of Freedom

1016

Significance

.000

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

2.632

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.86

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.92

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.93

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.93

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.05

As shown in Table 4.16, the revised measurement model demonstrates reasonable
levels of fit (x2 (1016) = 2674, x2 /df = 2.632, CFI = 0.93, IFI = 0.93, TLI = 0.92, GFI =
0.86, RMSEA = 0.05 to the data. Based on the recommended thresholds in Table 4.14,
the model fit for the complete measurement model is acceptable.

Structural Model and Hypothesis Testing
After refining the measurement model, structural equation modeling was
performed using AMOS 19.0 (Figure 4.1). The structural paths were defined as per the
conceptual model presented in Chapter II. The structural model shows a reasonably good
fit (x2 (899) = 2146, x2/df= 2.388, CFI = 0.94, IFI = 0.94, TLI = 0.94, GFI = 0.88,
RMSEA = 0.04). Based on the criteria recommended by Hair et al. (2010), Bollen (1989)
and Hu and Bentler (1999), these measures of the model fit are acceptable. However, not
all of the path coefficients were statistically significant.

102

The key constructs were evaluated in terms of the squared correlations to assess
the amount of variance explained for each of the constructs in the model (Table 4.17).
Cohen (1992) states that in models using multiple independent variables, an effect size of
2% is considered small, around 15% is considered medium and 35% or more is
considered large. The results of the proposed structural model are summarized in Figure
4.1. This model explains 23.8% of the variance in charitable giving/intention to donate
and 12.3% of the variance in the charitable giving/amount donated. The model explains
58.1% of the variance in identity saliency and 67.4% in relationship satisfaction.
Therefore, it means that the exogenous variables (such as trust, perceived financial need,
perceived organizational performance, demonstrable utility, emotional utility, familial
utility, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth participation) that lead to identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction together explain 23.8% of the variance of donors
future intentions to donate and 12.3% of their past, self-reported donations (amount
donated). Since, the primary objective of this study is not to explain all the variables that
influence charitable giving but rather to explain the role of identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction, this is a medium effect size and is acceptable (Kline, 2005;
Cohen, 1992). This also means that there are other factors that influence charitable
giving which have not been modeled in this study and can be opportunities for future
research. This model explains 58.1% of the variance in identity saliency and 67.4% of the
variance of relationship satisfaction, which are both very large effects. This means that
the variance of the exogenous variables (like trust, perceived financial need, perceived
organizational performance, demonstrable utility, emotional utility, familial utility,
solicitation, and parental socialization and youth participation) and endogenous variables

103

(like identity saliency and relationship satisfaction) in this model explain a reasonable
amount of the variance of the dependent variable in this study, charitable giving. The
model performs satisfactorily. Table 4.18 displays the model fit indices of the proposed
structural model.

Figure 4.1

Proposed Structural Mode] Results

Trust
Perceived
Financial
Need
Perceived
Organizational
Performance,
Demonstrable
Utility

Emotional
Utility

.123

-.314'

Identity
Salience

-.24?
.761'

.280'

.581
.259'

.-.175

Intention to
Donate

.108'

.452'

Relationship
Satisfaction

.130*

.674

_ .238

_

.295'

Familial Utility

-.016,
Model diagnostics: (x2 (899) = 2146, x2/df = 2.388, CFI = 0.94, IFI = 0.94, TLI = 0.94,

Solicitation
.404:
Parent*!
Socialization
& Youth
Participation

GFf = 0.88, RMSEA = 0.04).
Standardized estimates significant at *p<.05. **/K.0L

-.033

Figures in bold italics arc the squared correlations for ihe endogenous constructs.
Dotted lines represent insignificant paths.

Table 4.17
Variance Explained by Endogenous Constructs
Squared Correlations
Charitable Giving (Intention to Donate)
.238
Charitable Giving (Amount Donated)
.123
Identity Saliency
.581
Relationship Satisfaction
.674

104

Table 4.18
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Proposed Structural Model
Index

Proposed

Chi Square

2146.453

Degrees of Freedom

899

Significance

.000

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

2.388

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.88

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.94

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.94

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.94

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.04

All but one of the hypotheses were tested using the path coefficient. Hypothesis 3's
mediation tests are presented at the end of this section.
Hl:The greater the identity saliency of a donor, the greater the level of charitable
giving of the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between identity saliency
and charitable giving. The path coefficient to charitable giving/intention to donate =
0.259, (t = 5.284) is significant at p<0.001 (Figure 4.1) and the path coefficient to
charitable giving/amount donated .280 (t = 5.644) is significant at the p<.001.

Therefore, HI is supported. As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's identity
salience rises, their level of charitable giving increases. This finding builds on the work
of Arnett, German, and Hunt (2003) who had studied this relationship in alumni giving in
higher education.

105

H2: The greater the relationship satisfaction of a donor, the greater the level of
charitable giving of the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between relationship
satisfaction and charitable giving. The path coefficient to charitable giving/intention to
donate = 0.295, (t = 6.336) is significant at p<0.001 and the path coefficient to charitable
giving/amount donated .108 (t = 2.358) is significant at the p<.05 (Figure 4.1).

Therefore, H2 is supported. As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's relationship
satisfaction rises, their level of charitable giving increases. This finding contributes to
previous research in the donor nonprofit relationship satisfaction (Sargeant, 2001).

H4: Donors with a higher level of trust in a nonprofit organization will be more
satisfied with the relationship with the nonprofit organization.
This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between trust and
relationship satisfaction. The path coefficient = 0.123, (t = .829) is not significant (Figure
4.1). Therefore, H4 is not supported. As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's
trust in an organization rises, their level of relationship satisfaction increases; however,
the results do not support this hypothesis. This finding is contrary to previous research in
trust and commitment in donor nonprofit relational exchange (Sargeant et al., 2006).
This finding could be the result of trust being directly related to charitable giving and not
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

H5: The greater the perceived financial need for the nonprofit organization, the
higher the identity salience for the donor.

106

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between perceived
financial need and identity saliency. The path coefficient = -3.14, (t = -2.765) is
significant at p<0.01 (Figure 4.1). As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's
perceived financial need rises, their level of identity saliency increases; however, the

results do not support this hypothesis because the relationship is significant in the
reverse direction. This negative relationship would be denoted by the case in which the
greater the perceived financial need for a nonprofit organization, the lower the level of
identity saliency or the less a person identifies with a nonprofit. This finding could be
the result of donors being less motivated by financial crisis and being less likely to give
to and identify with a nonprofit in a financial crisis.

H6: The greater the perceived financial need for the nonprofit organization, the
higher the relationship satisfaction for the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between perceived
financial need and relationship satisfaction. The path coefficient = -.248, (t = -2.479) is
significant at p<.05. (Figure 4.1). As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's
perceived financial need rises, their level of relationship satisfaction increases; however,

the results do not support this hypothesis because the relationship is significant in the
reverse direction. This negative relationship would be denoted by the case in which the
greater a person's relationship satisfaction, the lower his perceived financial need for the
nonprofit organization. This finding could be the result of donors being less motivated by
financial crisis and being more likely to give to and be satisfied with a nonprofit on more
firm financial footing. The primary reason for giving to charity is to have an impact on

107

the cause, and an organization that is financially healthy is more likely to be able to make
an impact.

H7:The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the identity
salience of the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between perceived
organizational performance and identity saliency. The path coefficient = 0.761, (t =
6.198) is significant at p<0.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H7 is supported. As
hypothesized, this means that as a donor's perceived organizational performance rises,
their level of identity saliency increases.

H8:The greater the perceived organizational performance, the greater the relationship
satisfaction of the donor.
This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between perceived
organizational performance and relationship satisfaction. The path coefficient = 0.682, (t
= 3.003) is significant at p<0.01 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H8 is supported. As
hypothesized, this means that as a donor's perceived organizational performance rises,
their level of relationship satisfaction increases. This finding builds on the work of
Sargeant et al. (2006).

H9:Reciprocity in demonstrable utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive link between demonstrable utility
and charitable giving. The path coefficient to identity saliency is = -.175, (t = -2.499) and
is significant at p<.05. The path coefficient to relationship satisfaction is = -.155, (t = -

108

2.646) is significant at p<0.01 (Figure 4.1). As hypothesized, this means that as a
donor's demonstrable utility rises, their level of charitable giving increases mediated by
identity saliency and relationship satisfaction; however, the results do not support this

hypothesis because the relationship is significant in the reverse direction. This negative
relationship would be denoted by the case in which the greater a person's identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction, the lower his demonstrable utility. This finding
could be the result of the sample only being constructed of repeat donors as opposed to a
mix of first time donors and repeat donors. Because the study focuses on relational
exchange, exchange over time, the sample was restricted to repeat donors. It is possible
that demonstrable utility is only significant in first time gifts and not in continued giving.

H10: Reciprocity in emotional utility will relate positively to charitable giving
mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.
This hypothesis states that there is a positive link between emotional utility and
charitable giving. The path coefficient to identity saliency = .452, (t = 5.196) and is
significant at p<,001. The path coefficient to relationship satisfaction = .130 (t = 2.101) is
significant at p<0.05 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H10 is supported. As hypothesized, this
means that as a donor's emotional utility rises, their level of identity saliency,
relationship satisfaction, and charitable giving increases. The results indicate that there is
a much stronger relationship between emotional utility and identity saliency than
emotional utility and relationship satisfaction.

HI 1: Reciprocity in familial utility will relate positively to charitable giving mediated
by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

109

This hypothesis states that there is a positive link between familial utility and
charitable giving. The path coefficients are = .091, (t = 1.111) and .071, (t = 1.134) and
are not significant at p<.05, p<-01, or p<.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, Hll is not

supported. As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's familial utility rises, their level
of charitable giving increases mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction;
however, the results do not support this hypothesis. This finding could be related the
smaller sample size or the types of nonprofit organizations in the sample. Perhaps if the
sample were restricted to disease related nonprofits, in which familial utility plays a more
larger role as a giving motivation, the findings would then be more significant.

H12: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the identity
saliency of the donor.
This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between satisfaction with
the solicitation process and identity saliency. The path coefficient = -.016, (t = -.272) is
not significant at p<.05, p<.01, or p<.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H12 is not supported.
As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's satisfaction with the solicitation process
rises, their level of identity saliency increases; however, the results do not support this
hypothesis.

HI3: The greater the satisfaction with the solicitation process, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.
This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between satisfaction with
the solicitation process and relationship satisfaction. The path coefficient = 0.223,
(t=4.250) is significant at p<0.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H13 is supported. As
hypothesized, this means that as a donor's satisfaction with the solicitation process rises,

110

their level of relationship satisfaction increases. This finding builds on the work of
Sargeant (2001).

H14: The greater the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
identity saliency of the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between parental
socialization and youth participation and identity saliency. The path coefficient = 0.404,
(t = 3.085) is significant at p<0.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H14 is supported. As
hypothesized, this means that as a donor's parental socialization and youth participation
rises, their level of identity saliency increases.

HI5: The greater the parental socialization and youth participation, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of the donor.

This hypothesis states that there is a positive causal link between parental
socialization and youth participation and relationship satisfaction. The path coefficient = .033, (t = -.894) is not significant at p<0.001 (Figure 4.1). Therefore, H15 is not

supported. As hypothesized, this means that as a donor's parental socialization and
youth participation rises, their level of relationship satisfaction increases; however, the
results do not support this hypothesis. This finding could be the result of parental
socialization and youth participation being more directly related to bonding or identifying
with an organization rather than a condition of relationship satisfaction.
While not every path was statistically significant at p<.001 in the model, when the
less significant (p<.05, p<.01) and statistically insignificant paths were dropped from the
model, the model fit was poorer. As such, the proposed structural model was not revised.

Ill

Mediating Role of Identity Saliency and Relationship Satisfaction
Under the guidance of Holmbeck (1997) and McKinnon, Lockwood, and
Hoffman (2002), the mediating role of identity salience and relationship satisfaction was
tested by first dropping both constructs from the model. The revised model with nine
latent constructs was then run and the results of this model are found in Table 4.19. The
structural model shows reasonably good fit (x2 (484) = 1084, x2ldf= 2.240, CFI = 0.96,
IFI = 0.96, TLI = 0.95, GFI = 0.92, RMSEA = 0.04). This model explains 28.6% of the
variance in charitable giving/intention to donate and 8.4% of the variance in the
charitable giving/amount donated. Therefore, it means that the exogenous variables (such
as trust, perceived financial need, perceived organizational performance, demonstrable
utility, emotional utility, familial utility, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth
participation) together explain 28.6% of the variance of donors' future intentions to
donate and 8.4% of their past, self-reported donations (amount donated). There are less
significant paths than the proposed structural model as only the following paths were
significant: emotional utility to charitable giving (intention to donate) significant at
p<.05, demonstrable utility to charitable giving (intention to donate) significant at p<.05,
trust to charitable giving (intention to donate) significant at p<.05, and parental
socialization and youth participation to charitable giving (amount donated) significant at
p<.05.

112

Table 4.19
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model without Identity
Saliency and Relationship Satisfaction
Index

Revised, No Mediation

Chi Square

1084

Degrees of Freedom

484

Significance

.000

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

2.240

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.92

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.95

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.96

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.96

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.04

Next the model was run with only identity saliency as the mediating variable.
The results of the revised model with ten latent constructs are found in Table 4.20. The
structural model indicates a poor fit (x2 (916) = 8155, x2/df = 8.903, CFI = 0.67, IFI =
0.67, TLI = 0.64, GFI = 0.51, RMSEA = 0.11). This model explains 22.5% of the
variance in charitable giving/intention to donate and 12.7% of the variance in the
charitable giving/amount donated. The model explains 55.5% of the variance in identity
saliency. Therefore, it means that the exogenous variables (such as trust, perceived
financial need, perceived organizational performance, demonstrable utility, emotional
utility, familial utility, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth participation) that
lead to identity saliency and relationship satisfaction together explain 22.5% of the
variance of donors' future intentions to donate and 12.7% of their past, self-reported
donations (amount donated). There are less significant paths than the proposed structural

113

model as only the following paths were significant: emotional utility to identity salience
significant at p<.001, identity salience to charitable giving (intention to donate) and
charitable giving (amount donated) significant at p<.001, and perceived organization
performance to identity saliency significant at p<.05.

Table 4.20
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model with only Identity
Saliency
Index

Revised with only Identity Saliency

Chi Square

8155

Degrees of Freedom

916

Significance

.000

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

8.903

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.51

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.64

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.67

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.67

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.11

Next the model was run with only relationship satisfaction as the mediating
variable. The results of the revised model with ten latent constructs are found in Table
4.21. The structural model shows reasonably good fit (x2 (783) = 1908, x2/df= 2.437, CFI
= 0.95, IFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.92, GFI = 0.88, RMSEA = 0.045). This model explains
20.3% of the variance in charitable giving/intention to donate and 7.7% of the variance in
the charitable giving/amount donated. The model explains 62.6% of the variance in
relationship satisfaction. Therefore, it means that the exogenous variables (such as trust,
perceived financial need, perceived organizational performance, demonstrable utility,

114

emotional utility, familial utility, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth
participation) that lead to identity saliency and relationship satisfaction together explain
20.3% of the variance of donors' future intentions to donate and 7.7% of their past, selfreported donations (amount donated). There are less significant paths than the proposed
structural model as only the following paths were significant: trust to relationship
satisfaction significant at p<.001, solicitation to relationship satisfaction significant at
p<.001, and relationship satisfaction to charitable giving (intention to donate) and
charitable giving (amount donated) significant at p<.001.
Table 4.21
Chi Square and Goodness of Fit Indices for the Structural Model with only Relationship
Satisfaction
Index

Revised, with only Relationship Satisfaction

Chi Square

1908

Degrees of Freedom

783

Significance

.000

Normed Chi Square (Chi Square/df)

2.437

Goodness of Fit (GFI)

.88

Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)

.94

Comparative Fit Index (CFI)

.95

Incremental Fit Index (IFI)

.95

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSEA)

.045

A mediated model is one that seeks to explain some or all of the relationship
between independent variables and dependent variables through the inclusion of an
intervening variable or mediating variable. Instead of a direct causal link between the
independent and dependent variables, the mediated model hypothesizes that the
independent variable causes the mediating variable thus causing a change in the

115

dependent variable. Mediation can account for some (partial mediation) or all (full
mediation) of the observed relationship between variables. Partial mediation indicates
that there are significant relationships between the mediator and the dependent variable
and there remains a significant relationship between the independent variables and the
dependent variable. In this study, there were significant relationships between identity
saliency, relationship satisfaction and charitable giving (intention to donate and amount
donated). Excluding both mediating variables explained less of the variance in the
dependent variable and had less significant paths than the inclusion of both identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction; thus indicating, a partially mediated-relationship
between the independent variables and the dependent variables of charitable giving.

Summary of Chapter IV
This chapter presented the results of this mixed methods study in two sequential
stages: qualitative focus group interviews and a quantitative survey of a random sample
of individual donors to nonprofit organizations. It included the presentation of the focus
group data results, the descriptive statistics of the sample profile and dependent variable
of interest - charitable giving, confirmatory factor analysis of the eleven constructs, and
structural equation modeling, analysis of the data, and testing of the hypothesized
relationships. The results of the data analysis generated a wealth of information
supporting the individual charitable giving model. Confirmatory factor analysis was
utilized to test the reliability of the survey instrument. Next fifteen hypotheses were
formulated to test the relationships between charitable giving motivations (independent
variables), identity saliency and relationship satisfaction (mediating independent
variables) and charitable giving (dependent variable).

116

Then, structural equation modeling was undertaken to test the proposed individual
charitable giving model using data obtained from a survey of charitable donors from the
three largest MSAs in the Commonwealth of Virginia and to test the hypotheses.
Structural equation modeling was used in the data analysis because of its ability to
generate a better assessment of model fit of the data, incorporating observed variables,
latent constructs, and measurement error. The fifteen hypotheses were tested and of the
fifteen hypothesized relationships between the independent variables and charitable
giving, six hypotheses were unsupported. Familial utility and solicitation did not have
statistically significant relationships with identity saliency. Demonstrable utility and
identity saliency were significantly negatively related. Trust, familial utility, and parental
socialization and youth participation did not have statistically significant relationships
with relationship satisfaction. Demonstrable utility and relationship satisfaction were
significantly negatively related. Satisfaction with the solicitation process was
significantly related to relationship satisfaction. Emotional utility was significantly
related to identity saliency and relationship satisfaction in which the linkage with identity
saliency had a significantly stronger relationship. Of particular note is the strength of the
relationship between perceived organizational performance and identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction, the second most significant findings. Finally, both identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction were statistically significant related to charitable
giving and were evaluated as partially mediating the relationship between charitable
giving motivations and charitable giving. In the structural model, the charitable giving
motivations (perceived organizational performance, emotional utility, solicitation,
parental socialization and youth participation), identity saliency, relationship satisfaction,

117

all significantly predict charitable giving (past donated amounts and future intention to
donate) levels in the individual donors.

118

CHAPTER V
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
This research focused on explaining the antecedents to successful relationships
with nonprofit donors and the influence of identity saliency and relationship satisfaction
on individual charitable giving behavior in a sample of charitable donors in Virginia.
The review of the extant literature and previous research on identity saliency, relationship
marketing, and charitable giving, revealed that charitable giving behavior is influenced
by a number of different charitable giving motivations, identity saliency, and relationship
satisfaction. While previous research has tested the effects of identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction independently, the model used in this study tested both
constructs as mediating variables between charitable giving motivations and the level of
charitable giving behavior. Next, Chapter V presents a discussion of the findings,
managerial implications, suggestions for future research, limitations of the study, and
some closing remarks.

Discussion of the Findings
While previous researchers have studied identity saliency (Callero, 1985; Callero
et al., 1987; Lee et al., 1999, Amett et al., 2003) and relationship satisfaction (Sargeant,
2001) in charitable giving, these constructs were tested for the first time simultaneously
as mediators between charitable giving motivations and charitable giving behavior. The
goal of this study is to understand more fully the roles that identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction play in individual charitable giving and to explore the charitable

119

giving motivations that drive these mediating constructs. This section discusses the
findings for the proposed structural model and for each of the research questions.
The proposed structural model fit the data well. Identity saliency and relationship
satisfaction significantly predicted charitable giving; although the link between
relationship satisfaction and charitable giving (amount donated) was not as strong as its
relationship with charitable giving (intention to donate) and identity saliency and
charitable giving (intention to donate) and charitable giving (amount donated) (Figure
4.1). This suggests that asking donors about their future intentions as opposed to their
self-reported amount donated might be more reflective of their perceptions of the
nonprofit. The latent constructs of perceived organizational performance, emotional
utility, and parental socialization and youth participation significantly predicted higher
identity salience in the donors. Perceived organizational performance, emotional utility,
and solicitation, all significantly predicted relationship satisfaction in the donors. The
SEM analysis supports Sargeant's (2001) research on relationship fundraising, with
regard to the importance of satisfaction with the solicitation process and perceived
>
\
organizational performance and relationship satisfaction. The structural model also
supports Sargeant et al.'s (2006) original research on the perceptual determinants of
charitable giving, specifically in the significance of perceptions of organizational
performance and emotional utility. Lastly, the structural model supports the research of
Arnett et al. (2003) that linked identity saliency to charitable giving as a mediating
construct.
Several of the latent constructs resulted in insignificant and negative or inverse
relationships with identity salience and relationship satisfaction: perceived financial need,

120

demonstrable utility, and solicitation with identity salience, and parental socialization and
youth participation with relationship satisfaction. In the mediation testing where the
mediating variables were removed individually and together and the models were run
again, some of these relationships were significantly and directly related to charitable
giving. The hypothesized relationship between trust and relationship satisfaction was
significant when identity salience was removed from the model. Demonstrable utility,
while inversely related to identity saliency and relationship satisfaction, was significantly
related to charitable giving (intention to donate). Lastly, parental socialization and youth
participation was still significantly related to identity salience when relationship
satisfaction was removed from the model.
The scale items, data, and factor analysis were thoroughly reviewed to ensure the
accuracy of the findings. It is important to note that the sample and data reflect repeat
giving and not first time charitable donations; therefore, resulting negative paths indicate
a possible theoretical explanation.

Research Question One
To what extent do identity saliency and relationship satisfaction mediate relational
exchange between nonprofits and donors?

The findings resulting from research question one indicate a positive, significant,
and partially mediating relationship between identity saliency, relationship satisfaction
and charitable giving. This finding extends previous research that found that identity
saliency influences pro-social behaviors like blood donation (Callero, 1985), helping
behaviors (Callero et al., 1987) and charitable giving (Lee et al., 1999; Arnett et al.,
2003), and that relationship satisfaction also increases charitable giving levels (Sargeant,

121

2001). This study represents the first time that these two constructs were measured
simultaneously as mediating variables and, together, they explain a significant proportion
of the variance in individual charitable giving. This finding speaks to the importance of
donor cultivation and stewardship strategies in nonprofit relationship marketing. The
more a donor identifies with an organization, the higher the level of charitable giving.
The more satisfied a donor is with the relationship with a nonprofit, the higher the level
of charitable giving. Also, this finding also speaks to the importance of getting to know
the donor base, on an individual basis, understanding that each donor identifies in some
manner to the nonprofit they are supporting.
In practice and research, the focus has been on identifying who gives and why
they give but very few practitioners and even fewer researchers have asked why donors
continue to give a particular nonprofit. Exploring this question more fully might provide
practitioners with detailed knowledge of what communication and solicitation strategies
work best and the potential impact of donor perceptions of the organization. Moreover,
by getting to know donors better, the opportunity exists for a deeper level of engagement
with donors, in which the nonprofit develops passionate and engaged donors, who may
also desire more interaction with the nonprofit and the cause through volunteering or
advocacy efforts.

Research Question Two
What are the charitable giving motivations that influence identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction in relational exchange between nonprofits and donors?

The findings resulting from research question two indicate several interesting
relationships in the charitable giving motivations tested in this model: trust, perceived

122

financial need, perceived organizational performance, demonstrable utility, emotional
utility, familial utility, solicitation, and parental socialization and youth participation.
Perceived organizational performance, emotional utility, and parental socialization and
youth participation had a positive and significant relationship with identity saliency.
Perceived organizational performance, emotional utility, and solicitation had a positive
and significant relationship with relationship satisfaction. In this study, not all charitable
giving motivations were drivers of identity saliency and relationship satisfaction. Some
charitable giving motivations, like demonstrable utility and trust, were directly related to
charitable giving and not mediated by identity saliency and relationship satisfaction.

Trust
Trust was hypothesized to have a significant relationship with relationship
satisfaction; although, in this study the relationship was insignificant. However, during
the mediation tests for identity saliency and relationship satisfaction, trust was found to
have a positive and significant relationship with charitable giving (intention to donate)
but not charitable giving (amount donated) in the absence of the mediating variables. This
indicates that trust is not an antecedent of identity saliency but does play a role in future
intentions to donate to a nonprofit (Sargeant and Lee, 2004; Tonkiss and Passey, 2001;
Rousseau et al., 1998). Trust is critically important in relationships between donors and
nonprofits and is the foundation for voluntary association within the nonprofit sector
(Tonkiss and Passey, 2001). In this study, trust was found to be a significant driver of
relationship satisfaction when identity saliency was removed from the model in the
mediation testing. This finding regarding trust in individual charitable giving behavior
provides further empirical evidence of its significance in donor nonprofit relationships

123

and extends the limited research on perceived trust (Tonkiss and Passey, 2001, Sargeant
and Lee, 2004; Sargeant et al., 2006).

Perceived financial need
With regard to perceived financial need, charitable donors want to be a part of
successful nonprofits making an impact on a cause they care about. More often than not,
donors who are repeat givers are less motivated by an organization's financial crisis and
view their donations as an investment in their community.
A donation to a nonprofit organization is an investment in the community
the organization serves.... The philanthropic sector has an opportunity to
build stronger communities through boldness, innovations, and new
models for action that are based on results, not needs, on investment
opportunities not institutional financial urgency.. .Donors do not give to
organizations because organizations have needs, they give because
organizations meet needs (Sprinkel Grace, 1997).

While Arnett et al. (2003) found that perceived financial need was significantly
related to donating, the sample was limited to the university fundraising context and
included both first time donors and repeat donors. Additionally, the dependent variables
in the study were amount donated, derived from the organization's donor database, as
well as self-reported promoting behaviors; whereas this study's dependent variables
reflect self-reported donation amounts over time and intention to donate in the future.
Sargeant (2001) found that more than 26 percent of lapsed donors stop giving because
they perceive that other causes are more deserving. Donors who give based on perceived
financial need are usually first time donors, not repeat donors. He concludes that
nonprofits can retain this type of donor if they can find ways of deepening the bond
[identity salience] and improving the satisfaction [relationship satisfaction] between the

124

organizations and their supporters. In this study's results, the stronger an individual
donor's identity salience and relationship satisfaction, the lower the perceived financial
need. This negative path provides empirical support for Sargeant's (2001) managerial
suggestion that donors, who perceived the financial need of another cause to be greater,
generally shift their support to that more deserving cause unless they have higher identity
salience and relationship satisfaction with the first nonprofit.

Perceived organizational performance
Perhaps the most compelling finding in this study, perceived organizational
performance of the nonprofit was found to be a significant antecedent of identity salience
and relationship satisfaction and represents a key contribution to the literature. How a
nonprofit's performance is perceived by the donor strongly influences how much they
identify with an organization as a donor and how satisfied they are in their relationship,
and consequently these donors have higher levels of charitable giving. This finding
supports the work of Sargeant et al. (2006) in which perceived organizational
performance was found to be a significant predictor of charitable giving levels and
Sargeant (2001) in which he found that communicating the impact of the nonprofit to
donors on an ongoing basis influenced their perception of organizational performance
and made it less likely that donors would lapse or switch their support to a more
deserving organization.

125

Demonstrable utility
This study's lack of support for the hypothesized relationship between
demonstrable utility and identity salience, relationship satisfaction, and charitable giving
provides further empirical support for the work of Sargeant et al. (2006) where personal
benefits did not drive the relationship variables tested - trust or commitment. It is
important to reiterate that respondents in this study were repeat donors, not first time
donors. So while previous research (Amos, 1982; Beatty et al., 1991; Frisch and Gerrard,
1981, Buraschi and Cornelli, 2002; Andreoni and Petrie, 2004; Alpizar et al., 2007; Chen
et al., 2006; Edlund, Sagarin, and Johnson, 2007; Harris, Liguori, and Stack, 1973; Marr,
Mullin, and Siegfried, 2005; Schervish and Havens, 2002) suggests demonstrable utility
as a driver of charitable giving, this study's results indicate that demonstrable utility
should only be understood as such in first time donations and not long-term relationships
between donors and nonprofit organizations. The results indicate that demonstrable utility
is not related to identity salience and relationship satisfaction in a sample of repeat
donors.
During the mediation tests, demonstrable utility was found to be directly related
to charitable giving (intention to donate) when both identity saliency and relationship
satisfaction were removed from the model. This suggests that in a sample of repeat
donors, demonstrable utility was only significant in discussing future charitable giving
behaviors. This finding could be related to how recent their first time gift to the nonprofit
organization. If they had made their first charitable gift relatively recently, the value
provided in demonstrable utility could be more significant than if they had been giving to
the organization for quite some time.

126

Emotional utility
In this study, emotional utility was found to be a significant driver of both identity
saliency and relationship satisfaction and consequently charitable giving. This supports
previous research that has confirmed emotional utility as a ubiquitous motivation for
charitable giving (Andreoni, 2001; Kottasz, 2004; Kotler and Andreasen, 1991;
Haggberg, 1992; Komter, 1996; Andreoni, 1990; Feldman, 1985; Fultz et al., 1986;
Radley and Kennedy, 1995; Mathur, 1996; Cialdini, 1987; Bendapudi et al., 1996;
Cialdini et al, 1987; Wegener and Petty, 1994). Arnett et al. (2003) also found emotional
utility to be drivers of identity saliency, where self-identity and emotions play a
significant role. This study is the first time that emotional utility has been linked to
relationship satisfaction in the nonprofit sector and represents a key contribution to the
literature.
The decision to make a charitable gift to a nonprofit organization and to continue
that giving in a relationship over time, is an intensely personal decision. Emotions play a
role in first time gifts and as demonstrated in this study, they are also significant in
maintaining the relational exchange. Nonprofit organizations should continue to develop
solicitation strategies that appeal to donors' emotions and should be able to connect that
solicitation with making an impact on the cause they represent. The more donors feel
good about their charitable giving, the more likely they are to continue the relationship
and are more likely to desire a deeper connection or level of engagement with the
organization.

127

Familial utility
While previous research has linked familial utility to charitable giving (Bruce,
1998; Sargeant, 1999; Sargeant et al., 2006; Kotler and Clarke, 1987), in this study
familial utility was not a driver of identity saliency and relationship satisfaction or
directly related to charitable giving. Like demonstrable utility, perhaps the sample of
repeat donors influenced this finding. In the mediation testing, familial utility was only
significantly related to identity saliency and subsequently charitable giving; however, this
was not the case in the full model. In the full model, the standardized regression weights
for familial utility were less significant as compared to emotional utility suggesting that
this could matter more in first time donations.

Solicitation
The experience of being asked to donate is one of the most significant factors that
influence charitable giving and the process of being solicited for support was examined
using the scale developed by Sargeant (2001). In this study, satisfaction with the
solicitation process was a significant driver of relationship satisfaction and consequently
charitable giving. This finding supports previous studies that indicated donor fatigue
(Sargeant, 2001; Leslie and Ramey, 1988; Van Diepen et al., 2009; Wiepking, 2008;
Diamond and Noble, 2001) and dissatisfaction with the manner or mode of being asked
(Pancer et al., 1979) decreased charitable giving levels. The importance of the
satisfaction with the solicitation process also represents a key contribution to the
literature.

128

Parental socialization and youth participation
Parental socialization and youth participation was found to have an insignificant
relationship with relationship satisfaction, and a significant relationship with identity
saliency, which is contrary to the hypothesized paths. Previous research on parental
modeling of pro-social behaviors and participation as youth indicated that having these
youthful experiences make people more likely to exhibit these behaviors as adults
(Wilhelm et al., 2008; Feldman, 2007; Bekkers, 2005; Eisenberg, 2000). In this study, the
results indicate that parental socialization and youth participation only as a driver to
identity salience and subsequently, charitable giving. In the repeat giving context, donors
with higher parental modeling and youth participation are more likely to have higher
identity salience and give at higher levels.
This finding supports efforts to develop pro-social behaviors in youth through
parental modeling and youth participation. Connecting parental modeling and youth
experience with nonprofit identification contributes to a theoretical foundation for
nurturing a more caring society, populated with citizens who continue to exhibit these
pro-social behaviors as adults.

Managerial Implications and Suggestions for Future Research
As the evolution of the definition of marketing has evolved from value in
exchange toward value cocreation (value for all stakeholders), so too must the theoretical
and managerial understanding of the relationship between donors and nonprofit
organizations evolve toward value cocreation where value is created together for all
stakeholders to make transformational change (Figures 5.1 and 5.2). Support for this

129

evolutionary shift in understanding fundraising from the transactional exchange to the
relational exchange to the transformational exchange is found in the data from this
charitable giving study with important managerial implications and suggestions for future
research.
In the nonprofit context, as the understanding of fundraising evolves from
transactional exchange to value creation to value cocreation, the nonprofit organizations
shift their focus from the immediate and short-term to a more strategic perspective in
creating value together (Figure 5.2). In the transactional exchange, nonprofit
organizations focus on donor acquisition, raising more money, special events, and
fundraising programs (such as raffles, car wash, product sales). The variables of interest
are demonstrable utility and perceived financial need. Donors in the transactional
exchange are thinking about what they get from giving (tangible benefits) and the
financial need of the nonprofit organization.
In the relational exchange, nonprofits begin to manage relationships with donors
over time. The variables of interest are identity salience, relationship satisfaction, trust,
familial utility, parental socialization and youth participation, and solicitation. Donor
perceptions of the nonprofit become more significant in the relational exchange. Donors
are more influenced by relationship satisfaction, trusting the nonprofit, personal identity
and connections to the cause, and satisfaction with the solicitation process. From the
organizational perspective, the focus begins to shift to communications, donor renewal,
stewardship, and major gift campaigns.
In the transformational exchange, nonprofits understand donors as individuals and
endeavor to create value together to make transformational change in the world. The

130

variables of interest are identity salience, relationship satisfaction, perceived
organizational performance, emotional utility, parental socialization and youth
participation, and solicitation. In the transformational exchange, donors give because
they want to have an impact on a cause that they care passionately about. They continue
to give because they perceive the organization as being efficient and effective, and
making a difference, an impact. Finally, they continue to give to a particular organization
because they are satisfied with the solicitation process and in the relationship. Donors
feel valued by the organization and that their donations are having an impact on the cause
they care passionately about. In the transformational exchange, donors may also take on
other roles in the nonprofit, like volunteering or advocacy efforts representing a
dramatically increased level of engagement with high switching costs. Donors could also
be providing direct services, serving in leadership positions within the nonprofit, and
engaging external people and organizations to join the philanthropic effort.

Figure 5.1

An evolving understanding of marketing

Exchange

Value Creation

Value Cocreation

Each party gets
something
of value

Value in use &
relationship marketing

Creating value together
for all stakeholders

Adapted from: Shalt. J. N.. and Usiay. C. {2007). implications of the revised definition of
marketing: From exchange So value creation. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing. VaL 22(2),
302-30?.'

131

Figure 5.2

An evolving understanding of fundraising

Exchange

Value Creation

Value Cocreation

TRANSACTIONAL
EXCHANGE
Nonprofits focus
on donor
acquisition and

RELATIONAL EXCHANGE
Nonprofits begin to
manage relationships

TRANSFORMATIONAL
EXCHANGE
Nonprofits understand

with donors.

donors as individuals and
create value together to

raising more
money.

VARIABLES OF INTEREST
Identity Salience
Relationship Satisfaction

make transformational
change in the world.

VARIABLES OF
INTEREST

Trust
Familial Utility

VARIABLES OF INTEREST
Identity Salience

Demonstrable
Utility
Perceived Financial

Solicitation
Parental Socialization &
Youth Participation

Relationship Satisfaction
Perceived Organizational
Performance

Need

Emotional Utility
Solicitation
Parental Socialization &
Youth Participation

Very recently, multiple conceptions of value cocreation in philanthropy have
emerged: high impact philanthropy, social entrepreneurship, and venture philanthropy.
These conceptions of philanthropy, while similar to this idea of value cocreation in the
donor nonprofit relationship, have a quite different understanding of philanthropic action.
High impact philanthropy is defined as "the practice of making charitable
contributions with the intention of maximizing social good" (Center, 2012). High impact
philanthropy is most often practiced in the U.S. at the community foundation level and is
almost solely focused on outcome measurement. Tangentially related to value cocreation
in the nonprofit sector, social entrepreneurship has several meanings, which are
perspective dependent (Dees, 1998). Mair and Marti (2004) describe three variations of
the definition of social entrepreneurship: nonprofits finding new revenue streams to
create social value (Austin, Stevenson, & Wei-Skiller, 2003; Boschee, 1998); private

132

businesses involved in cross-sector partnerships (Sagawa & Segal, 2000; Waddock,
1988); and a process of alleviating social problems and creating social change (Alvord et
al, 2004, Ashoka Innovators, 2000). Venture philanthropy is influenced broadly by
venture capital finance and technology business management with the goal of achieving
philanthropic or social change. Also known as "involved grantmaking" - venture
philanthropy is characterized by experimental approaches, measurable results, a more
strategic, long-term perspective, capacity building, multi-year funding, and high
involvement by donors (Stanford, 2012). The primary difference between high impact
philanthropy, social entrepreneurship, venture philanthropy and the value cocreation put
forth in these closing remarks is the unit of analysis. The change [value] is implemented
by the organization whereas in transformational exchange, value is co-created.
This study has many implications for practitioners of nonprofit marketing strategy
in understanding the donor relationship, charitable giving motivations, and the potential
impact of identity saliency and relationship satisfaction. Sargeant and Shang (2011, p. 3)
call for a path forward in growing philanthropy by enhancing the quality of donor
relationships. In practice, nonprofits have focused too heavily on the tangible benefits of
membership or as defined in this study, demonstrable utility. Demonstrable utility is the
value derived from tangible benefits received as a result of the process of giving with
"selfish economic considerations'" suggesting that individual donors are motivated by
benefits received previously or promised in the future (Sargeant et al., 2006, p. 3).
Demonstrable utility was found to be of little significance to repeat donors and was
inversely related to a donor's identity salience and relationship satisfaction. The more a
donor identified with an organization and the more satisfied a donor was with their

133

relationship with an organization, the less importance they gave to tangible benefits of
charitable giving.
If nonprofit organizations want to deepen their level of engagement with donors,
they must first understand donors as unique individuals with individual charitable giving
motivations or reasons for giving. By understanding those motivations and giving donors
more opportunities to engage with the mission in a manner that suits them, nonprofits can
maximize a donor's identity saliency and relationship satisfaction. Nonprofits "need to
find ways of improving satisfaction and deepening the bonds that exist between them and
their supporters" (p. 188). Sargeant posited that the differentiating factor between lapsed
donors and active donors is the quality of the relationship. Perhaps the quality of the
relationship can be improved by turning those repeat donors into zealots, those donors
who are extremely passionate about the cause who donate not only their money; but also
their time in volunteering and advocacy efforts.
When a nonprofit organization shifts their strategy from the transactional
exchange to the transformational exchange, they are really shifting the organization's
approach to fundraising management and measuring its success from the very short-term
to the more strategic, long-term view. New fundraising strategies should focus on donor
retention, donor loyalty, integrating donors into the organization, and encouraging more
collaboration between programs, governance, and development.
Several scholars have pointed to the need for approaching the acquisition of
resources for the nonprofit organization in more strategic way, which necessitates a new
conceptualization of the individual donor as Brudney and Meijs (2009) propose, "a
natural resource" that is both sustainable and renewable, as well as, versatile in the roles

134

they play in nonprofits. Sargeant and Shang (2011) ask practitioners to consider donors
as potential volunteers and advocates. Given the managerial implications from this study
and recent practical suggestions from other scholars, the common constructs in charitable
giving should be developed and further refined to include other pro-social behaviors like
volunteering and advocacy. The role of and relationships between volunteering,
advocacy, and charitable giving behaviors of supporters should be explored as a potential
nonprofit engagement ladder of participation which would provide empirically based
evidence for building donor sustainability and versatility.
The findings in this study also suggest a need for a deeper exploration of
charitable giving motivations among types of donors: first time and renewing donors. As
proffered in this research, the motivations for giving differ among these groups and a
universal approach to developing charitable giving models is not applicable.
Moreover, the findings related to the perceptions of organizational performance,
present the opportunity to investigate the efficacy of nonprofit communications and
methods of communicating with donors. By refining organizational performance
messaging, how best to develop positive donor perceptions of organizational
performance, the frequency and methods of communication can be clarified. In this
study, perceived organizational performance was strongly related to donor identification
with the nonprofit and also in their levels of relationship satisfaction and represents a
critical area of future research.
Additionally, this study has implications for the public sector as governments use
volunteers to assist in the delivery of public goods and services and seek to engage
citizens in the governance process. Understanding their motivations for pro-social

135

behaviors and the impact of identity saliency and relationship satisfaction may help to
enable them to make more effective use of their resources and deepen their relationship
with citizens.

Limitations of the Study
This study is limited by some threats to internal validity including selection bias,
social desirability, and instrumentation. While every attempt has been made to
strengthen the research design, the use of a random sample from a consumer research
panel did present a threat to internal validity, selection bias, as the members of the panel
have agreed to membership for the purpose of surveys. Additionally, since the
population is limited to charitable donors in Virginia, the results cannot be generalized to
other populations. As discussed earlier, a frequent limitation of charitable giving
research and survey research, as a whole, is social desirability (Hall, 2001). Respondents
may not want to admit their level of charitable giving, as it is an intensely personal
decision. In order to be perceived more socially desirable, they give more socially
desirable answers, such as reporting higher or more frequent charitable donations. As
recommended by Dillman (2007), social desirability was minimized by using a survey
research method that minimized interpersonal communication and emphasized the
confidentiality of their responses.
In this study, instrumentation is also a threat to internal validity. Relying
predominantly on validated scales from Arnett et al. (2003), Sargeant (2001), and
Sargeant et al. (2006), the survey instrument was developed from several sources and the
reliability scores for Cronbach's Alpha were recalculated to minimize the threat to the
validity of the survey instrument.

Charitable giving in this study was measured in two ways: actual self-reported
charitable giving and intention to donate. The use of self-report data in charitable giving
research can be inaccurate, as the ability of respondents to recall accurate details during
the course of a completing a survey is not reliable (Bekkers and Weipking, 2010). This
limitation was overcome by also asking about their future intention to donate; thus
capturing another facet of charitable giving that can be more reflective of future
charitable giving behavior. In this study, more of the variance in charitable giving was
explained by the donor's intention to donate as opposed to the self-reported charitable
giving (amount donated).

Closing Remarks
The goal of this research is to provide nonprofit organizations with a means to
evaluate their marketing strategy and make adjustments to streamline and focus their
efforts with a more strategic approach to developing donor engagement and support.
The study's findings provide nonprofit organizations with a framework for nurturing
existing donor relationships, as well as attracting new donors. Greater and deeper
knowledge of the donor base allows for more targeted strategies to attract and retain
supporters, making the most efficient and effective use of limited organizational
resources.
The findings of this study expanded the work of previous researchers in the areas
of identity saliency, relationship satisfaction, and charitable giving motivations and it
revealed that both identity saliency and relationship satisfaction significantly predict
charitable giving behavior and partially mediate the paths between charitable giving

137

motivations and charitable giving behavior. Perceived organizational performance,
emotional utility, and parental socialization and youth participation were significant
drivers of identity saliency. Perceived organizational performance, emotional utility, and
satisfaction with the solicitation process significantly predicted relationship satisfaction
levels in donors. A further assessment of the results revealed that perceived financial
need, demonstrable utility, and familial utility are not antecedents of identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction and parental socialization and youth participation is not an
antecedent of relationship satisfaction.
Previous research in charitable giving behavior has investigated in a .
comprehensive manner, who gives, and this body of research has given us a better
understanding of why they give-, however, what has not been fully explored is why they
continue to give and what else would they do if asked. Giving volunteers and donors the
opportunity to do more, to have a greater impact on the things they care so much about is
not really about getting more out of them but is more about the organization fulfilling
their mission by giving them the opportunity to create change in the world.
The nonprofit sector provides what governments and markets fail to provide, and
these organizations tackle, in many cases, the most complex problems, in which a
transformational approach is warranted. The more we know about the factors that
influence pro-social behaviors, and act on that knowledge, the more likely we are to
nurture and grow a more caring society, a society that is capable of partnership,
compromise, collaboration, and comprehensive approaches to addressing societal needs.
Nonprofits are in a unique position, to be the bridge between governments and markets,
and citizens and consumers, with the rare ability to tap into the individual passions in our

138

citizenry and move them to action. Deepening the level of engagement with volunteers
and donors can only make it better and make us better.

139

REFERENCES
Abrams, B. A., and Schmitz, M. D. (1978). The "crowding-out" effect of governmental
transfers on private charitable contributions. Public Choice, 35(1), 29-39.
Abrams, B. A., and Schmitz, M. D. (1984). The "crowding-out" effect of governmental
transfers on private charitable contributions: Cross-section evidence. National Tax
Journal, 37, 563-568.
Adams, W. C. (1986). Testing geographical bias in international news whose lives count?
TV coverage of natural disasters. Journal of Communication 36(2), 113-123.
Alderson, W. (1957). Marketing behavior and executive action. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Alpizar, F., Carlsson, F., and Johansson-Stenman, O. (2007). Anonymity, reciprocity and
conformity: Evidence from voluntary contributions to a natural park in Costa
Rica. Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6), 1047-1060.
Alwin, D. F., and Krosnick, J. A. (1991). The reliability of survey attitude measurement:
The influence of question and respondent attributes. Sociological Methods and
Research, 20, 139-181.
Amos, O. M. (1982). Empirical analysis of motives underlying individual contributions
to charity. Atlantic Economic Journal, 10(4), 45-52.
Anderson, J. and Narus, J. A. (1990). A model of distributor firm and manufacturer firm
working partnerships. Journal of Marketing. 54( 1): 42-58.
Andreoni, J. (1988). Privately provided public goods in a large economy: The limits of
altruism. Journal of Public Economics 35, 57-73.
Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warmglow giving. Economic Journal, 100, 464-477.
Andreoni, J. (2001). The economics of philanthropy. In International Encyclopedia of the
Social and Behavioral Science, N. J. Smelser and P.B. Baltes, (Eds.) 11369-76.
London: Elsevier.
Andreoni, J., and Miller, J. (2002). Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of
the consistency of preferences for altruism. Econometrica, 70, 737-753.
Andreoni, J., and Petrie, R. (2004). Public goods experiments without confidentiality: A
glimpse into fund-raising. Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1605-1623.
Apinunmahakul, A., and Devlin, R. A. (2004). Charitable giving and charitable
gambling: An empirical investigation. National Tax Journal, LVII(l), 67-88.
Aristotle (1999, 1162a34-1163a24). Nichomachean ethics, Indianapolis.
Arnett, D. B., German S. D., and Hunt, S. D. (2003). The identity salience model of
relationship marketing success: The case of nonprofit marketing. Journal of
Marketing, 67(2), 89-105.
Arumi, A. M., Wooden, R., Johnson, J., Farkas, S., Duffett, A., and Ott, A. (2005). The
charitable impulse. New York: Public Agenda.

140

Association of Fundraising Professionals. (2011). The AFP fundraising dictionary online.
In B. Levy (Ed.), Arlington, VA: Association of Fundraising Professionals.
Retrieved from
http://www.afpnet.org/files/ContentDocuments/AFP Dictionary A-Z final 6-903.pdf
Auten, G. E., and Joulfaian, D. (1996). Charitable contributions and intergenerational
transfers. Journal of Public Economics, 59, 55-68.
Auten, G. E., Cilke, J., and Randolph, W. (1992). The effects of tax reform on charitable
contributions. National Tax Journal, 45, 267-290.
Auten, G.E., and Rudney, G. (1990). The variability of individual charitable giving in the
U.S. Voluntas 1, 80-97.
Bac, M., and Bag, P. K. (2003). Strategic information revelation in fund-raising. Journal
of Public Economics, 87, 659-679.
Backhaus, K., Adolphs, M., and Biischken, J. (1996). The paradox of unsatisfying but
stable vertical relationships, In J. Sheth, and A. Sollner, (Eds.): Development,
Management and Governance of Relationships. International Conference on
Relationship Marketing, 29-31.
Bacon, F., and Pitcher, J. (1985). The essays. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1974). Marketing as an organized behavioral system of exchange.
Journal of Marketing, 35(4), 77-81.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1975). Marketing as exchange. Journal of Marketing, 39(4), 32-39.
Banks, J., and Tanner, S. (1999). Patterns in household giving: Evidence from UK data.
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 10, 167-178.
Bar-Tel, D. (1976). Prosocial behavior: Theory and research. New York, NY: John
Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Barnes, J. G. (2000). Closeness in customer relationships: Examining the payback from
getting closer to the customer. In T. Hennig-Thurau and U. Hansen (Eds.).
Relationship marketing: Gaining competitive advantage through customer
satisfaction and customer retention. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Barrett, K. S. (1991). Panel-data estimates of charitable giving: A synthesis of
techniques.
Barrett, P. (2007). Structural equation modeling: Adjudging model fit. Personality and
Individual Differences, 42(5), 815-24.
Barrett, P. (2007). Structural equation modeling: Adjudging model fit. Personality and
Individual Differences, 42(5), 815-24.
Batson, C. D. (1998). Altruism and prosocial behavior. In D. T. Gilbert (Ed.), Handbook
of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 282-316). New York: Random House.
Becker, H. S. (1960). Notes on the concept of commitment. American Journal of
Sociology, 66(1), 32-40.

141

Bekkers, R. (2003). Trust, accreditation, and philanthropy in the Netherlands. Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 32, 596-615.
Bekkers, R. (2005a). It's not all in the ask. Effects and effectiveness of recruitment
strategies used by nonprofits in the Netherlands. Paper presented at the 34rd
Annual ARNOVA-Conference, Washington, D. C.
Bekkers, R. (2006a,). Keeping the faith: Origins of confidence in charitable
organizations and its consequences for philanthropy. Paper presented at the
NCVO/VSSN Researching the Voluntary Sector Conference 2006, Warwick
University, UK.
Bekkers, R. (2006b). Traditional and health related philanthropy: The role of resources
and personality. Social Psychology Quarterly, 68, 349-366.
Bekkers, R. (2007b). Measuring altruistic behavior in surveys: The all-or-nothing dictator
game. Survey Research Methods, 1(3).
Bekkers, R. (2008). Straight from the heart. In S. Chambre and M. Goldner (Eds.),
Advances in medical sociology, Volume 10: Patients, consumers and civil society:
US and international perspectives, 197-221. UK: Emerald Group.
Bekkers, R. and Wiepking, P. (2007). Generosity and philanthropy: A literature review.
Report commissioned by the John Templeton Foundation. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1015507
Bekkers, R., and Crutzen, O. (2007). Just keep it simple: A field experiment on
fundraising letters. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 12, 371-378.
Bekkers, R., and De Graaf, N. D. (2006). Education andprosocial behavior. Manuscript,
Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Bekkers, R., and Schuyt, T. (2008). And who is your neighbor? Explaining
denominational differences in charitable giving and volunteering in the
Netherlands. Review of Religious Research, 50(1), 74-96.
Bekkers, R., and Schuyt, T.N. (2005). And who is your neighbor? Explaining the effect of
religion on charitable giving and volunteering. Working paper, Department of
Philanthropic Studies, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
Bekkers, R., and Wiepking, P. (2006). To give or not to give, that's the question. How
methodology is destiny in Dutch data. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
35, 533-540.
Bekkers, R., and Wiepking, P. (2010). Accuracy of self-reports on donations to charitable
organisations. Quality and Quantity. 45(6),1369-1383
Bekkers, R., and Wiepking, P. (201 la). A literature review of empirical studies of
philanthropy: Eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(5), 924-973.

142

Bekkers, R., and Wiepking, P. (201lb). Who gives? A literature review of predictors of
charitable giving 1 - Religion, education, age and socialization. Voluntary Sector
Review, 2(3), 337-365.
Belfield, C. R., and Beney, A. P. (2000). What determines alumni generosity? Evidence
for the UK. Education Economics, 5(1), 65-80.
Bendapudi, N., Singh, S.N. and Bendapudi, V. (1996). Enhancing helping behavior: An
integrative framework for promotion planning. Journal of Marketing 60(3), 3349.
Bennett, R., and Savani, S. (2003). Predicting the accuracy of public perceptions of
charity performance. Journal of Targeting, Measurement, and Analysis for
Marketing, I /(4), 326-342.
Bennett, R. (2003). Factors underlying the inclination to donate to particular types of
charity. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 8(1),
12-29.
Bennett, R., and Gabriel, H. (2003). Image and reputational characteristics of UK
charitable organizations: An empirical study. Corporate Reputation Review, 6,
276-289.
Bennett, R., and Kottasz, R. (2000). Emergency fund-raising for disaster relief. Disaster
Prevention and Management, 9, 352-359.
Bentler, P.M. and Bonnet, D.C. (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the
analysis of covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88(3), 588-606.
Bentler, P.M. and Bonnet, D.C. (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the
analysis of covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin, 55(3), 588-606.
Berkowitz, L. (1968). Responsibility, reciprocity, and social distance in help-giving: An
experimental investigation of English social class differences. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 4, 46-63.
Berkowitz, L., and Daniels, L. R. (1964). Affecting the salience of the social
responsibility norm: Effects of past help on the response to dependency
relationships. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68, 275-281.
Berry, L. L. (1997). The service nightmare: Can we sustain success? Marketing
Management, Fall, 10-13.
Berry, L.L. (1980). Services marketing is different. Business, May, 24-29.
Berry, L.L. (1983). Relationship marketing. In L.L. Berry, G.L. Shostaack, and G. Upah
(Eds.). Emerging perspectives on services marketing. Chicago: American
Marketing Association.
Berry, L.L., and Parasuraman, A. (1991). Marketing services: Competing through
quality. New York: Free Press.
Bhattacharya, C.B., and Sen, S. (2003). Consumer-company identification: A framework
for understanding consumers' relationships with companies. Journal of Marketing
67(April), 76-88.

143

Bhattacharya, C.B., Hayagreeva, R., and Glynn, M. A. (1995). Understanding the bond of
identification: An investigation of its correlates among art museum members.
Journal of Marketing 59(4), 46-57.
Bielefeld, W., Rooney, P., and Steinberg, K. (2005). How do need, capacity, geography,
and politics influence giving? In A. C. Brooks (Ed.), Gifts of money in Americas
communities (pp. 127-158). Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Bitner, M. J. (1990). Evaluating service encounters: The effects of physical surroundings
and employee responses. Journal of Marketing, 54(April), 69-82.
Blau, P. M. (1968). Interaction: Social exchange, In International Encyclopedia of the
Social Sciences 7(2000), (pp. 452-458).
Blau, P.M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Board Source. (2011). Knowledge center. Retrieved from http://www.boardsource.org
Boulding, W., Kalra, A., Staelin, R., and Zeithaml, V. A. (1993). A dynamic process
model of service quality: From expectations to behavioural intentions. Journal of
Marketing Research, JO(February), 7-27.
Bowman, W. (2006, June). Should donors care about overhead costs? Do they care?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 288-310.
Brooks, A. C. (2002). Welfare receipt and private charity. Public Budgeting and Finance,
22(3), 101-114.
Brooks, A. C. (2003). Taxes, subsidies, and listeners like you: Public policy and
contributions to public radio. Public Administration Review, 63, 554-561.
Brooks, A. C. (2004). What do "don't know" responses really mean in giving surveys?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 33: 324-434.
Brooks, A. C. (2005). Does social capital make you generous? Social Science Quarterly,
86, 1- 15.
Brown, E. (2005). College, social capital, and charitable giving. In Gifts of Time and
Money in Americas Communities, A. C. Brooks (Ed.). New York: Rowman and
Littlefield.
Brown, E., and Ferris, J.M. (2007). Social capital and philanthropy: An analysis of the
impact of social capital on individual giving and volunteering. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly 36, 85-99.
Brown, E., and Lankford, H. (1992). Gifts of money and gifts of time: Estimating the
effects of tax prices and available time. Journal of Public Economics, 47, 321341.
Brown, M.W. and Cudeck, R. (1993). Alternative ways of assessing model fit. In Bollen,
K.A. and Long, J.S. (eds). Testing Structural Equation Models. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Brown, S. W. and Swartz, T. A. (1989). A gap analysis of professional service quality.
Journal of Marketing, 55(April), 92-98.

144

Bruce, I. (1998). Successful charity marketing: marketing need. Hemel Hempstead, U.K.
ICSA Publishing.
Brudney, J. and Meijs, L. (2009). It ain't natural: toward a new (natural) resource
conceptualization for volunteer management. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly, 55(4), 564-581.
Bryan, J. H., and Test, M. A. (1967). Models and helping: Naturalistic studies in aiding
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 400-407.
Bryant, W. K., Slaughter, H. J., Kang, H., and Tax, A. (2003). Participating in
philanthropic activities: Donating money and time. Journal of Consumer Policy,
26(1), 43-73.
Buchanan, R., and Gilles, C. (1990). Value managed relationship: The key to customer
retention and profitability. European Management Journal, 5(4), 523-526.
Buraschi, A., and Cornelli, F. (2002). Donations. CEPR discussion paper. (3488).
Retrieved online at: http://www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP3488.asp.
Burgoyne, C. B., Young, B., and Walker, C. M. (2005). Deciding to give to charity: A
focus group study in the context of the household economy. Journal of
Community and Applied Social Psychology, 15, 383-405.
Burke, P. J. and Reitzes, D. C. (1981). The link between identity and role performance.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 44, 83-92.
Burlingame, D. F. (1997). Critical issues in fund raising. New York: NSFRE/ Wiley.
Burnett, K. (1992). Relationship fundraising. London: White Lion Press.
Buttle, F. (1996). SERVQUAL: Review, critique, research agenda. European Journal of
Marketing, 30(1), 8-32.
Byrne, B.M. (1998). Structural equation modeling with LISREL, PRELIS and SIMPLIS:
Basic concepts, applications and programming. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Byrne, B.M. (2001). Structural equation modeling with AMOS: Basic concepts,
applications, and programming. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Callen, J. L. (1994). Money donations, volunteering and organizational efficiency.
Journal of Productivity Analysis, 5, 215-228.
Callero, P. L. (1985). Role identity salience. Social Psychology Quarterly, 48(3), 203215.
Carbone, R. (1986). An agenda for research on fund raising. College Park, MD:
Clearinghouse for Research on Fund Raising.
Carman, J. M. (1990). Consumer perceptions of service quality: An assessment of the
SERVQUAL dimensions. Journal of Retailing, 66, 33-55.
Carman, K. G. (2006). Social influences and the private provision of public goods:
Evidence from charitable contributions in the workplace. Unpublished

145

manuscript. Discussion Paper Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research,
Stanford University.
Carroll, J., McCarthy, S., and Newman, C. (2006). An econometric analysis of charitable
donations in the Republic of Ireland. Economic and Social Review, 36, 229-249.
Chang, W. C. (2005). Religious giving, non-religious giving, and after-life consumption.
Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1), Article 13. Available at:
http://ww w.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol5/i ss1/art13
Chaves, M. (2002). Financing American religion. New Directions for Philanthropic
Fundraising 35, 41-54.
Chen, Y., Li, X., and MacKie-Mason, J. K. (2006). Online fund-raising mechanisms: A
field experiment. BE Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(2).
Available from http://www.bepress.com/beieap/contributions/vol5/iss2/art4.
Choe, Y. S., and Jeong, J. (1993). Charitable contributions by low and middle income
taxpayers: Further evidence with a new method. National Tax Journal, 46(\), 3339.
Christensen, R., and Ebrahim, A. (2006). How does accountability affect mission? The
case of a nonprofit serving immigrants and refugees. Nonprofit Management and
Leadership, 17(2), 195.
Chua, V. C. H., and Wong, C. M. (1999). Tax incentives, individual characteristics and
charitable giving in Singapore. International Journal of Social Economics, 26,
1492-1504.
Cialdini, R., Schaller, M., Houlihan, D., Arps, K., Fultz, J., and Beaman, A. (1987).
Empathy-based helping: Is it selflessly or selfishly motivated?, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52(4), 749-758.
Clary, E. G., and Miller, J. (1986). Socialization and situational influences on sustained
altruism. Child Development, 57, 1358-1369.
Clotfelter, C.T. (1980). Tax incentives and charitable giving: Evidence from a panel of
Congram, C. A. (1987). Adding value through client service planning. In C. Suprenant
(ed.), Add Value to Your Service. Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Cook, K. S., and Emerson, R. M. (1978). Power, equity and commitment in exchange
networks. American Sociological Review, 43, 721-739.
Cronin, J. J., and Taylor, S. A., (1992). Measuring service quality: A reexamination and
extension. Journal of Marketing, 56(July), 55-68.
Crosby, L. A., and Stephens, N. (1987). Effects of relationship marketing on satisfaction,
retention and prices in the life insurance industry. Journal of Marketing Research,
24(November), 404-411.
Daneshvary, N., and Luksetich, W. A. (1997). Income sources and declared charitable tax
deductions. Applied Economics Letters, 4, 271-274.
Davidson, J. D., and Pyle, R. E. (1994). Passing the plate in affluent churches: Why some
members give more than others. Review of Religious Research, 36, 181-196.

146

Desmet, P. (1998). The impact of mail order on subsequent donations: An experiment.
Financial Accountability and Management, 14, 203-214.
Desrochers, S., Andreassi, J., and Thompson, C. (2004). Identity theory. Organizational
Management Journal, 1, 61-69.
Diamantopoulos, A. and Siguaw, J.A. (2000). Introducing LISREL. London: Sage
Publications.
Diamond, W. D., and Gooding-Williams, S. (2002). Using advertising constructs and
methods to understand direct mail fundraising appeals. Nonprofit Management
and Leadership, 12(3), 225-242.
Diamond, W. D., and Kashyap, R. K. (1997). Extending models of prosocial behavior to
explain university alumni contributions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
27, 915-928.
Diamond, W. D., and Noble, S. M. (2001). Defensive responses to charitable direct mail
solicitations. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 15(3), 2-12.
Dodge, Y. (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms. London: Oxford
University Press.
Duncan, B. (1999). Modeling charitable contributions of time and money. Journal of
Public Economics, 72, 213-42.
Duncan, B. (2004). A theory of impact philanthropy. Journal of Public Economics, 88,
2159-2180.
Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., and Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer-seller relationship.
Journal of Marketing, 51, 11-27.
Eaton, D. H. (2001). Charitable contributions and tax price elasticities for nonitemizing
taxpayers. International Advances in Economic Research, 7, 432-442.
Eckel, C. C., and Grossman, P. J. (2003). Rebate versus matching: Does how we
subsidize charitable contributions matter? Journal of Public Economics, 87, 681701.
Edlund, J. E., Sagarin, B. J., and Johnson, B. S. (2007). Reciprocity and the belief in a
just world. Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 589-596.
Eikenberry, A. M. (2009, June). The hidden costs of cause marketing. Stanford Social
Innovation Review.
Eisenberg, N. (2000). Emotion, regulation* and moral development. Annual Review of
Psychology, 51, 665-697.
Eisenberg, N., and Mussen, P. H. (1989). The roots of prosocial behavior in children.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eschholz, S. L., and Van Slyke, D. M. (2002). New evidence about women and
philanthropy: Findings from Metro Atlanta: United way of metropolitan Atlanta's
women's legacy.

147

Fan, X., Thompson, B., and Wang, L. (1999). Effects of sample size, estimation methods,
and model specification on structural equation modeling fit indexes. Structural
Equation Modeling, 6(1), 56-83.
Farmer, S. M., and Fedor, D. B. (2001). Changing the focus on volunteering: An
investigation of volunteers' multiple contributions to a charitable organization.
Journal of Management, 27, 191-211.
Feenberg, D. (1987). Are tax price models really identified: The case of charitable giving.
National Tax Journal, 40, 629-633.
Feldman, D., and Feldman, B. (1985). The effect of a telethon on attitudes toward
disabled people and financial contributions. Journal of Rehabilitation, 51, 42-45.
Feldman, N. E. (2007). Time is money: Choosing between charitable activities. Working
paper, Ben-Gurion University, Israel.
Feldstein, M. (1975a). The income tax and charitable contributions: Part I—aggregate
and distributional effects. National Tax Journal, 28, 81-99.
Feldstein, M. (1975b). The income tax and charitable contributions: Part II—the impact
on religious, educational, and other organizations. National Tax Journal, 28, 209226.
Feldstein, M., and Taylor, A. (1976). The income tax and charitable contributions.
Econometrica, 44, 1201-1222.
Forbes, K. F., and Zampelli, E. M. (1997). Religious giving by individuals: A cross
denominational study. The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 56,1730.
Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with
unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research,
19(1), 39-50.
Fultz, J. C, Batson, D., Fortenbach, V.A., McCarthy, P., and Varney, L.L. (1986). Social
evaluation and the empathy altruism hypothesis. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology,50, 761-769.
Gaskin, K. (1999). Blurred vision: Public trust in charities. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 4(2).
George, W. R. (1977). The retailing of services: A challenging future." Journal of
Retailing, Fall, 85-98.
German, S. D. (1997). Nonprofit relationship marketing: The role of identification. Ph.D.
dissertation, Texas Tech University, United States ~ Texas. Retrieved January 5,
2012, from Dissertations and Theses: Full Text.(Publication No. AAT 9736894).
Geyskens, I., Steenkamp, J. B., Scheer, L. K. and Kumar, N. (1996). The effects of trust
and interdependence on relationship commitment: A transatlantic study,
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 13, 303-17.
Glaser, J. S., (1994). The united way scandal — An insiders account of what went wrong
and why, New York: John Wiley and Sons.

148

Glenday, G., Gupta, A. K., and Pawlak, H. (1986). Tax incentives for personal charitable
contributions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 68, 688-693.
Graddy, E. A., Ferris, J. M., and Sohn, Y. J. (2011). The evolution of research on
philanthropy and nonprofit organizations as an intellectual field: an analysis of
leading journals. Informally published manuscript, The Center on Philanthropy
and Public Policy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
Retrieved from http://cppp.usc.edu/research/FINAL-RP-35-FerrisGraddySohn.pdf
Greenwood, D. T. (1993). Price and income elasticities of charitable giving: How should
income be measured? Public Finance Quarterly, 21, 186-209.
Greenwood, J. D. (1994). Realism, Identity, and Emotion. London: Sage Publications.
Gronroos, C. (1981). Internal marketing—An integral part of marketing theory. In J. H.
Donelly and W. R. George (Eds.), Marketing of Services. Chicago: American
Marketing Association.
Gronroos, C. (1991). The marketing strategy continuum: Toward a marketing concept for
the services marketing. Management Decision, 29(1), 7-13.
Gronroos, C. (1994). From marketing mix to relationship marketing: Towards a paradigm
shift in marketing. Management Decision, 32(2), 4-20.
Groves, R.M., F.J. Fowler, M.P. Couper, J.M. Lepkowski, E. Singer, and R. Tourangeau.
(2009). Survey Methodology. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Gruber, J. (2004). Pay or pray? The impact of charitable subsidies on religious
attendance. Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2635-2655.
Gundlach, G.T, Murphy, P.E. (1993). Ethical and legal foundations of relational
marketing exchanges. Journal of Marketing, 57, 35-46.
Hager, M. A., and Brudney, J. L. (2004). Volunteer management practices and retention
of volunteers. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute. Retrieved from
http://www.urban.Org/publications/411005.html
Haggberg, M. (1992). Why donors give. Fund Raising Management, 23(2),39-40.
Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., & Anderson, R.L., (2010). Multivariate data
analysis, 7th ed. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Harley, D. R. (1984). Customer satisfaction tracking improves sales, productivity, morale
of retail chains. Marketing News, 75(June).
Harris, M. B., Liguori, R. A., and Stack, C. (1973). Favors, bribes, and altruism. Journal
of Social Psychology, 89, 47-54.
Harvey, J. W. (1990). Benefit segmentation for fundraisers. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 75(1), 77-86.
Harvey, J. W., and McCrohan, K. F. (1988). Fundraising costs - societal implications for
philanthropies and their supporters. Business and Society 27(1), 15-22.
Havens, J. J., O'Herlihy, M. A., and Schervish, P. G. (2007). Charitable giving: How
much, by whom, to what, and how? In W. W. Powell and R. S. Steinberg (Eds.),

149

The non-profit sector: A research handbook (2nd ed., pp. 542-567). New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Hennig-Thurau, T., and Hansen, U. (2000). Relationship marketing - Some reflections on
the state-of-the-art of the relational concept. In T. Hennig-Thurau and U. Hansen
(Eds.). Relationship marketing: Gaining competitive advantage through customer
satisfaction and customer retention. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Hodgkinson, V. A., and Weitzman, M. S. (1996). Giving and volunteering in the united
states. Washington: Independent Sector.
Hoge, D. R., and Yang, F. (1994). Determinants of religious giving in American
denominations: Data from two nationwide surveys. Review of Religious Research
36, 123-48.
Hogg, M., Terry, D. and White, K. (1995). A tale of two theories: A critical comparison
of identity theory with social identity theory. Social Psychology Quarterly, 58,
255-269.
Holmbeck, G., (1997). Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the
study of mediators and moderators: Examples from the child-clinical and pediatric
psychology literatures. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65(4),
599-610.
Homans, G. C. (1958). Social behavior as exchange. American Journal of Sociology,
65(6), 597-606.
Homans, G. C. (1961). Social behavior: Its elementary forms. New York: Harcourt,
Brace and World.
Hood, R. D., Martin, S. A., and Osberg, L. S. (1977). Economic determinants of
individual charitable donations in Canada. Canadian Journal of Economics, 10,
653-669.
Hornstein, H. A. (1972). Promotive tension and prosocial behavior: The basis of
prosocial behavior from a Lewinian perspective. Journal of Social Issues, 28,
191-218.
Hornstein, H. A. (1976). Cruelty and kindness: A new look at aggression and altruism.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Houston, D. J. (2006). Walking the walk of public service motivation: Public employees
and charitable gifts of time, blood, and money. Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory 16, 67-86.
Houston, F. S., and Gassenheimer, J. B., (1987). Marketing and exchange, Journal of
Marketing, 51(A).
Hrung, W. B. (2004). After-Life Consumption and Charitable Giving. American Journal
of Economics and Sociology 63, 731-45.
http://www.impact.upenn.edu/our_work/documents/WhatisHighImpactPhilanthro
py_initialconceptpaperApril2007_000.pdf

150

Hu, L.T. and Bentler, P.M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure
analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6, 1-55.
Hunt, S. D. (1976). The nature and scope of marketing. Journal of Marketing 40 (July),
17-28.
Hunter, C. S., Jones, E. B., and Boger, C. (1999). A study of the relationship between
alumni giving and selected characteristics of alumni donors of Livingstone
College, NC. Journal of Black Studies 29, 523-39.
Jackson, E. F., Bachmeier, M. D., Wood, J. R., and Craft, E. A. (1995). Volunteering and
charitable giving: Do religious and associational ties promote helping behavior?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 24, 59-78.
Jackson, N. C., and Mathews, R. M. (1995). Using public feedback to increase
contributions to a multipurpose senior center. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis, 28, 449-455.
James, R. N., and Sharpe, D. L. (2007). The nature and causes of the u-shaped charitable
giving profile. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 36, 218-38.
Jencks, C. (1990). Varieties of altruism. In J.J. Mansbridge (Ed.) Beyond Self-interest.
Jones, A. M., and Posnett, J. W. (1991a). Charitable donations by UK households:
Evidence from the Family Expenditure Survey. Applied Economics, 23, 343-351.
Jones, A. M., and Posnett, J. W. (1991b). The impact of tax deductibility on charitable
giving by covenant in the UK. Economic Journal, 101, 1117-1129.
Jones, T. O., and Sasser, W. E. Jr. (1995). Why satisfied customers defect. Harvard
Business Review. November-December, 88-99.
Joreskog, K. and Long, J.S. (1993). Introduction. In Testing Structural Equation Models,
Kenneth A. Bollen and J. Scott Long, (Eds). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Katz, S. N. (1999). Where did the serious study of philanthropy come from, anyway?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 8(1), 74-82.
Keegan, W., Moriarty, S., and Duncan, T. (1995). Marketing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Kenny, D.A. and McCoach, D.B. (2003). Effect of the number of variables on measxires
of fit in structural equation modeling. Structural Equation Modeling, 10(3), 33351.
Key, P. (2009, April 10). Nonprofits report rising demand, shrinking purses. Philadelphia
Business Journal. Retrieved from
http://nonprofitfinancefund.Org/files/docs/2010/4 10 16 09philadelphia business
iournal.pdf
Keyt, J. C., Yavas, U., and Riecken, G. (2002). Comparing donor segments to a causebased charity: The case of the American Lung Association. Journal of Nonprofit
and Public Sector Marketing, 10(2), 117-134.

151

Kihlstrom, J. F. and Cantor, N. (1984). Mental representations of the self. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, 17. New York:
Academic Press.
Kingma, B. (1989). An accurate measurement of the crowd-out effect, income effect and
price effect for charitable contributions. Journal of Political Economy, 97, 11971207.
Kleinaltenkamp, M. (1994). Explaining relationships with new institutional economics.
In K. Backhaus and H. Diller (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on
Relationship Management Munster: Verband der Hochschullehrer fur
Betriebswirtschaftslehre.
Kline, R.B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling, 2nd edition.
New York: The Guilford Press.
Knoke D. (1990). Organizing for collective action. New York: Aldine de Gruyter
Komter, A. (1996). The social and psychological significance of gift giving in the
Netherlands. In A. Komter (Ed.), The gift: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp.
107-117). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press.
Kotler, P. (1972). A generic concept of marketing. Journal of Marketing. 36(2): 46-54.
Kotler, P. (1979). Strategies for introducing marketing into nonprofit organizations.
Journal of Marketing. 43(Y)\ 37-44.
Kotler, P. (1994). Marketing management. Analysis, planning, implementation and
control. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kotler, P., and Andreasen, A. R. (1991). Strategic marketing for non-profit
organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kotler, P., and Armstrong, G. (1999). Principles of marketing. (8 ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kotler, P., and Clarke, R. N. (1987). Marketing for health care organizations. Englewood
Kotler, P., and Levy, S. J., (1969). Broadening the concept of marketing. Journal of
Marketing 33, 10-15.
Kottasz, R. (2004). How should charitable organizations motivate young professionals to
give philanthropically. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 9, 9-27.
Krebs, D., (1970). Altruism - A rational approach. In, Eisenberg, N. (Ed.), 1982. The
development of prosocial behaviour. New York: Academic Press, (pp. 53-77).
Kumru, C., and Vesterlund, L. (2008). The effect of status on voluntary contribution.
Working paper, Department of Economics, University of Pittsburgh. Retrieved
online at: http://www.pitt.edu/~vester/status.pdf.
Landry, C., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., and Rupp, N. G. (2006). Toward an
understanding of the economics of charity: Evidence from a field experiment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 747-782.

152

Lankford, R. H., and Wyckoff, J. H. (1991). Modeling charitable giving using a box-cox
standard tobit model. Review of Economics and Statistics, 73, 460-470.
Laverie, D. A., Kleine III, R. E., and Kleine, S.S. (2002). Re-examination and extension
of Kleine, Kleine, and Kernan's social identity model of mundane consumption:
The mediating role of the appraisal process. Journal of Consumer Research,
28(4), 659-69.
Lee, B. A., and Farrell, C. R. (2003). Buddy, can you spare a dime? Homelessness,
panhandling, and the public. Urban Affairs Review, 38, 299-324.
Leslie, L. L., and Ramey, G. (1988). Donor behavior and voluntary support for higher
education institutions. Journal of Higher Education, 59(2), 115-132.
Levitt, L., and Kornhaber, R. C. (1977). Stigma and compliance. A re-examination.
Journal of Social Psychology, 103(1), 13-18.
Levitt, T. (1981). Marketing intangible products and product intangibles. Harvard
Business Review, May-June, 94-102.
Lincoln, A. J. (1977). Effects of the sex of the model and donor on donating to
Amsterdam organ grinders. Journal of Social Psychology, 103(1), 33-37.
Lindahl, W. E. (2011). Principles offundraising: Theory and practice. Sudbury, MA:
Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Inc.
Lindahl, W. E., and Conley, A. T. (2002). Literature review: Philanthropic fundraising.
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 13( 1), 91-112.
List, J. A., and Lucking-Reiley, D. (2002). The effects of seed money and refunds on
charitable giving: Experimental evidence from a university capital campaign.
Journal of Political Economy, 110, 215-234.
List, J. A., and Rondeau, D. (2003). The impact of challenge gifts on charitable giving:
An experimental investigation. Economics Letters, 79, 153-159.
Long, J. E. (2000). Omitted-variable bias when using state tax rates to estimate the tax
price effect on itemized deductions. Public Finance Review, 28(2), 120-133.
Lovelock, C. H., and Weinberg, C. B. (1984). Marketing for Public and Nonprofit
Managers. (1 ed.), New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Low, B. (1996). Opportunistic behavior in business relationship: A synthesis of the
transaction cost economics and the network governance structures. In
Development, Management and Governance of Relationships: Proceedings of the
1996 International Conference on Relationship Marketing. J.N. Sheth and A.
Sollner. (Eds.) Berlin: Humbold University Press, (pp. 35-49).
Lunn, J., Klay, R., and Douglass, A. (2001). Relationships among giving, church
attendance, and religious beliefs: The case of the Presbyterian Church (USA).
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 40, 765-775.
Lusch, R. F. (2007). Marketing's evolving identity: Defining our future. Journal of Public
Policy and Marketing, Retrieved from
http://www.marketingpower.com/AboutAMA/Pages/AMA Publications/AMA

153

Journals/Journal of Public Policy Marketin g/TOCS/summary fall
07/MarketingsEvolvingippmfall07.aspx
Lyons, M., and Nivison-Smith, I. (2006). Religion and giving in Australia. Australian
Journal of Social Issues 41, 419-36.
Lyons, M., and Passey, A. (2005). Giving Australia: Research on philanthropy in
Australia. Sydney: University of Technology.
MacKinnon, D., Lockwood, C., Hoffman, J. (2002). A comparison of methods to test
mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychological Methods, 7(1),
83-104.
MacNeil, I. R. (1978). Contracts: Adjustment of long-term economic relations under
classical, neoclassical and relational contract law. Northwestern University Law
Review, 72, 854—902.
MacNeil, I. R. (1980). The new social contract: An inquiry into modern contractual
relations. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.
Mael, F., and Ashforth, B. E. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the
reformulated model of organizational identification. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 13, 103-123.
Marcuello, C., and Salas, V. (2000). Money and time donations to Spanish non
governmental organizations for development aid. Investigaciones Economicas,
24, 51-73.
Marcuello, C., and Salas, V. (2001). Nonprofit organizations, monopolistic competition,
and private donations: Evidence from Spain. Public Finance Review, 29, 183-207.
Marr, K. A., Mullin, C. H., and Siegfried, J. J. (2005). Undergraduate financial aid and
subsequent alumni giving behavior. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,
45, 123-143.
Martin, M. W. (1994). Virtuous giving: Philanthropy, voluntary service, and caring.
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Marx, J. D. (2000). Women and human services giving. Social Work, 45(1), 27-38.
Mathur, A. (1996). Older adults' motivations for gift giving to charitable organizations:
An exchange theory perspective. Psychology and Marketing, 13( 1), 107.
Matsunaga Y. (2006). To give or not to give; to volunteer or not to volunteer; that is the
question. Evidence on Japanese philanthropic behavior revealed by the JGS-2005
data set.
McClelland R., and Brooks, A.C. (2004). What is the real relationship between income
and charitable giving? Public Finance Review 32(5): 483—498.
McClelland, R., and Kokoski, M. F. (1994). Econometric issues in the analysis of
charitable giving. Public Finance Quarterly, 22, 498-517.
McDonald, G. W. (1981). Structural exchange and marital interaction. Journal of
Marriage and Family, 43(A), 825-839.

154

McDonald, R.P. and Ho, M. (2002). Principles and practice in reporting statistical
equation analyses. Psychological Methods, 7(1), 64-82.
Mcintosh, C. (2006). Rethinking fit assessment in structural equation modeling: A
commentary and elaboration on Barrett (2007). Personality and Individual
Differences, 42(5), 859-67.
Merriam-Webster. (2011). In Merriam-Webster.com.
Mesch, D. J., Rooney, P. M., Steinberg, K. S., and Denton, B. (2006). The effects of race,
gender, and marital status on giving and volunteering in Indiana. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly 35, 565-87.
Midlarsky, E., and Hannah, M.E. (1989). The generous elderly: Naturalistic studies of
donations across the life span. Psychology and Ageing 4(3), 346-351.
Miles, J. and Shevlin, M. (2007). A time and a place for incremental fit indices.
Personality and Individual Differences, 42(5), 869-74.
Miller, K. (2005). Communication Theories. New York: McGraw Hill.
Mishra, D. B., Heide, J.B. and Cort, S. G. (1998). Information asymmetry and levels of
agency relationships. Journal of Marketing Research, 35, 277-295.
Mixer, J. R. (1993). Principles ofprofessional fundraising: Useful foundations for
successful practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Moorman C., Zaltman, G., and Deshpande, R. (1992). Relationships between providers
and users of market research: The dynamics of trust within and between
organizations. Journal of Marketing Research, 29 (August), 314-328.
Moorman, C., Deshpande, R., and Zaltman, G. (1993). Factors affecting trust in
marketing research relationships. Journal of Marketing, 57 (January), 81-101.
Morgan, R. M., and Hunt, S. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 55(3), 20-38.
Mulaik, S.A., James, L.R., Van Alstine, J., Bennet, N., Lind, S., and Stilwell, C.D.
(1989). evaluation of goodness-of-fit indices for structural equation models.
Psychological Bulletin, 105(3), 430-45.
Mulaik, S.A., James, L.R., Van Alstine, J., Bennet, N., Lind, S., and Stilwell, C.D.
(1989). evaluation of goodness-of-fit indices for structural equation models.
Psychological Bulletin, 105(3), 430-45.
Nonprofit Research Collaborative. (2011, March). The 2010 nonprofit fundraising
survey. Retrieved from
http://foundationcenter.org/gainlcnowledge/research/pdf/nrc survey2011 .pdf
Nord, W. (1973). Adam smith and contemporary social exchange theory. American
Journal of Economics and Sociology, 32(4), 421-36.
Nunnally, J.C. & Bernstein, I.H. (1994). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
O'Neill, C. J., Steinberg, R. S., and Thompson, G. R. (1996). Reassessing the tax-favored
status of the charitable deduction for gifts of appreciated assets. National Tax
Journal, 49, 215-233.

155

Okten, C., and Osili, U.O. (2004). Contributions in heterogeneous communities:
Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Population Economics 17, 603-26.
Okunade, A. A., and Berl, R. L. (1997). Determinants of charitable giving of business
school alumni. Research in Higher Education, 38, 201-214.
Olsen, J. A., and Eidem, J. I. (2003). An inquiry into the size of health charities: The case
of Norwegian patient organizations. Journal of Socio-Economics, 32, 457-466.
Olson, D. V., and Caddell, D. (1994). Generous congregations, generous givers:
Congregational contexts that stimulate individual giving. Review of Religious
Research, 36, 168-180.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pancer, S. ML, McMullen, L. M., Kabatoff, R. A., Johnson, K. G., and Pond, C. A.
(1979). Conflict and avoidance in the helping situation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 37, 1406-1411.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A. and Berry, L.L. (1985). A conceptual model of service
quality and its implications for future research. Journal of Marketing, Fall, 41-50.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A. and Berry, L.L. (1988). SERVQUAL: A multiple-item
scale for measuring consumer perceptions of service quality. Journal of Retailing,
64(1), 12-40.
Park, T. K., and Park, S. B. (2004). An economic study on charitable giving of individuals
in Korea: Some new findings from 2002 survey data. Presented at 6th
International Conference of the International Society for Third-sector Research,
Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada.
Parsons, L. M. (2003). Is accounting information from nonprofit organizations useful to
donors? A review of charitable giving and value-relevance. Journal of Accounting
Literature, 22, 104-129.
Parsons, L. M. (2007). The impact of financial information and voluntary disclosures on
contributions to not-for-profit organizations. Behavioral Research in Accounting,
19, 179-196.
Parvatiyar, A., Sheth, J. N., and Whittington, F. B. (1992) Paradigm shift in interfirm
marketing relationships: Emerging research issues, (Working Paper No. CRM
92-101), Atlanta, GA: Center for Relationship Marketing, Emory University.
Payne A., and Holt, S. (2001). Diagnosing customer value: Integrating the value process
and relationship marketing. British Journal of Management, 12, 159-182.
Payton, R. (1988). Philanthropy: Voluntary Action for the Public Good. New York:
Macmillan.
Payton, R. L., Tempel, E. R., and Rosso, H. A. (1991). Taking fund raising seriously: An
agenda. In D. F. Burlingame and L. J. Hulse (Eds.), Taking fund raising seriously.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

156

Petersen, J. (1997). The statistics of loyalty and satisfaction. Journal of Targeting,
Measurement and Analysis for Marketing, 6(1), 65-75.
Pharoah, C., and Tanner, S. (1997). Trends in charitable giving. Fiscal Studies, 18, 427433.Pilavian and Callero 1991
Pitts, R. E., and Skelly, G. U. (1984). Economic self-interest and other motivational
factors underlying charitable giving. Journal of Behavioral Economics, 13(2), 93109.
Polonsky, M. J. (1995). A stakeholder theory approach to designing environmental
marketing strategy. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 10(3), 29-42.
Polonsky, M. J., Schuppisser, D. S. W., and Beldona, S. (2002). A stakeholder
perspective for analyzing marketing relationships. Journal of Market-Focused
Management, 5, 109-202.
Polonsky, M. J., Shelley, L., and Voola, R. (2002). An examination of helping
behavior—Some evidence from Australia. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector
Marketing, 10(2), 67-82.
Potters, J., Sefton, M., and Vesterlund, L. (2005). After you—Endogenous sequencing in
voluntary contribution games. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 1399-1419.
Radley, A., and Kennedy, M. (1992). Reflections upon charitable giving: A comparison
of individuals from business, "manual" and professional backgrounds. Journal of
Community and Applied Social Psychology, 2, 113-129.
Radley, A., and Kennedy, M. (1995). Charitable giving by individuals: A study of
attitudes and practice. Human Relations, 48, 685-709.
Reece, W. S. (1979). Charitable contributions: New evidence on household behavior.
American Economic Review, 69, 142-151.
Reece, W. S., and Zieschang, K. D. (1985). Consistent estimation of the impact of tax
deductibility on the level of charitable contributions. Econometrica, 53, 271-293.
Reece, W. S., and Zieschang, K. D. (1989). Evidence on taxation and charitable giving
from the 1983 U.S. treasury tax model file. Economics Letters, 3(1), 49-53.
Reed, P. B., and Selbee, L. K. (2002). Is there a distinctive pattern of values associated
with giving and volunteering? The Canadian case. Retrieved January 18, 2010,
from http://www
,canadawhocares.ca/pdfs/ARNOVA%20Ethos%20Paper%20Nov.pdf
Regnerus, M. D., Smith, C., and Sikkink, D. (1998). Who gives to the poor? The
influence of religious tradition and political location on the personal generosity of
Americans toward the poor. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37, 48193.
Reichers, A. E. (1985). A review and reconceptualization of organizational commitment.
Academy of Management Review, 10, 465-476.
Reingen, P. H. (1982). Test of a list procedure for inducing compliance with a request to
donate money. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 110-118.

157

Rentschler, R., Radbourne, J., Carr, R., and Rickard, J. (2002). Relationship marketing,
audience retention and performing arts organisation viability. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7(2), 118-130.
Ricketts, R. C., and Westfall, P. H. (1993). New evidence on the price elasticity of
charitable contributions. Journal of the American Taxation Association, 15(2), 125.
Robinson, J. (1990). Estimates of the price elasticity of charitable giving: A reappraisal
using 1985 itemizer and nonitemizer charitable deduction data. Journal of the
American Taxation Association, 12, 39-50.
Roeger, K. L., Blackwood, A., and Pettijohn, S. L. (2011). The nonprofit sector in brief
Washington D.C.: National Center for Charitable Statistics at the Urban Institute.
Retrieved from http://www.urban.Org/publications/412434.html on December 9,
2011.
Rooney, P. M., Mesch, D. J., Chin, W., Steinberg, K. S. (2005). The effect of race,
gender, and survey methodologies on giving in the US. Econometrics Letters 86,
173-80.
Rooney, P. M., Steinberg, K., and Schervish, P. G. (2001). A methodological comparison
of giving surveys: Indiana as a test case. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly 30, 551-568.
Rosenberg, M. (1979). Conceiving the self New York: Basic Books.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., and Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after
all: A cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review. 23(3). 393404.
Ryans, A. B., and Wittink, D. R. (1977). The marketing of services: Categorization with
implications for strategy. In B. Greenberg and D. Bellenger (Eds.), Contemporary
Marketing Thought. Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Sargeant, A. (1999). Charitable giving: Towards a model of donor behavior. Journal of
Marketing Management, 15, 215-238.
Sargeant, A., and Jay, E. (2004). Fundraising management analysis, planning and
practice. London: Routledge.
Sargeant, A., and Lee, S. (2004). Trust and relationship commitment in the United
Kingdom voluntary sector: Determinants of donor behavior. Psychology and
Marketing, 21, 613-635.
Sargeant, A., and Woodliffe, L. (2005). The antecedents of donor commitment to
voluntary organizations. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 7(5(1), 61-78.
Sargeant, A., and Woodliffe, L. (2007). Individual giving behaviour: A multi-disciplinary
review. In A. Sargeant and W. Wymer (Eds.), The nonprofit marketing
companion. London: Routledge.
Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2000). Widening the appeal of charity.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 5, 318-332.

158

Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., and West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual determinants of nonprofit
giving behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.
Schervish, P. G. (1992). Adoption and altruism: Those with whom I want to share a
dream. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 21(4), 327-350.
Schervish, P. G., and Havens, J. J. (1995a). Do the poor pay more: Is the u-shaped curve
correct? Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 24, 79-90.
Schervish, P. G., and Havens, J. J. (1995b). Explaining the curve in the U-shaped curve.
Voluntas, 6, 202-225.
Schervish, P. G., and Havens, J. J. (1998b). Money and magnanimity: New findings on
the distribution of income, wealth, and philanthropy. Nonprofit Management and
Leadership, 8, 421- 34.
Schervish, P. G., and Havens, J. J. (2002). The Boston area diary study and the moral
citizenship of care. Voluntas, 75(1), 47-71.
Schervish, P. G., and Havens, J. J. (2003). New findings on the patterns of wealth and
philanthropy. Chesnut Hill, PA:, Social Welfare Research Institute.
Schervish, P., and Havens, J. (1997). Social participation and charitable giving: A
multivariate analysis. Voluntas, 5(3), 235-260.
Schiff, J. (1990). Charitable giving and government policy: An economic analysis. New
York: Greenwood Press.
Schlegelmilch, B. B., Diamantopoulos, A., and Love, A. (1997). Characteristics affecting
charitable donations: Empirical evidence from Britain. Journal of Marketing
Practice: Applied Marketing Science, 5(1), 14-28.
Schlegelmilch, B. B., Love, A., and Diamantopoulos, A. (1997). Responses to different
charity appeals: The impact of donor characteristics on the amount of donations.
European Journal of Marketing, 31, 548-560.
Schwartz, R. A. (1970). Personal philanthropic contributions. Journal of Political
Economy, 78, 1264-1291.
Schwartz, S. H. (1974). Awareness of interpersonal consequences, responsibility denial,
and volunteering. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(1), 57-63.
Schwartz, S. H. (1975). The justice of need and the activation of humanitarian norms.
Journal of Social Issues, 31(3), 111-136.
Serpe, R. T. (1987). Stability and change in self: A structural symbolic interactionist
explanation. Social Psychology Quarterly, 50(1), 44-55.
Sheth, J. N., and Uslay, C. (2007). Implications of the revised definition of marketing:
From exchange to value creation. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, Vol.
22(2), 302-307.
Sheth, J.N., and Parvatiyar, A. (1995). Relationship marketing in consumer markets:
Antecedents and consequences. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
23(4), 255-271.

159

Sheth, J.N., and Parvatiyar, A. (2000). The evolution of relationship marketing. In J.N.
Sheth and A. Parvatiyar (Eds.). Handbook of relationship marketing. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Simmons, W. O., and Emanuele, R. (2004). Does government spending crowd out
donations of time and money? Public Finance Review, 32, 498-511.
Simon, A. F. (1997). Television news and international earthquake relief. Journal of
Communication, 47(3), 82-93.
Slemrod, J. (1989). Are estimated tax elasticities really just tax evasion elasticities? The
Small, D. A., and Simonsohn, U. (2006). Friends of victims: Personal experience and
prosocial behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 532-542.
Smith, A. (2008, 1776). An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations.
Oxford, UK: Oxford Paperbacks.
Smith, A. (2010, 1759). The theory of moral sentiments. New York: Penguin Books.
Smith, J. R., and McSweeney, A. (2007). Charitable giving: The effectiveness of a
revised theory of planned behaviour model in predicting donating intentions and
behavior. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 17.
Smith, S. ML, and Beik, L. L. (1982). Market segmentation for fund raisers. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 10(3), 208-216.
Sokolowski, S. W. (1996). Show me the way to the next worthy deed: Towards a
microstructural theory of volunteering and giving. Voluntas, 7, 259-278.
Sollner, A. (1994). Commitment in exchange relationships: the role of switching costs in
building and sustaining competitive advantages. In Relationship Marketing:
Theory, Methods, and Applications (Conference Proceedings), J. N. Sheth and A.
Parvatiyar, (Eds.). Atlanta, GA: Emory University.
Solomon, M. R. (1983). The role of products as social stimuli: A symbolic interactionism
perspective. Journal of Consumer Research, 10(3), 319-329.
Sprinkel Grace, K. (1997). Beyond fund raising: new strategies for nonprofit innovation
and investment. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Srnka, K. J., Grohs, R., and Eckler, I. (2003). Increasing fimdraising efficacy by
segmenting donors. Australasian Marketing Journal 11, 70-86.
Staub, E. (1978). Positive social behavior and morality: Social and personal influences.
New York: Academic Press.
Staub, E., and Baer, R. S. (1974). Stimulus characteristics of a sufferer and difficulty of
escape as determinants of helping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
30, 279-284.
Steiger, J.H. (2007), "Understanding the limitations of global fit assessment in structural
equation modeling," Personality and Individual Differences, 42 (5), 893-98.
Steiger, J.H. (2007), "Understanding the limitations of global fit assessment in structural
equation modeling," Personality and Individual Differences, 42 (5), 893-98.

160

Stryker, S. (1968). Identity salience and role performance: The importance of symbolic
interaction theory for family research. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 30,
558-564.
Stryker, S. (1980). Symbolic interactionism: A social structural version. Menlo Park, CA:
Benjamin Cummings.
Stryker, S., and Burke, P. J. (2000). The past, present and future of identity theory. Social
Psychology Quarterly, 63, 284-297.
Stryker, S., and Serpe, R. T. (1982). Commitment, identity salience and role behavior:
Theory and research examples. In W. Ickes and E. S. Knowles (Eds.) Personality,
roles, and social behavior. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Sullivan, D. H. (1985). Simultaneous determination of church contributions and church
attendance. Economic Inquiry, 23, 309-320.
Tabachnick, B.G.; Fidell, L.S. (2001). Using Multivariate Analysis. Boston, MA: Allyn
and Bacon, Inc.
Talansky, J., and Deshmukh, A. (2011, March). 2011 state of the sector survey. Retrieved
from http://nonprofitfinancefund.org/2011-state-sector-survev-national-summarv
Thibaut, J.W., and Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Thompson, B. (2004). Communalities. In The SAGE Encyclopedia of Social Science
Research Methods. M.S. Lewis-Beck, A. Bryman and T. F. Liao (Eds.) Thousand
oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Tiehen, L. (2001). Tax policy and charitable contributions of money. National Tax
Journal, 54, 707-723.
Todd, S. J., and Lawson, R. W. (1999). Towards a better understanding of the financial
donor: An examination of donor behavior in terms of value structure and
demographics. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 4, 235-244.
Tonkiss, F., and Passey, A. (2001). Trust, confidence and voluntary organisations:
Between values and institutions. Sociology, 33(2), 251.
Trussell, J. M., and Parsons, L. M. (2007). Financial factors affecting donations to
charitable organizations. Advances in Accounting, 23, 265-287.
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Public Affairs. (2010). State summary.
Retrieved from U.S. Government website:
http://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/ssvirginia.pdf
Unger, L. S. (1991). Altruism as a motivation to volunteer. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 12, 71-100.
Van Diepen, M., Donkers, B., and Franses, P. H. (2009). Does irritation induced by
charitable direct mailings reduce donations? International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 26, 180-188.

161

Van Slyke, D. M., and Brooks, A. C. (2005). Why do people give? New evidence and
strategies for nonprofit managers. American Review of Public Administration 35,
199-222.
Vriens, M., Scheer, H., Hoekstra, J. C., and Bult, J. R. (1998). Conjoint experiments for
direct mail response optimization. European Journal of Marketing, 32, 323-339.
Wagner, C., and Wheeler, L. (1969). Model, need, and cost effects in helping behaviour.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12(2), 111-116.
Warwick, M. (2001). How to write successful fundraising letters. San Francisco: Jossey
Bass.
Webber, D. (2004). Understanding charity fundraising events. International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 9(2),122-134.
Weerts, D. J., and Ronca, J. M. (2007). Profiles of supportive alumni: Donors, volunteers,
and those who "do it all." International Journal of Educational Advancement,
7(1), 20-34.
Wegener, D. T., and Petty, R.E. (1994). Mood management across affective states: The
hedonic contingency hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
66(6), 1034-1048.
What Is High Impact Philanthropy?" Center for High Impact Philanthropy. School of
Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania. 24 April 2007. Retrieved
online at http://www.impact.upenn.edu/about/highimpactphilanthropy.
Wheaton, B., Muthen, B., Alwin, D., F., and Summers, G. (1977). Assessing reliability
and stability in panel models. Sociological Methodology, 5(1), 84-136.
Wiepking, P. (2008). Picturing generosity: National campaigns for charitable causes in
the Netherlands. For the love of mankind. A sociological study on charitable
giving (73-94). Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Philanthropic
Studies, VU University Amsterdam: Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Wiepking, P., and Heijnen, M. (2011). The giving standard: Conditional cooperation in
the case of charitable giving. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing 16( 1), 13-22.
Wiepking, P., and Maas, I. (2009, June). Resources that make you generous: Effects of
human and social resources on charitable giving. Social Forces, 86, 1973-1996.
Wilhelm, M. O., Brown, E., Rooney, P. M., and Steinberg, R. S. (2006). The
intergenerational transmission of generosity. Working paper, IUPUI.
Wilhelm, M. O., Brown, E., Rooney, P. M., and Steinberg, R. S. (2008). The
intergenerational transmission of generosity. Journal of Public Economics, 92,
2146-2156.
Wilson, A., and Pimm, G. (1996). The tyranny of the volunteer: The care and feeding of
voluntary workforces. Management Decision, 34(4), 24-40.

162

Wu, S. Y., Huang, J. T., and Kao, A. P. (2004). An analysis of the peer effects in
charitable giving: The case of Taiwan. Journal of Family and Economic Issues,
25, 483-505.
Yamauchi, N., and Yokoyama, S. (2005). What determines individual giving and
volunteering in Japan? An econometric analysis using the 2002 national survey
data. Presented at 34th ARNOVA Conference, Washington, D. C.
Yavas, U., Riecken, G., and Parameswaran, R. (1981). Personality, organization-specific
attitude, and socio-economic correlates of charity giving behavior. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 9(1), 52-65.
Yen, S. T. (2002). An econometric analysis of household donations in the USA. Applied
Economics Letters, P(13), 837-841.
Zaleski, P. A., and Zech, C. E. (1992). Determinants of contributions to religious
organizations. Free riding and other factors. American Journal of Economics and
Sociology, 51, 459-472.
Zaleski, P. A., and Zech, C. E. (1994). Economic and attitudinal factors in Catholic and
Protestant religious giving. Review of Religious Research, 36, 158-167.
Zaleski, P. A., Zech, C. E., and Hoge, D. R. (1994). Determinants of religious giving in
urban Presbyterian congregations. Review of Religious Research, 36, 197-206.

163

APPENDIX A
"Individual Giving Survey Instrument"

Introduction:
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this study. Your participation is voluntary, and
you can withdraw from the study at any time. Neither your identity nor the identity of the
organization to which you make charitable donations will be revealed in the publication
of research results.
This survey is part of a doctoral research project designed to examine charitable giving
motivations, and test and extend recent nonprofit relationship marketing research, which
has sought to explain why people give, why they continue to give to a specific nonprofit,
and how nonprofits can manage their relationships with donors. Charitable giving is
defined as "a (usually tax-deductible) gift made to a not-for-profit organization" (AFP,
2011). Charitable giving can include several types of resources such as gifts of time,
effort, money, or goods and services; however, this study exclusively examines charitable
gifts of money.
Your participation involves completing this survey, which should take 10-15
minutes. There are no known or anticipated risks to participation in this survey. The data
will be summarized and no individual responses can be identified for reporting purposes.
The nature of this study should not be invasive or embarrassing. Questions are confined
to ones that address your beliefs, perceptions, and/or demographics. Any information
provided by you in the study will be afforded professional standards for protection of
confidentiality.
By completing this study, you are consenting to the terms of this research as stated
above. This notice serves as your copy of the consent agreement. You may also request a
copy of these consent terms by contacting the Principal Investigator of the study. This
study has been reviewed by, and received clearance through, the Human Subjects
Research Committee at Old Dominion University.
If you have any questions about the study, please contact the Principal Investigator:
William Leavitt, Principal Investigator
Department of Urban Studies and Public Administration, College of Business and Public
Administration
Old Dominion University
2092 Constant Hall, Norfolk, Virginia 23529
757-683-5695, wleavitt@odu.edu
Jennifer A. Taylor, Co-Principal Investigator
Department of Urban Studies and Public Administration
College of Business and Public Administration

164

Old Dominion University
2092 Constant Hall, Norfolk, Virginia 23529
757-683-5695, jtayl078@odu.edu
If you have any questions regarding your rights as a research subject contact the Human
Subjects Research Committee Chair at irbcbpa@odu.edu or 757-683-5109.
Thank you for taking the time to take this short survey on charitable donations.
51. Have you personally, made a charitable donation to a non-for-projit organization in
the past two years? By charitable donation, we mean voluntary gifts of money to a
charity, social institution, associations andfoundations, as well as financial donations to
relief campaigns and sponsorships.
• Yes
• No - Terminate
52. Thinking about the nonprofit organization you made the most donations to in the past
two years, how many donations did you make to that nonprofit organization?
• 1 - Terminate
• 2-3
• 4+
• Unsure, but more than once in the past two years
S2. In the past two years, have you made two or more donations to the same nonprofit
organization?
• Yes
• No - Terminate
In this survey, you will be asked about two or more of your personal (individual, not
household) charitable donations to a nonprofit organization over the past two or more
years. Think about the nonprofit to which you have made two or more financial
contributions in the past two years.
Please consider this nonprofit when answering the following questions.
1. What is the name of the nonprofit organization that you made two or more
charitable gifts to over the past two years?

2. To the best of your knowledge, what type of nonprofit organization is (X)? (Select
one)
o Religious
o Education
o Foundation
o Human services
o Health
o Public-society benefit (relief)
o Arts, culture, and humanities

165

o
o
o
o

International affairs
Environment/animals
Military support organizations
Other (open field)

3. To the best of your knowledge, what is the size of the nonprofit organization?
o Small
o Medium
o Large
4. To the best of your knowledge, during the past 12 months, how much did you
donate in total to (X)? Please include donations through direct mail, online, tickets
to special events, raffles, sponsorships, and team fundraising events. Do not
include donations to capital (buildings, facilities) campaigns.
$
5. In the past 12 months, how frequent were your donations to (X)?
o
o
o
o
o

Once
2 to 3 times per year
4 to 8 times per year
Monthly
Weekly

6. How long have you been a donor of (X)?
o Less than 1 year
o 1-3 years
o 3-5 years
o More than 5 years
7. When thinking of the future and this charity, how much do you agree or disagree
with the following statements on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly
disagree and 7 means Strongly agree?
- I am likely to donate to the charity in question.
- I will donate the next time.
- I will definitely donate.
- I will recommend the charity to others to donate.
Please rate the following statements on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly
disagree and 7 means Strongly agree?
8. Donating to (X) is something I rarely think about. (R)
9. I would feel a loss if I were forced to give up donating to (X).
10.1 really don't have clear feelings about (X) donation. (R)
11. For me, being a donor means more than just giving money.
12. Donating to (X) is an important part of who I am.

166

13.1 feel confident that X is using my monies appropriately.
14. X's communications are always courteous.
15. X's employees have the best interests of society at heart.
16. X is the charity most likely to have an impact on this cause.
17. When X promises to provide a service to society, it does so.
18.1 feel safe in my transactions with X.
19. Their communications are visually appealing.
20. X keeps me informed about how my monies are being used.
21. Employees in X are always courteous
22. X's communications are always timely.
23. The behavior of X's employees instills confidence.
24. Employees in X have the knowledge to answer my questions.
25. X's employees have the best interests of their supporters at heart.
26. X makes me feel that it is always willing to help me if I have a question.
27. Employees at X are never too busy to speak with me.
28. X always responds promptly to requests I might have for information.
29. X gives me individual attention.
30. X writes to me at the times of the year I find most convenient.
31. Employees of X seem to understand my specific needs.
32. When I have a problem, X shows an interest in solving it.

33. How often do you attend church or other religious places of worship, such as
temples, mosques, or synagogues? (Select One)
• More than once per week
• Once a week
• A couple of times a month
• Once a month
• Less than once a month
• A couple of times a year
• Never
Please rate the following statements on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly
disagree and 7 means Strongly agree?
34. We should leave the world in a good state for the following generation
35. Society is endangered because people increasingly care less about each other.
36. The world needs responsible citizens.
37. My faith has a lot of influence on my life.
Please rate the following statements on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly
disagree and 7 means Strongly agree?
38.1 would trust this nonprofit to always act in the best interest of the cause.
39.1 would trust this nonprofit to conduct their operations ethically.
40.1 would trust this nonprofit to use donated funds appropriately.

167

41.1 would trust this nonprofit not to exploit their donors.
42.1 would trust this nonprofit to use fundraising techniques that are appropriate and
sensitive.
43. (X)'s need for financial support from its donors will be even greater in the future.
44. Nonprofit organizations that receive some public funding need the financial
support of their donors just as much as those nonprofits that do not.
45. (X) presently needs strong financial support from its donors.
46. This nonprofit is the nonprofit most likely to have an impact on this cause.
47. This nonprofit spends a high proportion of its income on this cause.
48. When I give to this nonprofit I receive some benefit in return for my donation.
49.1 give to this nonprofit to gain local prestige.
50.1 donate money to this nonprofit to receive their publications.
51. Contributing to this nonprofit enables me to obtain recognition.
52.1 may one day benefit from the work this organization undertakes.
53.1 often give to this nonprofit because 1 would feel guilty if I didn't.
54. If I never gave to this nonprofit I would feel bad about myself.
55.1 give money to this nonprofit in memory of a loved one.
56.1 felt that someone I know might benefit from my support.
57. My family had a strong link to this nonprofit.
On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly disagree and 7 means Strongly agree,
How much do you agree that (X) does a good job of...
58. Asking for appropriate levels of support.
59. Leaving it to me how much to donate.
60. Thanking me for my support.
61. Responding quickly when I contact them.
62. Demonstrating they care about their supporters.
63. Being polite in all their communications.
64. Informing me about how money is spent.
65. Not asking me for support too often.
66. Making me feel important.
Please rate the following statements on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means Strongly
disagree and 7 means Strongly agree.
67. My parents rarely donated money to charitable causes. (R)
68. My father treated his job as one in which he tried to help other people.
69. My parents actively participated in volunteer organizations (such as the Red
Cross, March of Dimes, etc.)
70. My mother treated her job (in home and/or out-of home) as one in which she
helped other people.
71. In my family, we always helped one another.
72. My parents very frequently donated money to people who collected money door
to door (Such as March of Dimes, Heart Fund, etc.)
73. Concerning strangers experiencing distress, my parents generally thought that it

168

was more important to "not to get involved." (R)
74. My parents frequently discussed moral values with me (values like the "Golden
Rule," etc.)
75. When I was growing up, my parents told me I should be willing to "lend a helping
hand."
76. My parents often urged me to donate money to charities.
77. When I was younger, my parents very often urged me to get involved with
volunteer projects for children (for example, UNICEF, walkathons, etc.)
Thank you for your participation. If you have any questions, concerns, or would like to
see the final product for this research project, please contact William Leavitt,
wleavitt@odu.edu

169

APPENDIX B
"Hypotheses and Constructs"

Construct /
Variable

Survey
Questions

Questions 4-7 are used to
measure the dependent
variable, charitable giving.
HI: The greater the identity
saliency of a donor, the
greater the level of
charitable giving of the
donor.
H2: The greater the relationship
satisfaction of a donor, the
greater the level of
charitable giving of the
donor.
H3: The greater the identity
saliency and the
relationship satisfaction,
the greater the level of
charitable giving of the
donor.

Charitable Giving

Questions
4-7

Identity Saliency

Questions
8-12

Relationship
Satisfaction

Questions
13-32

Identity Saliency
and Relationship
Satisfaction

Questions
8-32

H4: Donors with a higher level
of trust in a nonprofit
organization will be more
satisfied with the
relationship with the
nonprofit organization.
H5: The greater the perceived
financial need for the
nonprofit organization, the
higher the identity salience
for the donor.
H6: The greater the perceived
financial need for the
nonprofit organization, the
higher the relationship
satisfaction for the donor.
H7: The greater the perceived
organizational
performance, the greater
the identity salience of the

Trust

Questions
38-42

Perceived
Financial Need

Questions
43-45

Arnett, German, &
Hunt, (2003)
Reliability =.724

Perceived
Financial Need

Questions
43-45

Arnett, German, &
Hunt, (2003)
Reliability =.724

Perceived
Organizational
Performance

Questions
46-47

Sargeant, Ford &
West, (2006);
Reliability = .721

Hypothesis

Source &
Reliability in this
study
Ranganathan and
Henley, (2007)
Reliability = .905
Callero, (1985)
Reliability — .709

Sargeant, (2001)
Parasuraman,
Zeithaml, and
Berry (1988)
Reliability = .969
Callero, (1985)
Reliability =.709
Sargeant, (2001)
Parasuraman,
Zeithaml, and
Berry (1988)
Reliability = .969
Sargeant, Ford, &
West, (2006)
Reliability = .937

170

donor.
H8: The greater the perceived
organizational
performance, the greater
the relationship satisfaction
of the donor.
H9: Reciprocity in
demonstrable utility will
relate positively to
charitable giving mediated
by identity saliency and
relationship satisfaction.
H10: Reciprocity in emotional
utility will relate positively
to charitable giving
mediated by identity
saliency and relationship
satisfaction.
HI 1: Reciprocity in familial
utility will relate positively
to charitable giving
mediated by identity
saliency and relationship
satisfaction.
H12: The greater the satisfaction
with the solicitation
process, the greater the
identity saliency of the
donor.
HI3: The greater the satisfaction
with the solicitation
process, the greater the
relationship satisfaction of
the donor.
HI4: The greater the parental
socialization and youth
participation, the greater
the identity saliency of the
donor.
H15: The greater the parental
socialization and youth
participation, the greater
the relationship satisfaction
of the donor.

Perceived
Organizational
Performance

Questions
46-47

Sargeant, Ford &
West, (2006);
Reliability = .721

Demonstrable
Utility

Questions
48-52

Sargeant, Ford, &
West, (2006)
Reliability = .71

Emotional Utility

Questions
53-54

Sargeant, Ford, &
West, (2006);
Reliability = .768

Familial Utility

Questions
55-57

Sargeant, Ford, &
West, (2006);
Reliability = .622

Solicitation

Questions
58-66

Sargeant (2001);
Reliability = .919

Solicitation

Questions
58-66

Sargeant (2001)
Reliability = .919

Parental
Socialization &
Youth
Participation

Questions
67-77

Perry (1997),
Clary & Miller
(1986)
Reliability = .866

Parental
Socialization &
Youth
Participation

Questions
67-77

Perry, (1997),
Clary & Miller,
(1986)
Reliability =.866

171

APPENDIX C
Moderator's Guide"
Focus Group Schedule
Introduction
Statement of Rules & Guidelines
Short Question and Answer Discussion
Giving motivations
Repeat giving
Barriers to giving
Attitudes about giving
Total

5 minutes
10 minutes
50 minutes
15 minutes
15 minutes
10 minutes
10 minutes
65 minutes

Introduction
My name is Jennifer Taylor, I am a doctoral candidate at Old Dominion University in the
College of Business and Public Administration. Your participation in this focus group is
part of my dissertation on measuring the relationship between donor motivations and
donor giving. There is also an observer, also a PhD student at ODU, sitting in the back of
the room. The observer's role is to take detailed field notes during the focus group.
The purpose of this focus group is to understand the various motivations for charitable
giving in Hampton Roads, really to understand 'why' people give and continue to give to
nonprofit organizations. The results from today's discussion will be used to develop a
survey instrument that will measure the relationship between donor motivations and
donor giving in a sample population from Hampton Roads later this year.
Statement of Rules and Guidelines
A focus group is a group discussion that produces a dynamic conversation, which leads to
an in-depth exploration of the topic - donor motivations and donor/nonprofit
relationships. My expectation of this process is for an open, polite and orderly
environment where everyone is encouraged to participate. This focus group is expected to
last about one hour and will begin by the moderator asking questions and follow up
questions to stimulate a free-flowing conversation about the topic. I will toss out
questions to the group and open it up for discussion and/or I may ask questions
individually and then we will discuss. Everyone may have a different opinion or answer
and I want to hear it all. There will be a digital audio recording device in use, which will
record the focus group interview, and the data will be confidentially transcribed for
analysis. Participating in this focus group brings a risk for potential embarrassment,
discomfort, and potential emotional distress. What is discussed here is expected to stay
confidential within the members of the group. By participating, you are agreeing to hold
the information confidential. You should not participate if you think that you cannot
maintain the confidentiality. It is okay to leave the room, at any time, if you feel
uncomfortable. Do you understand the project and your role in the research?
First, let's go around the room, introduce ourselves, first name only please, and tell the
group how you came to live in Hampton Roads.

172

Short Question and Answer Discussion
Giving motivations
What are some of the reasons that you have decided to make a donation to a nonprofit
organization?
When you make a donation do you:
• Feel good about it?
Warm feeling or glow
• Give to effect a change?
Desire to cause social change
• Understand the individual need?
Empathy, sympathy
• Understand why the cause is important?
Belief in the mission
• Expect recognition for your gift?
Prestige, Recognition
• Am proud of donating to the nonprofit?
Respect
• Think your friends also give to the nonprofit?
Peer pressure
• Receive a monetary or economic benefit by giving, i.e. sponsorship, perks, benefits?
Economic, Reciprocity
• Give because someone close to you has been affected by the cause?
Familial
Repeat giving
Have you made more than one donation to the same nonprofit organization?
Is there anything that stands out as influencing you to make a repeat donation?
Does the nonprofit:
• Value your contribution?
• Appreciate your extra effort to volunteer or give?
• Listen to any concerns you may have?
• Recognizes you when you do something for or give something to the nonprofit?
• Provides you with information on how my gift is being used?
8 Use organizational resources appropriately?
Barriers or deterrents to charitable giving
Can you think of a time when you wanted to make a donation but did not?
Had you made donations previously to that organization?
What reasons do you think caused you not to become a repeat donor?
• Financial?
• Other more deserving causes?
• Death or relocation?
• Lack of recognition of gift?
• Information about gift was used?
(Follow up list derived from Sargeant, 2001)
Attitudes about giving
Of the organizations that you give to on a regular basis, why do you keep giving to them?
Can you describe your relationship with the organization?
How are your charitable gifts valued, recognized, thanked?
Do you think the money given to nonprofit organizations is for good causes?
Do you think that the nonprofits perform a useful function for society?

173

Do you think that nonprofit organizations have been successful in helping the needy?
Is money donated to nonprofit organizations wasted?
(Webb, Green, Brashear, 2000)
Close
Is there anything we missed that you would like to talk about?
What is the most important point we discussed?

174

APPENDIX D
"Informed Consent"
PROJECT TITLE: Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity Saliency
and Relationship Satisfaction
INTRODUCTION
The purposes of this form are to give you information that may affect your decision
whether to say YES or NO to participation in this research, and to record the consent of
those who say YES. The focus groups for the Relational Exchange in Nonprofits study
will be conducted, here in the conference room (location will vary based on group).
RESEARCHERS
Jennifer A. Taylor, M.A.
William Leavitt, Ph.D.
College of Business and Public Administration
Department of Urban Studies and Public Administration
DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH STUDY
Several studies have been conducted looking into the subject of why people make
charitable donations. None of them have explained the role of identification with the
cause and relationship satisfaction and their impact on giving.
If you decide to participate, then you will join a study involving participation in a focus
group, which is similar to a group discussion of charitable giving by individuals. This
research is non-experimental in nature and will be confidentially recorded in a digital
audio format. If you say YES, then your participation will last for approximately 60
minutes in this location. Approximately 7-9 other individuals with similar experiences
will be participating in this study.
EXCLUSIONARY CRITERIA
You should have completed the initial questionnaire prior to this. To the best of your
knowledge, you have made a charitable donation to a nonprofit organization within the
last 24 months to participate in this study.
RISKS AND BENEFITS
RISKS: If you decide to participate in this study, then you may face a risk of social or
emotional distress in discussing your past experiences with charitable giving. You may
experience some discomfort in being audio recorded. There is also a risk of breech of
confidentiality due to the other participants in the focus group. In addition to the
facilitator, there is an observer in the room whose role is to take detailed, confidential
field notes. The researcher tried to reduce these risks by asking participants to keep the
discussion confidential and to treat each other with respect during the discussion. And, as
with any research, there is some possibility that you may be subject to risks that have not
yet been identified. If for any reason, you are uncomfortable with the research, you are

175

free to leave the room and the study at any time.
Participating in this focus group brings a risk for potential embarrassment, discomfort,
and potential emotional distress. What is discussed here is expected to stay confidential
within the members of the group. By participating, you are agreeing to hold the
information confidential. You should not participate if you think that you cannot
maintain the confidentiality.

BENEFITS: The main benefit to you for participating in this study is a boxed lunch.
Others may benefit by gaining further insight into their charitable giving behaviors.
COSTS AND PAYMENTS
The researchers want your decision about participating in this study to be absolutely
voluntary. Yet they recognize that your participation may pose some inconvenience. In
order to minimize that, you will receive a boxed lunch. The researchers are unable to give
you any additional payment for participating in this study.
NEW INFORMATION
If the researchers find new information during this study that would reasonably change
your decision about participating, then they will give it to you.
CONFIDENTIALITY
All information obtained about you in this study is strictly confidential unless law
requires disclosure. The results of this study may be used in reports, presentations and
publications, but the researcher will not identify you.
WITHDRAWAL PRIVILEGE
It is OK for you to say NO. Even if you say YES now, you are free to say NO later, and
walk away or withdraw from the study — at any time. Your decision will not affect your
relationship with Old Dominion University, or otherwise cause a loss of benefits to which
you might otherwise be entitled.
COMPENSATION FOR ILLNESS AND INJURY
If you say YES, then your consent in this document does not waive any of your legal
rights. However, in the event of harm, injury, or illness arising from this study, neither
Old Dominion University nor the researchers are able to give you any money, insurance
coverage, free medical care, or any other compensation for such injury. In the event that
you suffer injury as a result of participation in any research project, you may contact Dr.
William Leavitt at 757-683-5695, who will be glad to review the matter with you.
VOLUNTARY CONSENT
By signing this form, you are saying several things. You are saying that you have read
this form or have had it read to you, that you are satisfied that you understand this form,
the research study, and its risks and benefits. The researchers should have answered any
questions you may have had about the research. If you have any questions later on, then
the researchers should be able to answer them:

176

Jennifer A. Taylor
Dr. William Leavitt

361-779-2392
757-683-5695

If at any time you feel pressured to participate, or if you have any questions about your
rights or this form, then you should call Dr. Adam Rubenstein Director of Research
Compliance, at 757- 683-3686, or the Old Dominion University Office of Research, at
757-683-3460.
And importantly, by signing below, you are telling the researcher YES, that you agree to
participate in this study. The researcher should give you a copy of this form for your
records.

INVESTIGATOR'S STATEMENT I certify that I have explained to this subject the
nature and purpose of this research, including benefits, risks, costs, and any experimental
procedures. I have described the rights and protections afforded to human subjects and
have done nothing to pressure, coerce, or falsely entice this subject into participating. I
am aware of my obligations under state and federal laws, and promise compliance. I have
answered the subject's questions and have encouraged him/her to ask additional questions
at any time during the course of this study. I have witnessed the above signature(s) on
this consent form.
Subject's Printed Name & Signature

Date

Investigator's Printed Name & Signature

Date

177

APPENDIX E
"Recruitment Flyer"
Do you make donations to charity?
FOCUS GROUP
"Relational Exchange in Nonprofits"

FREE LUNCH FOR
PARTICIPANTS

Jennifer A. Taylor, Doctoral Candidate in the College of Business and Public
Administration at ODU, is sponsoring a series of focus groups to learn why people give
to charity and why they make repeat donations.
If you have a made a donation, cash or in-kind, to a nonprofit organization in the past 24
months, you are invited to join a small group of other donors to discuss your giving
motivations and experiences with nonprofit organizations. The audio-recorded feedback
from the focus groups will be used to develop a survey of donors.

Time:
When:
Where:

12 Noon - 130 pm
Thursday, September 8, 2011

To learn more and to reserve your space in one of the focus groups, please email Jennifer
A. Taylor, jtayl078@odu.edu

178

APPENDIX F
"Recruitment Flyer"
Do you make donations to charity?

FOCUS GROUP
"Relational Exchange in Nonprofits"

FREE LUNCH FOR
PARTICIPANTS

Jennifer A. Taylor, Doctoral Candidate in the College of Business and Public
Administration at ODU, is sponsoring a series of focus groups to learn why people give
to charity and why they make repeat donations.
If you have a made a donation, cash or in-kind, to a nonprofit organization in the past 24
months, you are invited to join a small group of other donors to discuss your giving
motivations and experiences with nonprofit organizations. The audio-recorded feedback
from the focus groups will be used to develop a survey of donors.

Time:
When:
Where:

12 Noon - 130 pm
Tuesday, September 6, 2011

To learn more and to reserve your space in one of the focus groups, please email Jennifer
A. Taylor, jtayl078@odu.edu

179

APPENDIX F
"Codebook"
I

Identification

25

ASK

Way in which asked, asked, authenticity of

21

ask
PN

Perceived need

18

OEffi

Organizational efficiency

18

GB

Giving back

17

PS

Parental socialization

15

OEffe

Organizational effectiveness

12

REC

Recognition

11

A

Altruism

10

PB

Perceived benefits

10

E2G

Easy to give

9

R

Religion

8

COM

Communications

8

MD

Making a difference

6

ES

Economic Situation

6

oc

Other cause

5

pp

Peer pressure

3

F

Familial

3

S

Spouse

3

TD

Tax deduction

2

STA

Status

2

PRE

Prestige

2

SCD

Scandal

2

180

APPENDIX H
"IRB Certificate of Approval''

Ci!U.10JU,

_

BUSINESS & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION

OLD DOMINION
UNIVERSITY
IDEA FUSION

2004conStam H»II
Norfolk, VA 23529
757.SS3.3520

Certificate of Approval
Date:

9/5/11

Responsible Project
Investigator (RPJ):

William Leavitt

Co-Investigator:

Jennifer A. Taylor

Proposal Number:

003

Effective Date:

9/5/11

Expiration Date:

9/5/12

Exemption Category:

6.2

Title:

Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity Saliency and
Relationship Satisfaction

All IRB Approved Investigators must comply with the following:
•
•

•
•

•
•

For the duration of your protocol, any change in the experimental design/Consent and/or Assent
Form must be approved by the IRB before implementation of the changes.
Use only a copy of the IRB signed and dated Consent and/or Assent Form. The investigator bears
the responsibility for obtaining from all subjects "Informed Consent" as approved by the IRB. The
IRB requires that the subject be given a copy of the Consent and/or Assent Form. Consent and/or
Assent Forms must include the name and the telephone number of the investigator.
Provide non-English speaking subjects with a certified translation of the approved Consent and/ or
Assent Form in the subject's first language.
The investigator also bears the responsibility for informing the IRB immediately of any
unanticipated problems that are unexpected and related to the study in accordance with IRB Policy
and Procedures.
Obtain [RB approval for all advertisements, questionnaires and surveys before use.
Federal regulations require a Continuing Review to renew approval of this project within a 12month period from the last approval date unless otherwise indicated in the review cycle listed
below. If you have any restricted/high risk protocol, specific details will be outlined in this letter.
Non-compliance with Continuing Review will result in termination of this study.

You will be sent a Continuing Review reminder 75 days prior to the expiration date. Any questions
regarding this IRB action can be referred to the CBPA College IRB Chair at 757-683-5109.
Sincerely,

CBPA College IRB Chair

APPENDIX I

Proposed Measurement Model

APPENDIX J

Revised Measurement Model

e-

7«

APPENDIX K

Proposed Structural iVIodcl

APPENDIX L

Structural Model without Identity Salicncy and Relationship Satisfaction

APPENDIX M
Structural Model with only Identity Saliency

-.02
.60

40
-.12

-56 .83,

,.72
.67

.64
.74
.30
,55

.51

.47
.72

.41
.64

APPENDIX N

Structural Mode! with only Relationship Satisfaction
.88

JENNIFER A. TAYLOR
College of Business and Public Administration
Department of Urban Studies & Public Administration
Old Dominion University
2084 Constant Hall, Norfolk, Virginia 23529
i tay!078@odu.edu
361-779-2392

Education
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia
College of Business and Public Administration
Doctoral Candidate, Public Administration and Urban Policy
Major Fields: Public Administration/Nonprofit Management; Cognate: Marketing
Dissertation: Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity
Saliency and Relationship Satisfaction in Donor Behavior.
Chair: Dr. William Leavitt
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
John Glenn School of Public Affairs and Department of Art Education
M.A., Policy and Administration, Arts 1998.
Public/Nonprofit Policy and Administration; Arts
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina
College of the Arts and Sciences
B.A., Art History, 1995.
Art History, Art Education, and Art Studio
Publications
Taylor, Jennifer A. (March, 2011). Pluralism, Participation, and Progress. Administrative Theory
and Praxis.
Williams, Andrew; & Jennifer A. Taylor (2012) Accountability Ambiguities: The Holistic
Accountability Framework. Voluntas.

Teaching Experience
2010-2011

Instructor/Teaching Assistant
College of Business and Public Administration
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia
Courses: Foundations of Public Service (PAS 300); Administrative Theory I
(PADM 651); Introduction to the Nonprofit Sector (PADM 695).

2005-2011

Adjunct Instructor
Distance Learning Program
Park University, Parkville, Missouri
Courses: Introduction to the Humanities, (LS211), In Class and Online Teaching.

2004-2007

Adjunct Instructor
Small Business Development Center
Del Mar College, Corpus Christi, Texas
Courses: Marketing for Small Businesses & Nonprofits, Accounting for Small
Businesses & Nonprofits.

Working Papers and Manuscripts Under Review
Morris, John C.; Greentree, Vivian; & Jennifer A. Taylor (Submitted) It's Not All About Me:
Tracing the Myth of the "Rugged Individual." Public Voices.
Taylor, Jennifer A. Coming Home to Feminine: A Foundational Shift in Public Service Values.

Research In Progress
Miller-Stevens, Katrina; Taylor, Jennifer A.; & John C. Morris. Are We Really On the Same
Page? An Empirical Examination of Value Congruence Between Public and Nonprofit Managers
Taylor, Jennifer A. Relational Exchange in Nonprofits: The Role of Identity Saliency and
Relationship Satisfaction in Donor Behavior.

Funded Research In Progress
2012 Annual Survey of Military Families, Survey design & data analysis on behalf of Blue Star
Families, Alexandria, Virginia; a military families advocacy nonprofit. $5,000
2012 Military Community Blueprint Grant by Bristol Myers Squibb, community organizing and
grant implementation on behalf of Give an Hour, Arlington, Virginia; a nonprofit providing free
mental health services to military families. $34,000

Scholarly Conference Presentations
Miller-Stevens, Katrina; Taylor, Jennifer A.; & John C. Morris, Are We Really On the Same
Page? An Empirical Examination of Value Congruence Between Public and Nonprofit
Managers. Research results presented at American Society of Public Administration (ASPA), Las
Vegas, Nevada: April, 2012.
Miller-Stevens, Katrina; Taylor, Jennifer A.; & John C. Morris, Are We Really On the Same
Page? An Empirical Examination of Value Congruence Between Public and Nonprofit
Managers. Research design to be presented at Southeast Conference on Public Administration
(SeCOPA), New Orleans, Louisiana: September, 2011.
Taylor, Jennifer A. Paths to Public Service. Panel chair and discussant at the American Society of
Public Administrators Hampton Roads Annual Conference, (ASPA-HR), Old Dominion
University, Norfolk, Virginia: March, 2011.
Taylor, Jennifer A. Developing a Culture of Philanthropy: A Relationship Marketing Model for
Nonprofit Organizations. Research presented at Association of Research on Nonprofit &
Voluntary Associations (ARNOVA), Arlington, Virginia: November, 2010.
Taylor, Jennifer A. and Andrew Williams. Nonprofit Accountability: The Holistic
Accountability Framework. Paper presented at the Southeast Conference on Public
Administration (SECOPA), Wilmington, North Carolina: October, 2010.
Morris, John C.; Greentree, Vivian; & Taylor, Jennifer A. The Myth of the Self-Sufficient
Individual and the Role of Public Service in American Politics. Paper presented at the Southeast
Conference on Public Administration (SECOPA), Wilmington, North Carolina: October, 2010.
Taylor, Jennifer A. Coming Home to Feminine: A Foundational Shift in Public Service Values.
Paper presented at the Public Administration Theory Network (PAT-Net), Omaha, Nebraska:
May, 2010.
Williams, Andrew; Taylor, Jennifer A. and et al. Nonprofit Accountability: Negotiating the
Network. Paper presented at International Research Society for Public Management (IRSPM),
Berne, Switzerland: April, 2010.
Taylor, Jennifer A. Coming Home to Feminine: A Foundational Shift in Public Service Values.
Paper presented at the American Society of Public Administrators Hampton Roads Annual
Conference, (ASPA-HR), Virginia Beach, Virginia: March, 2010.
Kesterson, Misty and Jennifer A. Taylor. Electronic Portfolios: A Product of Student and Faculty
Success. Paper presented at the Center for Educational, Development, Evaluation, and Research
Conference (CEDER), Corpus Christi, Texas: February, 2006.

Taylor, Jennifer A. Empty Their Pockets! Revenue Enhancers for Community Theatres. Paper
presented for the Texas Nonprofit Theatre Alliance Annual Conference, (TNTA), Corpus Christi,
Texas: January, 2004.

Other Publications
Taylor, Jennifer A. (2009, August 26). The Effects of Deployment on Military Children. The
Flagship, B1.
Taylor, Jennifer A. (2009, November 6). The Case for Halloween. The Flagship, Bl.

Work Experience
Graduate Teaching & Research Assistant, Old Dominion University, 2009-2011.
Director of Development, Deputy Managing Director, Virginia Stage Company, 2007-2009.
Led a development team of staff, volunteers, and board members in meeting the annual
contributed income goal of $1.6 million and additional capital, endowment, and planned giving
efforts.
Nonprofit Consultant, Taylored Resources, 1998-2011.
United Way, Elizabeth River Project, USS Lexington Museum, The Dwelling Place, Art Center of
Corpus Christi among others
Self-employed as a nonprofit consultant for thirteen years; presenting seminars and workshops,
managing employees, cash flow, accounting, fundraising, program and business development,
and marketing and public relations. Exemplar projects follow:
Director of Marketing, Corpus Christi Blue Angels Air Show, 2005, 2007.
Secured federal contract to solicit corporate support on behalf of the U.S. Navy Morale,
Welfare, and Recreation programs. In less than 60 days, secured over $65,000 in direct
corporate support, of which 63% represented new donors; negotiated $85,000 in in-kind
donations.
Interim Executive Director, Harbor Playhouse, 2003-2004.
Recruited to rebuild local performing arts organization on the brink of bankruptcy.
Responsibilities included operations, fiscal management of an operating budget of
$500,000; marketing, public relations, fundraising, and the supervision and leadership of
seven employees and over 300 volunteers.
Interim Executive Director, Family Outreach Corpus Christi, 2001-2003.
Recruited to remedy a chaotic situation in a local social service agency. Responsibilities
included but were not limited to board, volunteer, and staff leadership, marketing and
public relations, fiscal management, operations and facilities management, program
evaluation and fundraising. Supervised five employees and over 100
volunteers. Implemented a debt reduction plan for agency.

Director of Development, American Cancer Society, Florida Division, 1999-2000.
Served as Development Director of two counties in Northwest Florida. Managed multiple
annual fund revenue sources including special events, major gifts, planned giving,
corporate sponsorship, memorials, and direct mail. Raised special event income 61% over
the previous year's net, surpassed annual goal in special events revenue by 31%,
$468,000.
Graduate Administrative Assistant, Office of the President & Department of Art Education,
The Ohio State University, 1997-1998.
University Service
• Treasurer, Public Administration & Urban Studies PhD Student Association, Old
Dominion University, 2009-2011.
• Site Committee Member, Public Administration Theory Network Conference, Old
Dominion University, 2010-2011.
• Member, Public Service Minor, Undergraduate Curriculum Development Committee,
Old Dominion University, 2009.
• Member, Public Service Minor Marketing, Old Dominion University, 2009-2011.
• Member, Public Service Week Planning Committee, Old Dominion University, 20092010.
• Site Committee Member, Lawrence and Isabel Barnett Symposium, The Ohio State
University, 1998.
Community Service
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Girl Scouts of America, Daisy & Brownie Troop 135, Troop Leader, 2008-present.
Cultural Alliance of Hampton Roads, Board member, 2009-2011.
Tidewater Officers' Spouses' Association, Board of Directors, 2007-2010.
Downtown 100 Member, Norfolk Downtown District, 2008-2009.
The Hermitage Museum of Art, The Art of Glass Committee Member, 2009.
Idaho Commission on the Arts, General Operating Support Panelist, 2002.
Idaho Commission on the Arts, Project Support Panelist, 2002.
National Endowment for the Arts, Challenge America Grant Review Panelist, 2002.
Coastal Bend Officers' Spouses' Association, Board of Directors, 2005-2007.
Corpus Christi Chamber of Commerce Ambassador, 2001-2003.
Santa Rosa Medical Center Women's Advisory Board, 2000.
Santa Rosa County School District Visual Arts Juror, 2000.
Northwest Arts Partnership, Board of Directors, 1996-1998.

Awards
•
•

Department of Urban Studies and Public Administration, Old Dominion University,
Travel Award, 2010, 2011.
Division of Student Affairs, Graduate Student Travel Award, Old Dominion University,

•

Public Administration Theory Network PhD Student Grant, 2010.

2011.

Affiliations/Memberships
• Reviewer, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing
• Association of Fundraising Professionals (AFP), 1999 - Present.
• Association for Research on Nonprofit Organizations and the Voluntary Action
(ARNOVA), 2009 - Present.
• American Society of Public Administrators (ASPA), 2009 - Present.
• Public Administration Theory Network (PAT-Net), 2009 - Present.
Research and Teaching Interests
Administrative Theory
Citizenship
Ethics and Values
Governance and Accountability
Human Resources
Inter-Sectoral Relations
Military Families
Nonprofit Finance
Philanthropy, Volunteerism, & Civic Engagement
Public and Nonprofit Organization Management
Public Policy Process
Research Design
Social Marketing

