Int Rev Public Nonprofit Mark
DOI 10.1007/s12208-017-0177-z

O R I G I N A L A RT I C L E

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization,
and its relevance to nonprofit marketing

Walter Wymer 1

& Mohammad Muzahid Akbar 2

Received: 27 September 2016 / Accepted: 12 February 2017
# Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2017

Abstract The conceptualization of brand authenticity as evidenced from the extent
literature is examined for validity issues. The body of literature on brand authenticity
has produced a fragmented and varied theory of the construct and the value of
knowledge produced from this research stream is questionable. This is problematic
for researchers working on nonprofit marketing topics that investigate brand authen-
ticity as a construct of interest. In the literature, brand authenticity has been defined in a
variety of ways, typically as a multidimensional construct. As many as 40 different
dimensions were found in our literature search. At the conclusion of our analysis, we
present brand authenticity as a unidimensional construct that refers to the degree to
which a brand object is perceived to be the quintessential exemplar of its type. This
definition of brand authenticity is most consistent with the denotative meaning of the
term and is suited to all types of brand objects including nonprofit organizations.

Keywords Brand authenticity . Theory construction . Construct definition

1 Introduction

In the commercial sector, the growth in the number of brands and rapid imitation of
competitor product innovations have led to high levels of product similarity. Brand
managers are attempting to remain competitive by finding ways to maintain brand
distinctiveness and finding ways of evoking strengthening brand preference (Gilmore
and Pine 2007). In the nonprofit sector, branding has become a major managerial
mindset for nonprofit executives and influences their strategic and tactical decisions
(Kylander and Stone 2012).

* Walter Wymer

walter.wymer@uleth.ca

1 University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, Canada
2 University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

Brand authenticity is a relatively recent brand concept that is receiving in-
creased attention in the literature because it may be useful in helping brands
remain competitive (Beverland 2005a, b; Blackshaw 2008; Eggers et al. 2013).
Nonprofit managers view brand authenticity has a means of influencing perceived
brand experience (Bennett et al. 2013). Despite brand authenticity’s potential
importance in the competitive brand marketplace, B…the concept of brand au-
thenticity has not been thoroughly examined in academic marketing research so
far^ (Schallehn et al. 2014, p. 192).

Brand management is becoming even more important in the nonprofit sector
(Michel and Rieunier 2012; Wymer 2013b). Nonprofit managers are recognizing
the importance of distinguishing their organizations by managing their organiza-
tions as brands (Laidler-Kylander and Stenzel 2013; Wymer et al. 2015). Non-
profit managers continue to search for ways to gain notoriety and favorable
reputations in order to attract support (e.g., donations and volunteers) in an
increasingly competitive environment (Stride and Lee 2007; Wymer and Rundle-
Thiele 2016). In some nonprofit sectors (like arts and culture areas) ensuring an
authentic patron experience is viewed as a fundamental requirement of nonprofit
brand survival (Bennett et al. 2013). Nonprofit organizations involved in tourism
are increasingly concerned about brand authenticity (Correia and Brito 2014;
Stoykova 2015). Nonprofit organizations involved in rebranding strategies are
concerned about maintaining the authenticity of their brands (Lee 2013).

In spite of the interest in brand authenticity, the construct’s development in the
scholarly literature has been problematic. The conceptualizations of brand authenticity
lack sufficient precision to delineate the actual meaning of the construct (Wymer 2016).
Some authors’ have had an applied research perspective of brand authenticity (c.f.,
Assiouras et al. 2015; Beverland 2005a). Hence, brand authenticity was conceptualized
and measured in a limited industry context. As a consequence, the brand authenticity
literature has become fragmented and inconsistent. The conceptualization of brand
authenticity has not achieved a consensus in the literature as there are multiple
perceptions of the construct as well as multiple measures.

If the conceptualization of brand authenticity lacks validity, then measures of
brand authenticity are invalid. Research relying on misconceptualizations of con-
structs or invalid measures of those constructs are suspect and add little to our
knowledge (Summers 2001). The purpose of this paper, then, is to develop a valid
conceptualization of brand authenticity that can be useful to researchers and
enhance the validity of research on this important construct. By providing a valid
conceptualization of brand authenticity, valid measures can be developed and
future research can add to our knowledge.

To attain the objective of this paper, our analysis will begin by deriving a semantic
understanding of authenticity. We will combine an examination of the etymology of
the term an examination of how the term is used in the literature. We will then
examine the validity of the various conceptualizations of brand authenticity in the
marketing literature. At the conclusion of this analysis, a reconceptualization of brand
authenticity will be offered. A more valid conceptualization of brand authenticity
should help researchers arrive at a consensus on its meaning, help them develop a
valid measure of brand authenticity, reducing continued fragmentation in the litera-
ture, and enhance the validity of future research on this construct.

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

2 Understanding authenticity

The conceptualization of a construct should begin by deriving the root meaning of
the construct’s name from its denotation (Wymer 2013a). This practice helps to
reduce the invalidation of construct conceptualizations because of researchers’
biases (Wymer and Alves 2013).

Authenticity refers to the degree to which an object is real or genuine (not a
copy or a fake), and is a representation of its true nature (Dictionary.com 2016).
Since brand authenticity, by definition, refers to the level of authenticity of an
object (the brand), brand authenticity refers to the degree to which the brand is
perceived to be original (rather than a copy of a more authentic brand) (Peterson
2005). Brand object refers to the entity that is the target of brand identification
(Wymer 2013b).

It is unlikely that the quality being authentic is inherently advantageous to a brand. If
there is a managerial benefit of brand authenticity, it is likely dependent upon the
brand’s strength. For example, the first entrant of a brand in the marketplace is original
and, by definition, authentic. However, if a subsequent competitor’s brand is much
more preferred by consumers than the authentic brand, being authentic yields little
benefit for the category pioneer. Conversely, if competitors’ brands are viewed by
consumers as inferior versions of the authentic brand, then authenticity may be
perceived as a desirable brand attribute. Hence, it is reasonable to believe that the
influence of brand authenticity on brand preference (or other desirable outcome
variable) is moderated by brand strength (Wymer 2015).

Brand managers may make changes to a brand object over time. New features may
be added. Logos may be redesigned. The degree to which changes to a brand affects its
perceived brand authenticity is likely dependent upon the degree to which the changes
are perceived to be imitatively-influenced. That is, if a brand is changed in such a way
that is more closely resembles another brand than before the change, it is likely that the
change will reduce the perceived brand authenticity.

An important issue in the conceptualization of brand authenticity concerns the
degree to which a brand is perceived to be the exemplar, or quintessence, of its kind.
A brand exemplar is the brand that is the model from which competitor brands are
patterned or compared. Does an authentic brand have to be the first, original object of
its type (the prototype); does it have to be the de facto brand exemplar; or does it have
to be both?

As an illustrative example, the IBM Simon Personal Communicator was the
first or original smartphone (IBM Simon 2016). However, the Apple iPhone is, by
far, the dominant brand and is considered the quintessential smartphone (Vance
2015). Either the Simon or the iPhone is the most authentic. Simon is the category
pioneer (the first of its kind), whereas the iPhone is the exemplar or quintessential
smartphone. Being authentic implies that the brand is perceived to be real, true,
and not a copy of something else. We think it is reasonable to believe that
quintessence is more indicative of authenticity than pioneer status. Apple, the
maker of the iPhone, is one of the most authentic global brands according to a
recent survey of 12,000 consumers in 14 countries (Nanji 2016). It
is the
smartphone brand that sets the standard to which competing brands are compared.
The iPhone appears to be perceived as the real (authentic) smartphone.

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

We will examine the importance of exemplar status to the brand authenticity
construct further in our subsequent analysis of the literature. We will evaluate the
various ways in which brand authenticity has been conceptualized and used in the
extent literature. Because scholarly work on brand authenticity has become fragmented
rather than achieving coherence and consensus (Akbar 2016; Coary 2013), it is
valuable to examine the relative validity of brand authenticity in the literature. The
objective is to arrive at the most valid conceptualization of the construct so that future
work on brand authenticity can result in more valid knowledge. This is especially
important for nonprofit marketing researchers who are often faced with validity issues
when using constructs first developed in the general marketing literature.

3 Analysis of brand authenticity in the literature

Based on our prior discussion, we will tentatively offer the following definition of
brand authenticity. Brand authenticity refers to the degree to which a brand is perceived
to be the quintessential exemplar of its type. Hence, this conceptualization of brand
authenticity is likely unidimensional and would be measured as a continuous variable.
Next, we will examine how the extent literature has conceptualized brand authenticity.
Reviews of the brand authenticity literature have been reported previously (Akbar
2016; Coary 2013). Hence, we will not review the body of literature on brand
authenticity but will, instead, analyze how the construct has been conceptualized in
the literature.

Our previous tentative definition for brand authenticity conceives the construct as
unidimensional. A unidimensional construct refers to a distinct unitary concept whereas
a multidimensional construct is a concept which is formed by combining other, lower-
order, concepts. For example, socioeconomic status (a multidimensional construct) is
formed by combining wealth, income, occupation, and education. Occupation (a
unidimensional construct) refers to one’s job classification.

With respect to the dimensionality of brand authenticity, in the prior literature it has
been presented as a multidimensional construct. There is not a defense in the literature
of the need to conceive brand authenticity as a multidimensional construct. However, if
it is a multidimensional construct then a brand object must have the dimensional traits
in order to be perceived to be authentic. That is, the relationship between the dimen-
sions and the higher order construct, brand authenticity is, by definition, formative.

A relatively common facet in the literature on brand authenticity is that the construct
is often not defined as a unidimensional construct, but as a multidimensional construct.
Brand authenticity is then defined in the literature in terms of its purported dimensions.
Unfortunately, the dimensionality of brand authenticity varies between authors.

For example, in Akbar (2016), the following dimensions of brand authenticity (see
Table 1) were found in the literature. There is little consistency among authors
regarding which dimensions are the true dimensions that form the construct.
(Information on the literature search methodologies from which the findings in
Table 1 were based is contained in Appendix A.)

As the reader can readily discern, brand authenticity has been described in numerous
ways. Authors appear to define brand authenticity to suit the context of their studies.
What is needed, then, is a thorough analysis of the various brand authenticity

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

Table 1 Brand authenticity dimensions found in the literature [Akbar (2016)]

Name of dimension

Definition

Key citations

Adhering to principles

It refers to faithfulness to internal values

Coary (2013)

and mission statement, and
truthfulness with customers.

Beautiful

It refers to whether the brand has an

Boyle (2004)

emphasis on harmony and aesthetics.

Being the category pioneer

It refers to being first in the market or

Coary (2013)

inventor of the product.

Congruency

It refers to how individual [employee]

Eggers et al. (2013)

values and brand values are congruous
and how employees are committed to
fulfill value requirements.

Consistency

It refers to whether promises made to

Eggers et al. (2013)

stakeholders are aligned with its values
and strategies to achieve consistency
amongst all brand elements
(concerning operations,
communications, staff, etc.).

It refers to a brand’s stability, endurance,
and consistency. It refers to a brand’s
timelessness, historicity, and ability to
transcend trends.

It refers to the brand’s transparency and
honesty towards the consumer, as well
as its willingness and ability to fulfill
the claims it makes.

It refers to whether brand understands and

satisfies the customers’ and
stakeholders’ needs by providing
Bindividualized benefits^, as promised.
It refers to whether the brand stands for

Bruhn et al. (2012); Morhart

et al. (2014)

Morhart et al. (2014)

Eggers et al. (2013)

Authentic Brand Index

more than just making money.

(2008)

It refers to whether the brand stands for
something more than its commercial
success.

Beverland (2006)

Continuity

Credibility

Customer orientation

Declared beliefs

Downplaying commercial

motives

Ethical

It refers to whether the organization and

Boyle (2004)

its products can be trusted.

Familiarity

It refers to whether the brand is well

Authentic Brand Index

known.

(2008)

Heritage and pedigree

It refers to whether the brand has a

Authentic Brand Index

distinguished heritage and maintains
its traditions. It refers to whether the
brand has an engaging story. It refers
to whether the brand builds on
long-held traditions and timeless
design, and whether it has a strong link
to the past.

(2008); Beverland (2006,
2009); Napoli et al.
(2014)

Honest

Human

It refers to whether the brand avoids all

Boyle (2004)

forms of dishonesty.

It refers to whether humanity is
emphasized by the brand.

Boyle (2004)

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

Table 1 (continued)

Name of dimension

Definition

Key citations

Integrity

It refers to the moral purity and

Morhart et al. (2014)

responsibility of a brand towards its
customers.

Maintaining the original

It refers to whether the brand maintains

Coary (2013)

product

Method of production

its original product(s) without a
compromise.

It refers to whether the brand maintains
exacting production processes with the
help of devoted and skilled people.

Beverland (2006)

Momentum

It refers to whether the brand appears to

Authentic Brand Index

become ever more popular.

(2008)

Natural

It refers to whether the brand has a

Boyle (2004); Gilmore and

Naturalness

preference for natural processes and
materials.

It refers to a brand’s impression of

genuineness, realness, and lack of
artificiality.

Pine (2007)

Bruhn et al. (2012)

Originality

It refers to whether the brand has

Personal utility

introduced something new and unique
to the market. It refers to a brand’s
particularity, individuality, and
innovativeness.

It refers to whether the customers feel that
they cannot live without the real utility
delivered by the brand.

Quality commitment

It refers to whether the brand has

uncompromising quality commitment.
It refers to whether stringent quality
standards are maintained by the brand
while employing the finest materials
and craftsmanship.

Authentic Brand Index
(2008); Bruhn et al.
(2012); Gilmore and Pine
(2007)

Authentic Brand Index

(2008)

Beverland (2006, 2009);
Napoli et al. (2014)

Relationship to place

It refers to whether the brand is rooted in

Beverland (2006)

Reliability

Rooted

Simple

Sincerity

Stylistic consistency

a region, which has a unique
reputation to be celebrated and aims to
celebrate it.

It refers to a brand’s trustfulness,

credibility, and keeping promises.

Bruhn et al. (2012)

It refers to whether the brand is connected

Boyle (2004)

to a place and time of origin.

It refers to whether the brand minimizes

Boyle (2004)

complexity.

It refers to whether the brand tries not to
let people down. It refers to whether
the brand refuses to compromise its
values and principles.

It refers to whether the brand follows its
production traditions consistently, and
does not compromise to appear trendy
or fashionable.

Authentic Brand Index
(2008); Napoli et al.
(2014)

Beverland (2006)

Sustainable

Boyle (2004)

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

Table 1 (continued)

Name of dimension

Definition

Key citations

Symbolism

It refers to whether the brand wants a
Bbetter tomorrow^, and is not
exclusively focused on today.

It refers to the symbolic quality of a brand
that consumers can use to define who
they are or who they are not.

Morhart et al. (2014)

Three-dimensional

It refers to whether the brand provides

Boyle (2004); Gilmore and

deep and vivid experiences.

Pine (2007)

Unspun

It refers to whether the brand is candid

Boyle (2004)

and not manipulative.

dimensions so that a more valid conceptualization of the construct can emerge and be
used consistently in the future. Otherwise, the knowledge of this construct and its
relationships with other constructs will not be valid and little knowledge will be
discovered from research on this topic.

Brand authenticity refers to how authentic a brand object is perceived by some
audience of interest. Hence, brand authenticity is a perceived trait of a brand object. The
brand object, the entity that is branded, needs to be distinguished from the organization
that is marketing the brand object. There is a theoretical conflation in the literature
between the perceived authenticity of a brand object and the authenticity of the
organization that markets the brand object.

It may be that case that an organization is a brand object, but this is not always the
case. A valid conceptualization of brand authenticity should not confuse the marketing
organization with the brand object. Four of the brand authenticity dimensions used in
the literature and presented in Table 1 (adhering to principles, congruency, consistency,
and ethical) refer to the organization that is managing the brand rather than to the brand
object. Hence, the validity of these four dimensions is questionable.

We have previously discussed the issue of whether or not category pioneer status
was a requirement for brand authenticity. Sometimes a category pioneer is launched
before its time (a market segment is ready to adopt it) or the category pioneer is
supplanted by a more successful competitor that becomes the category exemplar. The
Bbeing the category pioneer^ dimension from Table 1, therefore, appears to have
questionable validity.

An important issue when considering the validity of brand-related constructs per-
tains to the applicability of the construct across brand object types. If a brand object
may be imbued with a given characteristic, then having that characteristic should be a
possibility across the various types of brand objects. If a brand object can be perceived
to be authentic, then it should be possible for all types of brand objects to be perceived
to be authentic. We know from the literature that many entities (i.e., brand objects) can
be branded; such as goods, services, people, ideas, places, and organizations (Wymer
2013b).

Unfortunately, some brand authenticity dimensions that have been used in prior
work violate this principle. Some authors’ conceptualizations of brand authenticity

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

were biased by their inability to consider the construct outside their research context.
Maintaining the original product (see Table 1), for example, assumes that the brand
object is a product. Method of production, natural, quality commitment, and stylistic
consistency assume that the brand object is a manufactured product. The validity of
these dimensions is questionable.

One potential validity error authors may make is to confound an antecedent of a
construct as a dimension of the construct (Summers 2001). For a construct to be a
dimension of a higher order construct, its meaning must be contained within the
conceptual domain of the higher order construct. If construct A has relationship with
construct B but its meaning is not contained within the conceptual domain of construct
B, then construct A is not a dimension of construct B. Hence, construct A may be an
antecedent, mediator, moderator, or consequent of construct B; but it is not a dimension
of construct B.

The best way to avoid confounding an antecedent of a construct as a dimension of
the construct is to make sure that the proposed dimension’s meaning is contained within
the denotative meaning of the construct. In the extent literature on brand authenticity,
some authors have added dimensions which appear to have no semantic relationship to
the denotative meaning of authenticity. Hence, adding a dimension to the conceptual-
ization of a construct in which the added dimension does not belong in the conceptual
domain of the construct weakens construct validity.

The dimension, personal utility, is an example of this validity error. Personal utility
(see Table 1) refers to whether customers feel that they cannot live without the real
utility delivered by the brand (Authentic Brand Index 2008). It is not apparent how this
concept of personal utility is related to brand authenticity. Perhaps brand authenticity
has some influence on one’s subsequent feelings of attachment or identification with a
brand (an antecedent-consequent relationship in the nomological net), but personal
utility does not appear to belong within the semantic meaning (conceptual domain) of
brand authenticity. Furthermore, since a construct’s dimension has a formative rela-
tionship with the construct, the theoretical implication of including personal utility as a
dimension of brand authenticity is that one must feel that one cannot live without a
brand for one to perceive the brand as authentic. This is a flawed theory of brand
authenticity and, hence, personal utility should not be conceived as a brand authenticity
dimension.

The validity error of adding a dimension to a construct’s conceptual domain in
which the dimension’s semantic meaning is not contained within the semantic
meaning of the higher order construct
in the brand authenticity
literature. The dimensions (see Table 1): continuity, credibility, customer orien-
tation, declared beliefs, and downplaying commercial motives are examples of
this type of validity error.

is manifest

An examination of the dimension, familiarity, provides an illustrative example of this
type of validity error. Familiarity refers to whether the brand is well known (Authentic
Brand Index 2008). First, the definition of familiarity is flawed because it frames
familiarity as a categorical variable instead of a continuous variable. The dimension
should be redefined to refer to the degree to which a brand is well known to a target
audience. In any event, brand familiarity shares a relationship with brand authenticity, to
be sure. One has to have some level of familiarity with a brand before one can evaluate the
extent to which a brand is authentic. However, although brand familiarity is a necessary

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

prerequisite of brand authenticity, this does not qualify it as a dimension of brand
authenticity, but as an antecedent. Hence, there is a relationship between brand familiarity
and brand authenticity, but the relationship exists external to the conceptual domain of
brand authenticity (antecedent-consequent in the nomological net).

The dimension, heritage and pedigree, does not appear to exist within the conceptual
domain of authenticity as denoted in the language. The dimension, human, does not
appear to exist within the conceptual domain of authenticity (and, by definition, cannot
qualify as a dimension of authenticity). Human, which refers to whether humanity is
emphasized by the brand, may not even exist within the nomological net of brand
authenticity. Integrity, momentum, relationship to place, reliability, rooted, simple,
sincerity, sustainable, symbolism, three-dimensional, and unspun all appear to violate
the principle that a dimension must exist within the conceptual domain of its higher
order construct. If these alleged dimensions did exist within the conceptual domain of
brand authenticity, then a brand could not be perceived to be authentic without them.
Each of these dimensions may have some relationship with brand authenticity and,
therefore, may exist within brand authenticity’s nomological net. However, none of
these dimensions appears to be a semantic component of brand authenticity. The best
way to avoid this validity error is to require a proposed dimension to be a semantic
component of the higher order construct’s denotative meaning.

The brand authenticity dimension, honest (see Table 1), deserves greater scrutiny.
Brand authenticity implies that the brand is not a copy of something else, but is itself
the exemplar from which copies are based. The honest dimension refers to whether the
brand avoids all forms of dishonesty (Boyle 2004). While one may argue that a brand
that is perceived to be an imitation of an exemplar brand is a false or dishonest brand, it
is unclear if the anthropomorphized trait exists within the conceptual domain of brand
authenticity. The definition of honesty in Table 1 defines the dimension as the avoid-
ance of all forms of dishonesty. Avoiding dishonesty and being honest are distinct, but
related, concepts. By definition, an exemplar is not a copy. But avoiding being a copy
of something else does not necessarily make one a model that others will use as a basis
for imitation. Being an exemplar excludes imitators and, therefore, renders the poorly-
conceived honest dimension moot because it is not needed to cover the conceptual
domain of brand authenticity.

The dimension, originality, refers to whether the brand has introduced something
new and unique to the market. It refers to a brand’s particularity, individuality, and
innovativeness (Authentic Brand Index 2008; Bruhn et al. 2012; Gilmore and Pine
2007). The central meaning of this definition is that originality is similar to unique. To
be original, the brand object (1) introduced something new and unique to the market
and (2) remains distinctive. One flaw with this conceptualization is that it refers to a
commercial brand object. However, brand objects are not necessarily bought and sold
like consumer products (for example, a charity can be a brand object). Bringing
something new and unique to the market is problematic. The IBM Simon Personal
Communicator was the first or original smartphone (IBM Simon 2016). It meets the
definition of the originality dimension. However, it is not considered to be the authentic
smartphone. This honor belongs to the iPhone, as discussed previously. An authentic
brand may be the pioneer in its category, but it does not have to be the pioneer to be an
authentic brand. Hence, originality (as defined in the brand authenticity literature) is not
a valid brand authenticity dimension.

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

The dimension, naturalness, refers to a brand’s impression of genuineness, realness,
and lack of artificiality (Bruhn et al. 2012). The denotative meaning of naturalness
refers to a property of existing, or being formed, in nature (Naturalness 2016). Hence,
there is a lack of congruence between the denotation of naturalness and the way in
which it has been defined for this context. We do acknowledge, however, that there is a
relationship between the denotative meaning of authenticity and genuineness, realness,
and lack of artificiality.

The word genuine is often used in the definition of authentic and authentic is often
used in the definition of genuine. It addresses the idea that something authentic is the
real (not a counterfeit or imitation) version of something. It’s best to define something
in terms of what it is rather that what it is not. If a brand object is perceived to be an
exemplar, it is, by definition, not an imitation of something else. If a brand object is an
exemplar, it is an ideal example of its type. It is the typical example of its type; it is a
model or pattern to be copied or imitated (Exemplar 2016). Likewise, if a brand object
is perceived to be the quintessence of its kind, it is perceived to be the most perfect
embodiment of its kind (Quintesssence 2016). Hence, for something to be perceived to
be authentic refers to the degree to which it is perceived to be the quintessential
exemplar of its type. The iPhone has a high degree of brand authenticity because it is
perceived to be the best example of a smartphone, the distinctive brand others imitate,
the standard to which other smartphones are compared.

4 Reconceptualizing brand authenticity

In contrast to the multidimensional theory of brand authenticity in the extent literature,
our conceptualization of brand authenticity is unidimensional. We define brand authen-
ticity as the degree to which a brand object is perceived to be the quintessential
exemplar of its type. This definition is congruent with the denotation of authenticity
and it can apply to all types of brand objects, a characteristic of valid construct
conceptualizations (Wymer 2016). Being a unidimensional construct means that it
cannot be conflated with another construct due to placing a proximate member of the
construct’s nomological net in the construct’s conceptual domain.

Measuring brand authenticity can be easily accomplished by using three or four
reflective indicators of the construct. Future research is needed to develop and validate
an appropriate scale for brand authenticity. Possible scale items might include the
following:

1. XXX is the best example of its kind.
2. XXX is the one that serves as a comparison for others of its kind.
3. XXX is the most imitated of its kind.

With respect to the iPhone, the scales could be modified as follows: (1) The
iPhone is the best example of a smartphone; (2) The iPhone is the smartphone that
serves as a comparison for other smartphones; and (3) The iPhone is the most
imitated smartphone. Using a nonprofit organization as our brand object, the
scales could be modified as follows: (1) The Red Cross is the best example of a
disaster relief organization; (2) The Red Cross is the disaster relief organization

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

that serves as a comparison for other disaster relief organizations; and (3) The Red
Cross is the most imitated disaster relief organization.

With respect to predicting brand authenticity, it is reasonable to believe that brand
strength has an influence on brand authenticity. Brand strength refers to the degree to
which a brand is well known, perceived favorably, and perceived to be remarkable in
comparison to peer brands (Wymer et al. 2016). The extent to which brand strength
influences brand authenticity will be better understood in future research.

It is reasonable to believe that brand strength is predictive of some desirable outcome
variables. What is the relationship between brand strength, brand authenticity, and
desired outcome variables? Is the effect of brand strength on target outcome variables
mediated or moderated by brand authenticity? Future research is needed to help us
understand these important marketing relationships better.

4.1 Brand authenticity, brand values, and brand personality

Brand authenticity has some overlap in the literature with brand values and brand
personality. Future research which continues to develop the theory of brand authenticity
should further explicate the relationships among these constructs.

All three brand constructs (authenticity, personality, and values) can be useful by
certain individuals as a vehicle of self-expression and ego enhancement (Malär et al.
2011). A key concept in this research stream is self-congruence, which refers to the
degree to which there is a fit between an individual’s self and the brand’s personality or
image (Aaker 1999). Brand personality attributes human characteristics or traits to a
brand object. The same can be said for brand authenticity and brand values. Aaker
(1997) identified five dimensions of brand personality: sincerity, excitement, compe-
tence, sophistication, and ruggedness. Subsequent research has added additional brand
personality dimensions, like social responsibility (Madrigal and Boush 2008). Brand
authenticity is positioned as a brand personality dimension (Napoli et al. 2014).

Some researchers have construed authenticity as emblematic of a brand’s deeply-
held, noncommercial values (Holt 2002; Morhart et al. 2014). In our analysis, we found
this construal and use of perceived authenticity to be synonymous with deeply-held
noncommercial values to be a source of invalidity in the theoretical construction of
brand authenticity. Researchers making the argument that link authenticity with brand
core values that are not commercially motivated were working within an inadvertent
corporate-consumer paradigm. This problem is one of the reasons this article is
important to nonprofit marketing researchers—brand authenticity is conceived in a
manner that is relevant across brand object types, making our conception valid for
nonprofit marketing scholars.

5 Implications for nonprofit marketing research

There are distinctions between branding in the nonprofit sector and branding in
the commercial sector that make nonprofit branding more complex and worthy of
a dedicated program of research. Marketers of consumer brands seek to stimulate
consumer brand preference to increase competitiveness. A corporation’s reputation
and the brand images of its consumer products are distinct. A nonprofit’s

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

reputation and its brand image are inherently combined. In a sense, the nonprofit’s
reputation is the brand. A for-profit business exists to increase the wealth of its
owners. The business, thus, focuses on increasing profits by increasing prices,
increasing sales, and reducing competition. A nonprofit has no owners and exists
to fulfill its mission. A business focuses on stimulating a preference for its brand
from a target group of consumers. A nonprofit has multiple stakeholder groups
from whom it cultivates relationships and seeks support.

Furthermore, the relationship between consumer and brand in the commercial
setting is often transactional or value exchange. That is, consumers exchange
money for the benefits that consuming the product provides them. It is essentially
an economic and an egoistic relationship. The relationship between nonprofit
supporter (e.g., donor, volunteer) and brand in the nonprofit setting is often value
expressive. That is, supporters give their money or time to the nonprofit organi-
zation from an intrinsic motivation to act in accord with their core values. It is
essentially a noneconomic and an altruistic relationship.

The research stream involving the brand authenticity construct has flaws and
nonprofit marketing scholars should exercise caution with working with this construct.
When nonprofit marketing scholars are developing a research program that extends
prior research on marketing constructs, they should make sure that the constructs are
conceptualized in a valid manner. To assess the degree to which a construct has been
validity conceived, the validity issues presented in this paper can serve as a guide.

First, the way in which a construct has been defined should be consistent with
the denotation of the construct’s name. If it is not, then the definition should be
changed for congruency with the denotation of the construct’s name or the
construct should be given a name synonymous with its definition/meaning. If
there is no close semantic association between the meaning of a proposed con-
struct and a word in the formal language, the researcher should invent a unique
word for that construct.

Second, the definition should be parsimonious and precise. The definition of a
construct should be sufficient to cover the meaning within the boundaries of its
conceptual domain without expanding beyond those borders. The definition should
describe the meaning of the construct, but only that construct.

Third, the definition of the construct should apply to all relevant contexts. The
validity of research in marketing has often been compromised by this problem (Wymer
2013a). Often researchers have had consumer products or services in mind when they
define constructs or develop their scales. The brand authenticity research is an example
of this error. If brand authenticity is a quality that can exist for any type of brand object,
then the construct should be defined in such a way that all types of brand objects are
included. Nonprofit marketers, especially, should be sure to redefine constructs with
which they work to correct for this source of invalidity.

Finally, the construct’s definition should not include an antecedent (or other
construct from its nomological net). A construct’s definition should only refers to
its meaning and it should not include the meaning of an additional construct. Take
special care when evaluating the conceptualization of a multidimensional con-
struct. Make sure that the dimensions are necessary and sufficient facets of the
higher order construct. Make sure that the measurement model is a first order
reflective and second order formative model for multidimensional constructs.

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

6 Conclusion

Careless research results in a literature that adds little but confusion to our understand-
ing of marketing phenomena (Jacoby 1978). Poorly conceptualized constructs are a
major source of such work. Brand authenticity is an example of the unintended
consequences of poorly conceived constructs. Subsequent research fragments rather
than extends the research stream. Poorly conceived constructs lead to confusion and
disunity rather than knowledge discovery and scientific consensus.

The name assigned to a construct should be consistent with its denotation. A validity
problem is indicated when the name of a construct has two meanings, one according to
the formal language (denotation) and one assigned by a researcher. Marketing re-
searchers should avoid using jargon to name constructs but should instead use the
most appropriate word from the formal language.

The definition of a construct should be as precise and parsimonious as possible. The
definition should be sufficient to define the construct’s meaning (conceptual domain)
without describing facets of other constructs.

Even though brand authenticity is a relatively emergent construct, the body of work
on the construct has been considerably weakened by its initial problematic conceptu-
alizations. Researchers have not been reluctant to add dimensions to brand authenticity
if they believed it suited the contexts of their research studies. As a consequence, we
know little about the brand authenticity construct and its nomological relationships.

In this paper, we have analyzed the literature on brand authenticity and concluded
that brand authenticity is a unidimensional construct that refers to the degree to which a
brand object is perceived to be the quintessential exemplar of its type. This definition is
precise and parsimonious. It is congruent with the denotation of authenticity. We hope
this can be used to enhance the validity of future work on brand authenticity.

Appendix A. Literature searching procedures from Akbar (2016)

In order to identify and gather the necessary literature, multiple databases including
Science Direct, Google Scholar, SAGE Journals Online, Business Source Complete,
ProQuest Science Journals, JSTOR, Web of Science Core Collection, Elsevier,
EBSCO, and ABI/INFORM Global were used. The following keywords were used
for the search: Brand authenticity, Authenticity of brand, Authentic brand(s), Authentic
branding, Authenticity defined, Typologies (types) of authenticity, Conceptualization of
brand authenticity, Brand authenticity conceptualized, Brand authenticity scale,
Revisiting the conceptualization of brand authenticity, Confirmatory factor analysis
of brand authenticity scale, Interpretations of authenticity in different fields, Applica-
bility of brand authenticity to commercial and/or non-profit brands, etc.

In the initial stages, the aforementioned databases were used to download suitable
articles and for that reason, the search was not restricted to any given time frame, to
ensure that any relevant article did not go undetected. In addition, many relevant
articles were downloaded from a number of journals including Journal of Business
Research, Journal of Brand Management, Advances in Consumer Research, Journal of
Consumer Psychology, European Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing, Market-
ing Management, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Psychology & Marketing,

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

Journal of Management Studies, The Academy of Management Journal, Academy of
Management Review, Journal of Applied Psychology, Annals of Tourism Research,
and Tourism Management.

In the later stages of this process, the search was reduced to articles emerging
between 1980 and 2014 and the suitable articles were reviewed from these findings,
taking into consideration the titles, abstracts, and articles by selective reading. This
search generated approximately 30 articles that are relevant to BA, and out of those
only 5 or 6 were found be pertinent to the conceptualization of BA.

Additionally, two PhD dissertations and three Master’s theses on brand authenticity
were identified from the search. Of those dissertations, one by Coary (2013) seemed to
be quite relevant and original addressing the conceptualization of BA. Of several books
uncovered on Authenticity or BA, three were found to be relevant to the purpose of this
study, from Boyle (2004), Gilmore and Pine (2007), and Beverland (2009). The first
two books were considered to be the most relevant to the conceptualization of BA. The
website created by Authentic Brand Index (2008) was also found to be pertinent to the
study. Some studies related to BOrganizational authenticity^ as well as BAuthentic
leadership^ were also identified. Those articles provided an idea about authenticity in
general, but yielded nothing more conclusive. Interestingly, a number of articles on
authenticity were found to be relevant to tourism, which were helpful in enriching an
understanding of authenticity in a business-like context. Perhaps the most pertinent
article on brand authenticity was Beverland’s (2006) article focusing on the authenticity
of luxury wine brands. Several articles and a book were also found that addressed
typologies and diversity in interpretations of authenticity. From this literature search
and review, only several resources could be extrapolated to a reasonable extent in order
to conceptualize BA.

References

Aaker, J. (1997). Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of Marketing Research, 34, 347–356.
Aaker, J. (1999). The malleable self: the role of self-expression in persuasion. Journal of Marketing Research,

34, 347–356.

Akbar, M. (2016). Reconceptualizing brand authenticity and validating its scale. MSc Thesis, University of

Lethbridge, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.

Assiouras, I., Liapati, G., Kouletsis, G., & Koniordos, M. (2015). The impact of brand authenticity on brand

attachment in the food industry. British Food Journal, 117(2), 538–552.

Authentic Brand Index (2008). A study of the most authentic brands in Australia. Retrieved from http://www.

authenticbrandindex.com.

Bennett, R., Kerrigan, F., O’Reilly, D. (2013). New horizons in arts, heritage, nonprofit and social marketing.

Routledge.

Beverland, M. B. (2005a). Crafting brand authenticity: the case of luxury wines. Journal of Management

Studies, 42(5), 1003–1029.

Beverland, M. B. (2005b). Brand management and the challenge of authenticity. Journal of Product and

Brand Management, 14(7), 460–461.

Beverland, M. B. (2006). The ‘real thing’: branding authenticity in the luxury wine trade. Journal of Business

Research, 59(2), 251–258.

Beverland, M. (2009). Building brand authenticity: 7 habits of iconic brands. Palgrave Macmillan, UK:

Springer. doi:10.1057/9780230250802.

Blackshaw, P. (2008). The six drivers of brand credibility. Marketing Management, 17(3), 51–54.
Boyle, D. (2004). Authenticity: Brands, fakes, spin and the lust for real life. London: Harper Perennial.

Brand authenticity, its conceptualization, and its relevance

Bruhn, M., Schoenmüller, V., Schäfer, D., & Heinrich, D. (2012). Brand authenticity: towards a deeper
understanding of its conceptualization and measurement. Advances in Consumer Research, 40, 567–576.
Coary, S. P. (2013). Scale construction and effects of brand authenticity (Doctoral dissertation, University of

Southern California).

Correia, R. F., & Brito, C. M. (2014). Mutual influence between firms and tourist destination: a case in the

Douro Valley. International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 11(3), 209–228.

Dictionary.com (2016). Authentic. Online at http://www.dictionary.com/browse/authentic.
Eggers, F., O’Dwyer, M., Kraus, S., Vallaster, C., & Gueldenberg, S. (2013). The impact of brand authenticity
on brand trust and SME growth: a CEO perspective. Journal of World Business, 48(3), 340–348.

Exemplar (2016). Exemplar. Available at http://www.dictionary.com/browse/exemplar.
Gilmore, J. H., & Pine, B. J., II. (2007). Authenticity – what consumers really want. Boston: Harvard Business

School Press.

Holt, D. B. (2002). Why do brands cause trouble? A dialectical theory of consumer culture and branding.

Journal of Consumer Research, 29(1), 70–90.

IBM Simon (2016). IBM Simon. Online at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_Simon.
Jacoby, J. (1978). Consumer research: a state of the art review. Journal of Marketing, 42(2), 87–96.
Kylander, N., & Stone, C. (2012). The role of brand in the nonprofit sector. Stanford Social Innovation Review,

10(2), 35–41.

Laidler-Kylander, N., & Stenzel, J. S. (2013). The brand IDEA: Managing nonprofit brands with integrity,

democracy, and affinity. Wiley.

Lee, Z. (2013). Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations: exploring tensions in the nonprofit sector. Journal

of Marketing Management, 29(9–10), 1124–1142.

Madrigal, R., & Boush, D. M. (2008). Social responsibility as a unique dimension of brand personality and

consumers’ willingness to reward. Psychology and Marketing, 25(6), 538–564.

Malär, L., Krohmer, H., Hoyer, W. D., & Nyffenegger, B. (2011). Emotional brand attachment and brand
personality: the relative importance of the actual and the ideal self. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 35–52.
Michel, G., & Rieunier, S. (2012). Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving.

Journal of Business Research, 65(5), 701–707.

Morhart, F., Malär, L., Guèvremont, A., Girardin, F., & Grohmann, B. (2014). Brand authenticity: an
integrative framework and measurement scale. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 25(2), 200–218.
Nanji, A. (2016). The 10 most authentic global brands. Available online at http://www.marketingprofs.

com/charts/2016/29901/the-10-most-authentic-global-brands.

Napoli, J., Dickinson, S. J., Beverland, M. B., & Farrelly, F. (2014). Measuring consumer-based brand

authenticity. Journal of Business Research, 67(6), 1090–1098.

Naturalness (2016). Natural. Online at http://www.dictionary.com/browse/naturalness.
Peterson, R. A. (2005). In search of authenticity. Journal of Management Studies, 42(5), 1083–1098.
Quintesssence (2016). Quintessence. Available online at http://www.dictionary.com/browse/quintessence?s=t.
Schallehn, M., Burmann, C., & Riley, N. (2014). Brand authenticity: model development and empirical

testing. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 23(3), 192–199.

Stoykova, B. (2015). Authenticity of ethnic tourism (based on the example of the congregation of the
Karakachans in Bulgaria). International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 12(3), 297–313.
Stride, H., & Lee, S. (2007). No logo? No way. Branding in the non-profit sector. Journal of Marketing

Management, 23(1–2), 107–122.

Summers, J. O. (2001). Guidelines for conducting research and publishing in marketing: from conceptuali-
zation through the review process. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 29(4), 405–415.
Vance, A. (2015). It’s Apple’s world, so why do other smartphone makers even bother? BloombergBusinessweek,
available online at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-10-08/it-s-apple-s-world-so-why-do-other-
smartphone-makers-even-bother.

Wymer, W. (2013a). The influence of marketing scholarship’s legacy on nonprofit marketing. International

Journal of Financial Studies, 1(3), 102–118.

Wymer, W. (2013b). Deconstructing the brand nomological network. International Review on Public and

Nonprofit Marketing, 10(1), 1–12.

Wymer, W. (2015). Nonprofit brand strength’s moderational role. Ekonomski Vjesnik / Econviews - Review of

Contemporary Entrepreneurship, Business and Economic Issues, 28(1), 155–166.

Wymer, W. (2016). Improving the quality of empirical nonprofit research: The focal constructs and their
measures. International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 1–12, online first at https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12208-016-0169-4.

W. Wymer, M.M. Akbar

Wymer, W., & Alves, H. (2013). Scale development research in nonprofit management & marketing:
a content analysis and recommendation for best practices. International Review on Public and
Nonprofit Marketing, 10(1), 65–86.

Wymer, W., & Rundle-Thiele, S. (2016). Supporter loyalty: conceptualization, measurement, and outcomes.

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45(1), 171–191.

Wymer, W., Boenigk, S., & Möhlmann, M. (2015). The conceptualization of nonprofit marketing orienta-
tion—a critical reflection and contributions towards closing the practice-theory gap. Journal of Nonprofit
& Public Sector Marketing, 27(2), 117–134.

Wymer, W., Gross, H., & Helmig, B. (2016). Nonprofit brand strength: what is it? How is it measured? What
are its outcomes? VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 27(3),
1448–1471.