Journal of Marketing Management

ISSN: 0267-257X (Print) 1472-1376 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjmm20

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap
Between Brand Identity and Brand Reputation
Leslie de Chernatony
To cite this article: Leslie de Chernatony (1999) Brand Management Through Narrowing the
Gap Between Brand Identity and Brand Reputation, Journal of Marketing Management, 15:1-3,
157-179, DOI: 10.1362/026725799784870432
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1362/026725799784870432

Published online: 01 Feb 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 26318

View related articles

Citing articles: 43 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjmm20

]oumal of Marketing Management

1999, 15, 157-179

Leslie de
Chematonyl

Brand Management Through Narrowing
the Gap Between Brand Identity and
Brand Reputation

Open University
Business School

Classical models of brand management
pay
insufficient attention to staff as brand builders, placing
more emphasis on extemalissuessuchasimage.This
paper explores the significant contribution from
employees and considers the need to align their values
and behaviours wiUl the brand's desired values. It
clarifies the importance of culture in brand building
and discusses how an adaptive, strategically
appropriate culture, consistenUy apparent throughout
an organisation is likely to be associated wiUl healthy
brand perfonllance. A model is proposed, suggesting
tlwt stronger brands result from a homogeneous
brand identity, wiUl congruent identity components. It
argues that reputation is a more appropriate extemal
assessment of a brand Uwn image. By auditing the
gaps between brand identity and brand reputation,
managers can identify strategies to minimize
incongruency and develop more powerful brands. It is
concluded that brand reality is an important aspect of
branding.

Introduction
Since the 1980s, when finns awoke to the financial value of brands (Murphy
1992), branding has attracted considerable interest amongst both researchers
(e.g. Shocker, Srivastava and Ruekert 1994) and consultants/practitioners (eg
Macrae 1996a). Much has been written about the interaction between brands
and consumers (e.g. Cowley 1991; Keller 1998) with less about the role of
organisations' staff (eg Kapferer 1997; Aaker 1996). A similar bias to researching
customer rather than organisational issues has occurred in marketing (Ruekert
and Walker 1987). The research emphasis needs rebalancing, addressing the
role of staff in brand building (eg Ambler and Barrow 1996; Balmer 1995),
particularly since in the new infomlation age technology is automating far more

1 Correspondence:Leslie de Chernatony,BeneficialBank Professor of Brand Marketing
Open UniversityBusiness School The Open UniversityWalton Hall MiltonKeynesMK7
6M England Tel: +44-1908-654739
Fax: +44-1908-655889
E-mail:
L.Dechernatony@open.ac.uk

ISSN0267-257X/99/010157+22

$12.00/0

©Westbum Publishers Ltd.

158

Les]ie de Chernatony

processes, leaving the more judgmental, value based decisions to staff.
There are several reasons for looking inside an organisation when brand
building.
One reason can be appreciated from considering a brand's key components
and the move from individual line branding to corporate branding.
As
researchers have shown (eg de Chernatony 1993; Bhat and Reddy 1998), at the
broadest brands satisfy functional and emotional needs. To dominate attractive
positionings, managers strive to incorporate a unique mix of functional and
emotional values into their brand. Functional values are more difficult to sustain
due to factors such as advances in technology (Lambin 1996), similar designs for
competing brands (de Chernatony and McDonald 1998) and the ease of copying
competitors' prices (Balmer and Stotvig 1997). Consequently much branding
activity has focused on building emotional values (Goodyear 1996).
These
evolve not just from advertising, but also from the finn's staff interacting with
different stakeholder groups. Increasingly organisations are linking their brands
with their corporate values, putting more emphasis on corporate rather than line
brand building (King 1991; Mitchell 1994). Insufficient attention to
communicating to staff the corporation's values and their individual roles in
delivering them, can result in inconsistencies between the brand's espoused
values in the media and the values perceived when dealing with staff.
In developed economies dominated by service (Zeithaml and Bitner 1996),
quality control is shifting from factory production lines to the joint production
and consumption of services brands between staff and consumers. Staff playa
significant role in services branding, as the tum around of ASDA demonstrated
(Nonnan 1997). Their assumptions, attitudes, beliefs and values influence
consumers' brand perceptions.
However, different departments may have
differing values from the sub-cultures of the finn (Brown 1995) and through a
lack of alignment inconsistent perceptions may result as consumers come in
contact with different parts of the organisation.
Another reason for looking inside the organisation is the shift in the branding
literature from the importance of image (Boulding 1956), focusing on consumers'
perceptions of brand differentiation, to identity (Kapferer 1997) which is more
concerned with how managers and staff make brands unique. An important
component of a brand's identity is the organisation's culture, which influences
the corporate brand's values. This is perceived through the metaphor of the
corporate personality (Abratt 1989, Olins 1995). There is a growing literature on
corporate identity (eg Marwick and Fill 1997; Hatch and Schultz 1997; Balmer
and Stotvig 1997; Morison 1997; Wilson 1997; Balmer 1995). This is moving
away from just stressing graphic design and is focusing on integrating the values
of an organisation with its unique logo, signaling desired behaviour to staff, and
helping to align their values with the desired brand values.
Internally, managers face the challenges of defining the brand's values, then
working across the organisation to ensure commitment enthusiasm and
con~istent staff behaviour delivering these values. One of the external challenges
is engendering confidence amongst multiple stakeholders about their brand's

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

159

ability to consistently deliver valued outcomes. This goes beyond focusing on
brand image, which concerns the latest perceptions and continually changes.
Instead, managers need to focus on reputations, which are more stable,
representing the distillation of multiple images over time (Fombrun and Van Riel
1997).
This paper therefore predominantly explores issues internal to the
organisation, and clarifies the significance to brand building of culture, staff
alignment, and brand identity. It then looks externally at the importance of
reputation and concludes by considering how brand management can be
conceived as minimizing the gap between the brand's identity and its reputation.
Looking Inside the Organisation when Brand Building
Move to Corporate Branding
Writers (e.g. Olins 1995; Kapferer 1997; Laforet and Saunders 1994) have
presented brand naming architectures showing varying strengths of association
between line brands and their corporations. For a variety of reasons there is a
move towards corporate branding (Mitchell 1994; Balmer 1995). Some might
consider the reason for this as being due to the increasing costs of promoting
individual line brands, or due to the advent of category management, where
priority is given to promoting product sectors to retailers, rather than individual
line brands. Mitchell (I997) provides a more complete picture. We have moved
from the industrial age, which stressed tangible assets, to the infonnation age
which seeks to exploit intangibles such as ideas, knowledge and infonnation.
The new branding model is therefore one which emphasizes value through
employees' involvement in relationship building. Internally brand management is
becoming culture management and externally it is customer interface
management In the new branding mode corporate branding internally signals
messages about the desired culture and externally it reduces the infonnation
overload problems from line branding, decreasing customers' infom1ation
processing costs. Corporate branding facilitates consumers' desires to look
deeper into the brand and assess the nature of the corporation. A further reason
for corporate branding is that through building respect and trust with one of the
corporation's offerings, consumers are more likely to accept the corporation's
promises about other offerings.
Corporate branding thus provides the strategic focus for a clear positioning,
facilitates greater cohesion in communication programmes (Siegel 1994), enables
staff to better understand the type of organisation they work for, and thus
provides inspiration about desired styles of behaviour (Smythe, Dorward and
Reback 1992).
Managing corporate brands needs a different approach to classic line
branding.
Individual line branding primarily focuses on consumers and
distributors and few staff interact with consumers.
By contrast, corporate
branding is about multiple stakeholders interacting with many staff from
numerous departments and important objectives are ensuring a consistent

160

Leslie de Chernatony

message and unifonn delivery across all stakeholder groups (King 1991). In line
branding, consumers mainly assess the brand's values from advertising,
packaging, distribution and the people using the brand. Yet in corporate
branding, while values are partly inferred from corporate communication
campaigns, stakeholders' interactions with staff are also important
In the early days of some corporate brands (e.g. Virgin, Body Shop and
Hewlett Packard) strong personality entrepreneurs had a philosophy about their
brand making the world a better place (Collins and Porras 1996) and recmited
staff with similar values to theirs (Buchanan and Hurczynski 1997). With a low
number of staff in regular contact stakeholders were likely to perceive a
consistent corporate brand. Success resulted in growth and more staff. The
more successful finllS communicated their brand philosophy through a culture
that rigidly enshrined particular core values, allowing peripheral values and
practices to adapt over time. New staff could appreciate from the culture how to
contribute as brand builders. In less successful corporations, new managers were
uncomfortable with the issues of corporate culture and brand visions and over
time lost sense of their core values (Kotter and Heskett 1992). New staff were
less confident about the corporation's core values and different styles of
behaviour evolved, causing disparate perceptions amongst stakeholders.
In corporate branding, staff are not only critical contributors to the brand's
values, but represent evaluative brand cues (Hansen 1972). As such, the HRM
Director should be a key member of the brand's team, since they devise policy on
brand building issues such as recmibnent induction and training.
At
Waterstone's, the Marketing Director's view is "Recmibnent is a branding
exercise, ifs part of the management of the corporate brand" Ond 1998, p325).
The need for more emphasis on staff as brand builders is echoed by others. For
example, Mottram (1998) argues that staff must understand the brand's vision,
be totally committed to delivering it and more emphasis should be placed on
internal communication (eg. Intranets).
These points indicate that corporations need to pay more attention to their
cultures, since these encompass their staffs values and assumptions which affect
their behaviour and thus influence stakeholders' perceptions, as is next
considered.
Integration Paradigm of Corporate Culture
Researchers (e.g. Parasuraman and Deshpande 1984; Wilkins and Ouchi
1983) have exhorted the need for more attention to corporate culture. Until the
relatively recent interest in corporate identity and reputation, culture had
attracted little attention in marketing (Deshpande and Webster 1989). In part
this may be due to this concepfs complex nature (Ogbonna and Harris 1998),
which has given rise to over 160 definitions (Kroeber and Kluckhohn 1952).
Interpretations of "culture" can be divided into two main groups (Semircich
1983). The first group of writers, who have dominated culture research, adopted
a positivistic perspective, conceptualizing it as something an organisation "has".
Deshpande and Webster's (1989) definition is a good example, i.e. "Culture is ~

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

161

set of shared assumptions and understandings about organizational functioning"
(p5). This school regards culture as an independent variable, for example
imported into a finn when staff join, or as a by-product of the finn's production.
It emphasizes homogeneity from a unified, collective consensus of the
organisation, with senior managers instrumental in defining their organisation's
culture and directing staff to accept and adhere to it (Legge 1995). Some refer
to this as the integration paradigm (Meyerson and Martin 1987).
Schein (1984) is a key proponent of this school of thought His definition has
many attractions from a corporate branding perspective, i.e. "The pattern of basic
assumptions that a given group has invented, discovered, or developed in
learning to cope with its problems of external adaptations and internal
integration and that have worked well enough to be considered valid and,
therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think and
feel in relation to those problems" (p6). This helps brand managers analyze their
culture at three levels and identify corrective action. The first level, visible
artifacts, is instantly recognizable and easiest to change. It is the most superficial
manifestation of the corporate culture and includes aspects such as the
building's architecture, office designs, staffs dress style, their behaviour and logos.
These are visible clues about an organisation's brands and management needs
to regularly audit these to ensure they all communicate the same message. If
employees' styles of behaviour are inconsistent with the desired brand identity, to
understand "why", the next level needs investigating, i.e. their values. Many
instnunents have been developed to measure organisational culture at this level
(see Cooke and Szumal 1993), however, directed interviewing is likely to reveal
post-hoc rationalizations for behaviour, or ideal values. It is therefore necessary
to delve to the third level of culture, appreciating unconscious underlying
assumptions; i.e. the learned responses that started as espoused values which,
through experience, are reinforced and become taken for granted assumptions.
Advances in means-end theory (Gutman 1982) enabled researchers to use
laddering techniques (Reynolds and Gutman 1988) to elicit hierarchical maps,
showing how people relate brand attributes to their values, and has become
popular for exploring values amongst both managers Oenkins 1996) and
consumers (Reynolds, Gengler and Howard 1995).
However laddering
techniques do not tap into unconscious underlying basic assumptions.
Employing ethnographic research methods (Gill and Johnson 1991; Hirschman
1986), researchers can explore the five types of basic assumptions Schein (1984)
suggested, i.e. (i) the finn's relationship with its environment, (ii) its view about
establishing 'tnlth' and decision making, (iii) the finn's view about human nature,
(iv) assumptions about what is right for staff to do and (v) the way staff should
relate to each other. From an analysis of the five types of basic assumptions
managers can then:
assess whether there is coherence between them;
predict the values that should be associated with these assumptions, then
after measuring these values identify which issues need greater

162

Leslie de Chernatony
consideration;
consider .whether in the current commercial climate thes'e basic
assumptions hold tme.

For example, analyzing the five basic assumptions of Philips Electronics shows
why its perfonnance has been poor. Philips' relationship with its environment,
assumption W, was that of staff focusing on technological leadership at the
expense of customer orientation. This reinforced assumption (ii) that the nature
of truth be vested in rational, technological considerations, rather than
addressing consumers' decision criteria. Assumption (iii) resulted in staff who
were good, capable corporate citizens deserving the continuing tradition of
paternalism. Some argued this delayed decisions about redundancies when
profitability fell. The nature of human activity, assumption (iv), was such that
senior managers who had historically been successful, shunned different ways of
doing business as the environment became harsher. Finally, from assumption (v),
there was a prevalent belief in the independence of different sub-organisations,
enabling Japanese competitors to take advantage of fragmented and
uncoordinated actions.
Thus Schein's (1984) definition offers opportunities for better employing
branding resources if managers:
audit all three domains (artifacts, values and basic assumptions);
explore the extent to which there is congruence between these three;
assess gaps between the desired brand values and the three components
of culture.
Differentiation Paradigm of Corporate Culture
The integration paradigm is conceptually appealing since having a shared set
of values and basic assumptions reflects employees' needs for order and
consistency. Staff reflect on the perceived culture to help them decide how to
respond in a new, ambiguous situation (Wilkins and Ouchi 1983). However, this
implies a culture split between corporate level and departmental level (Gregory
1983) and there is evidence that organisations are characterized by several
cultures (Hofstede 1998), raising questions about whether shared values and
assumptions should be considered more in tenns of frequency, similarity, or
intensity (Gordon and DiTomaso 1992). This second school of thought considers
culture as a root metaphor for the organisation, i.e. a metaphor for organisational
knowledge, or shared symbols and meanings, or the unconscious mind. Culture
exists in and through social interactions of staff, negotiating and sharing symbols
and meaning. The integration paradigm regards culture as something an
organisation "has", while the metaphor perspective sees culture as something a
group of people "are". The artifacts are no longer the visible layer of culture,
rather the means of its transmission and negotiation (Morgan 1986). This
interpretation recognizes that all finns have subcultures, which individually share
similar values and assumptions, but the extent to which these confonn to the

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

163

culture of senior management will vary.
Within the metaphor perspective, referred to as the differentiation paradigm
(Meyerson and Martin 1987), culture is not a mechanism for management to
change staffs values, assumptions and behaviour, but rather is a factor managers
need to be attentive to. Some corporate brands have historically perfomled
poorly (e.g. British Rail) as the culture espoused by senior managers in meetings
ran contrary to employees' views and were not internalized within the diverse
units.
The implications for corporate brand management are that the
subcultures need understanding and the diversity in values and assumptions
need explaining to the senior team and all staff. Before assuming the problem is
solely one of communication about the corporation's espoused culture, checks
are needed (Martin 1992) to assess:
Is there action inconsistency? For example, a Director continually talks
about the importance of customers, yet when presented with a
recommendation to change their brand to reduce customer complaints,
rejects this due to the cost of production retooling.
Is there symbolic inconsistency? For example, staff continually hear
about "striving to achieve the highest quality", yet the carpeting in the
offices looks worn out
Is there ideological inconsistency? For example, a financial institution
proclaims its policy of ethical investments, but then accepts an invitation
from a tobacco company to assist in its pension planning.
Employees' working patterns may also impede management's goal of greater
consistency of values and assumptions. For example, the high dependence on
part time staff in retailing can result in a fragmented culture, as staff feel no
commitment to their finn. Some organisations, such as ASDA are addressing
this problem by employing staff with contracts offering longer hours (Nonnan
1997).
Other organisations are breaking down the boundaries of subcultures. Taking
employees out of their daily roles and showing them how their work relates to
others in the organisation encourages them to reconsider their assumptions and
values. It also helps them appreciate the corporation's intentions and recognize
their importance in contributing to customer satisfaction - even if they are
distant from customers. An early example of this is the British Airways
programme, but a more recent case is BUPA (Mistry 1998).
The assumption that striving for a greater sense of shared values is associated
with a greater likelihood of organisational success needs further consideration.
Impact of Culture on Peifonnance
Hofstede (1980) was one of the early writers to argue the association between
strong cultures and high perfonnance and was followed by others, e.g. Peters and
Watennan (1982), Kanter (1989) and Denison (1990). The rationale is that in a
strong corporate culture there are consistent values and thus similar styles of

164

Leslie de Chernatony

behaviour, to which new staff are inducted and which out-live changes in senior
management. This leads to agreement about key objectives, albeit as Smith and
Janowitz (1996) observed, it could result in imperfect alignment as different
employees argue over the best tactics to meet the objectives.
The shared values engender greater motivation as staff feel proud and
become committed and loyal. Understanding and confonning to the behavioural
expectation from the shared values, employees need less supervision (Kotter and
Heskett 1992). Strong culture companies are better able to capitalize on
learning from the past, integrating successful practices into rituals and well
known stories that enable staff adopt these.
A further appeal of the strong culture-perfonnance theory is that a fiml's
culture provides the basis for a sustainable competitive advantage. Through
working to develop a strategically appropriate culture, corporate brands are
underpinned by intangible assets which competitors should find hard to emulate
(e.g. Bettencourt and Brown 1997).
However, one can question the strong culture theory. Wilkins and Ouchi
(1983) argue that organisations can manage themselves more efficiently by
having clans. Through a socialization process, employees become integrated into
clans, doing what is best for the finn by drawing on a general paradigm. This is a
master routine to overcome their limited cognitive capabilities (Schwenk 1988)
which provides simplification categorizations, processing procedures and
examples of good solutions. However, the assumption of a shared paradigm is
questionable since while managers share some aspects of their finn's paradigm,
there are also idiosyncratic aspects (e.g. de Chernatony, Daniels and Johnson
1993; Reger and Huff 1993). As employees scan their environment to appreciate
their corporation's paradigm, their perceptual processes focus attention on
particular pieces of infomlation, at the expense of others. Their interpretations
and memory retention also vary and thus different conceptualizations of the
corporation's paradigm may arise.
Another problem is the differing interpretations of "strength of culture". For
example Schein (1984) regarded this as stability and intensity, Deal and Kennedy
(1982) talked about coherence, while Gordon and DiTomaso (1992) interpreted
it as consistency. The literature about strong culture-performance is often
anecdotal and the few empirical studies that have been undertaken suffer from
methodological weaknesses (Legge 1995; Brown 1995).
Of particular relevance to brand management teams is the research by Kotter
and Heskett (1992). Adopting a more robust approach (albeit subject to the
limitation that interviews were not with the fimls' staff, but competitors' managers
and analysts) they found a weak positive association between culture strength
and corporate perfOnllance. They were critical of the strong culture theory, since
if everyone in a fiml adheres to the same but inappropriate values, everyone is
following the same path to disaster. Instead, better perfonnance is more likely
when a finn has a strong culture which is:
appropriate for its environment;

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

165

adaptable as the environment changes;
respects leadership at all levels;
attentive to satisfying the needs of staff, customers and stakeholders
This work needs validating (albeit Gordon and DiTomaso (1992) also showed
empirical support for the importance of cultural adaptability and perfonnance),
yet has implications for managing corporate brands.
Managers need to agree what are their few core values that should be timeless
and which less central values should adapt to changing situations. For example,
one of Hewlett Packard's timeless values is serving customers well. One of its
less central values was encouraging staff development through internal
promotion. As they moved from the instmments to the computer market they
found that to best serve customers' needs they required staff who were
knowledgeable about this market To remain tme to their core value they
changed this less central value and recmited senior people externally (Kotter and
Heskett 1992). The recent corporate redesign of BA's tail fins is visible
manifestation of how the core value, striving to deliver excellent customer service
has remained, but the diversity of designs reflects the new value of encouraging
innovation amongst staff, who have attended training sessions to appreciate how
to more flexiblymeet different customers' needs.
Another implication for managing corporate brands is that the shared culture
needs to recognize that any brand decisions must balance the needs of
customers with staff and shareholders. This concurs with Doyle's (1992) finding
that the long nm success of finns depends on satisfying a coalition of
stakeholders, not just one party. Richard Branson publicly declared Virgin's
adherence to this, stating 'We give top priorities to the interests of our staff;
second priority to those of our customers; third to our shareholders
.
Working backwards, the interests of our shareholders depend on high levels of
customer satisfaction .... which depends on happy staff who are proud of the
company they work for" (Macrae 1996b, p232).
Brand Management as Identity Management
While not negating the importance of brand image, a central theme of this
paper is that more emphasis needs placing on brand identity than has
historically been the case when managing brands. Drawing on the International
Corporate Identity Group (van Riel and Balmer 1997) identity is about the ethos,
aims and values that present a sense of individuality differentiating the brand, i.e.
finn centered, while image is a holistic impression of the relative position of a
brand among its perceived competitors (Poiesz 1989), i.e. customer centered.
There are several helpful models that enable managers better appreciate their
corporate identity (e.g. Balmer and Stotvig 1997; van Riel 1995; Ind 1997). A
particularly insightful brand-based view of identity was presented by Kapferer
(1997). His hexagonal identity prism model is a powerful tool to understand the
essential difference between a brand and its competitors and is based on six
central components: physique, personality, culture, relationship, reflection and

166

Leslie de Chernatony

self image. However in view of the previous discussion, it is contended that
adaptations be made, resulting in the model portrayed in figure 1. This model
conceptualises the brand's identity in ternlS of its vision and culture, which drive
its desired positioning, personality and the subsequent relationships, all of which
are then presented to reflect stakeholders' actual and aspirational self-images.
The rational for this internally focused model of brand essence is next addressed.

BRAND IDENTITY
Presentation:
reflecting
stakeholders'
- aspirations
- self-images

Figure 1. The Components of Brand Identity

The Brand's Vision
To thrive a brand needs a clear vision giving a well-defined sense of direction.
Building on Collins and Poras (1996), managers need to envisage the brand's
environment at least five years ahead, i.e. outside the time period appropriate for
incremental projections, and consider how the brand is going to make this
futuristic world better. This exercise is best undertaken by an independent

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

167

person collating the brand team's individual views on these two issues and then
convening a workshop to present and debate them to reach a consensus.

Tile Brand's Culture
To develop, or refine a strategy appropriate for such a vision, the next step is
to audit the brand's culture. Drawing on Schein (I984), this can be appreciated
in temlS of the visible artifacts, employees' and managers' values and the mental
models of those involved in brand building activities. It is important to
understand which values have remained unchanged over time i.e. the core
values, and which have changed, i.e. the peripheral, almost fashion like, values
(d. Kotter and Heskett 1992). While Schein refers to "basic assumptions", this is
akin to Wilkins and Ouchi's (I983) "paradigm", Spender's (I989) "recipe" and
the more recent literature on "cognitive maps/mental models" (Fiol and Huff
1992; Huff 1997).
This audit shows the suitability of the organisation's culture to help achieve
the brand vision, through appreciating the gaps between desired and current
components of culture. Drawing on the earlier points, the model encourages
managers to assess the extent to which employees share similar values and also
evaluate whether the culture components support each other. One way to
establish the congruence of perceptions about core values is to draw on the
procedure suggested by van Rekom (I 997). This produces a hierarchical value
map for all staff, by asking each employee to focus on their brand building
activity and continually ask why it is important to the brand. The group's map is
drawn by linking commonly mentioned concepts. In a shared values culture
there should be frequent linkages between concepts, which in tum should lead
to a greater likelihood of commibnent behind the brand (Finegan and Theriault
1997; Meglino, Ravlin and Adkins 1989).
In view of the earlier section on the differentiation paradigm of corporate
culture, there may be differences between the values staff hold. Workshops
should then be held, explaining to staff the differences in values, showing how a
cluster of desired values should result in superior brand perfonnance, then
seeking their ideas and involvement in moving to these new values. It would be
inappropriate for management to adopt an authoritarian style, insisting that staff
adopt the new values.
Surfacing people's mental models may provide insight about why a brand is
under perfonning. As Bettis and Prahalad (1995) argued, managers' "dominant
logic", or shared mental models, helps them cope with data overload, by focusing
only on factors deemed relevant by their mental models. This filtered data
becomes incorporated into brand plans. However, through this filtering and selfreinforcing behaviour, managers play down external drivers for change and in a
self-deceiving cycle, perfonnance gradually falls until a crisis forces the shared
mental model to be rejected. Using an independent external organisation to
surface the shared mental models and reviewing these models' appropriateness,
managers can appreciate which erroneous assumptions to forget and which new
ones to learn. The ultimate in challenging managers' shared mental models is

Leslie de Chernatony

168

the annual client survey for Nicholson McBride, who commission a competitor to
undertake this (Nicholson 1997).

The Brand's Positioning
The next stage is to consider the intended positioning's suitability against the
vision and core values. This coherence check may indicate alternative actions.
Kapferer (1997) does not talk about positioning, but rather "physique", i.e. the
brand's physical qualities, albeit he alludes to the link between physique and
personality. The model in figure 1 overtly talks about positioning, since from the
brand's core values, according to means-end theory (Gubllan 1982), there should
be a particular set of functionally distinct capabilities that distinguishes a brand.
This positioning will be reinforced through artefacts, which like Kapferer's
physique, give stakeholders cues about the brand's perfonnance characteristics.
The

brand's

emotional

values

feature

predominantly

in the

personality

component of identity, which is covered in the next section.
The strength of Kapferer's (1997) argument that this new model adheres to,
is that brand identity is a richer constmct to understand and build brands, than
just focusing on positi0cning. An alternative way to develop a brand positioning is
to go beyond the four issues Kapferer raises and adopt the more strategic six
dimensions of Hooley, Broderick and Moller (1998), broadening the debate to
become company wide. However, in so doing, the scope for misinterpretation
and therefore inappropriate implementation increases. It is wrong to assume
that all staff will have the same mental models about brand positioning. For
example, Reger's (1990) interviews amongst managers in the same banking
market showed only two positioning dimensions were common to 80% of
managers and all used at least one idiosyncratic dimension to interpret
competing brands' positionings. It is important to appreciate how each member
of the brand's team assesses its positioning. An easy to administer and analyse
procedure is the card sort technique (de Chernatony, Daniels and Johnson 1994).
Once administered, each person should be shown their positioning map,
comparing them against the desired map to help them understand how their
views differ and the need for change.

The Brand's Personality
The fiml's core values not only influence the brand's functional domain, but
also ifs personality. Just as positioning is a shorthand to help stakeholder
groups appreciate what the brand can do for them, personality also helps reduce
infomlation search and processing, by quickly recognizing the brand's values
through the personality metaphor (Aaker 1997). The challenge is to blend the
personality presented through the media, with supporting congment staff
behaviour.
A link managers sometimes overlook is that between the brand's positioning
and personality. The two interact as shown in figure 1. For example, in a recent
study, a leading-edge brand consultant remarked "If you do a focus group
amongst housewives on detergents, they will describe the Ariel woman and

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

169

contrast her to the Persil mum. Now where are they getting that from? They're
not getting it from the advertising. They're getting it from the functional delivery"
(de Chernatony and Oall'Olmo Riley 1997). Another coherence check is
therefore needed, not just between the corporation's values and the planned
personality, but also between the positioning and its implications for personality.
The Brand's Relationship
Once the brand's personality has been defined, then as with all animate
fonns, a relationship evolves, defined by the values inherent in the brand's
personality (Fournier 1998). Through several interactions, particular types of
relationships evolve, enabling both parties to understand each other better. A
limitation with brand image studies is they focus on the relationship from
customer to brand (Blackston 1992), assuming the brand to be passive. However
in the model in figure 1, the brand, through the staff, is an active participant in
any relationship. Managers need to work with staff to enable them to recognise,
from their core values, what types of relationships are appropriate between
employees and other employees, between employees and customers and between
employees and other stakeholders. Various ways of characterising relationships
can be found in the business to business literature (eg Ford at al 1998; Wilson
1995) and the consumer literature (eg Fournier 1998). What is important is
regularly assessing the relationships, since these change over time, and staff
should be involved in evaluating how well their relationships reinforce the
brand's values, personality and positioning.
The Brand's Presentation
Having maintained a dialogue with staff to develop a unified identity, the final
part is identifying presentation styles. The first aspect involves considering how

the brand's identity can be presented to appeal to stakeholders' aspired
characteristics (cf Kapferer's (1997) reflections). The challenge is that different
stakeholder groups have different points of contact with the organisation and as
such there is potential for conflicting messages. Staff from all departments need
to identify their stakeholders and appreciate how they evaluate and select
brands. By considering the signals emitted during these processes, discrepant
cues can be identified and a more coherent style of presentation devised.
The second aspect revolves around reflecting the internal self-images of the
brand's stakeholders. To enable the brand to connect with stakeholders, it needs
to resonate with their sense of self (Belk 1988; Hogg and Mitchell 1996) and
ensure they feel comfortable with the brand in a variety of situations (Lee 1990;
Sirgy 1982). Brands are valued for their symbolic meanings, helping consumers
understand and express aspects of their self to others (McCracken 1993). The
symbolic meaning of a brand is not only driven by advertising, but also emerges
through customers interacting with staff and other brand users. Without
concern for employees' contributions to the brand's self-image presentation
styles, there may be incongntity between the desired symbolic meanings
portrayed in the advertising and employees' behaviour. An example of reducing

170

Leslie de Chernatony

such incongmity for the local community stakeholder group is seen by some
organisations encouraging staff to become involved in charitable activities, for
example Woolworth's employees raised £O.lm in 1997 for Whizz Kidz charity.
Brand Building as Gap Reduction
From figure 1, gaps can be identified in the brand building process where
employees' perceptions, values and behaviours may nm contrary to the desired
brand intentions. By addressing the elements in figure 1, managers can work
with staff, using participative workshops, to seek their ideas and involvement in
change programmes to reduce gaps. However, sight must not be lost of the
importance of external stakeholder groups, since ultimately they decide the fate
of brands.
Under the traditional view of brand management, when the gap between a
brand's identity and its image become noticeable, this acts as a trigger for change
(Dutton and Dukerich 1991; Marziliano 1997). However, using image as an
indicator for change is problematic since this focuses attention on the latest
perceptions and fluctuates over short periods of time. By contrast, reputation
relates to perceptions about a brand over time (Fombnm and Van Riel 1997)
and is more stable. Therefore, by incorporating an externally oriented measure,
i.e. brand reputation, with the internal components involved in brand building, i.e.
brand identity, we have, as figure 2 shows, a mechanism to facilitate a balanced
approach to brand building. By evaluating the gap between the brand's identity
and its reputation, managers can fine tune their strategies to ensure a better
match between identity and reputation.
There are several advantages of incorporating reputation, rather than image,
into this model. Numerous stakeholder groups are interested in a finn's brand,
rather than just consumers, and reputation portrays the external assessment
amongst multiple stakeholders. In fonning brand perceptions, people draw on
many sources at different points in time, resulting in a reputation (Rindova
1997). Fombmn and Rindova (1996) crisply clarify this through their definition
of corporate reputation which can be adapted for brands as "A collective
representation of a brand's past actions and results that describes the brand's
ability to deliver valued outcomes to multiple stakeholders". Brands strive to
ensure consistency over time, yet if they fail to respond to worsening internal
misalignments amongst employees, while making stretching external claims, their
reputations will fall (Herbig and Milewicz 1995).
CEOs regard reputation as a particularly important intangible asset which
provides the opportunity for a sustained positioning advantage (Hall 1992). It
encourages greater confidence in stakeholders' anticipations about future
outcomes (Weigelt and Comerer 1988) and can be a key influencer in choosing
between apparently similar brands (Dowling 1994). Fu rthenn ore, favourable
reputations are more likely to be associated with superior performance
(Fombnm and Shanley 1990; Roberts and Dowling 1997; Fombmn 1996).

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

171

BRAND IDENITIY
Presentatim:
reflecting

stakeholders'
- aspirntions

- self-images

* Btand Visim
*QdbJre
artifacts
values -am

Reputation

- }EIiJi1eral
rredal rrxxJeIs

Figure 2. A Process for Managing Brands
Monitoring a brand's reputation and comparing this against the brand's identity
provides insights about the urgency and direction for change. The types of
changes needed can be appreciated when the differences between identity and
reputation are shown for each stakeholder group separately and when they are
also benchmarked against key competitors' reputations.
Some questions
managers and their staff should address include:

172

Leslie de Chernatony

- Is the desired identity recognised by all stakeholder groups and
appreciated as being distinctively superior to competition?
- Of the few critical aspects of brand identity, how consistent are the
matches between identity and reputation for each stakeholder group?
- For each stakeholder group, what actions do people in all departments
need to take to strengthen the identity-reputation congnlity?
- Are there particular reputation problems with some stakeholder groups
resulting from a lack of awareness, or evaluation skills, that need a closer
relationship?
- Are staff and managers aware of the way some stakeholder groups interact
with others to refract the signals staff emit? What actions are needed to
minimise this refraction effect if detrimental?
- Which aspects of the brand identity need changing and will this have an
adverse impact on other identity components?
- What systems are needed to measure the impact of brand identity changes
on both brand reputation and perfom1ance?
Conclusions
The literature about building and sustaining brands has placed significant
emphasis on the interactions between consumers and brands. This paper seeks
to redress the balance. For too long the importance of staff as brand builders has
not been sufficiently considered. By bringing them into the brand building
process, making them aware of their roles in delivering their brand's identity then
alerting them to their brand's reputation, and therefore differences, they can
participate in the process of considering how to change to better deliver the
desired identity.
In view of this special edition exploring the notion of brand reality, the
arguments in this paper support the significant contribution brand reality can
make to brand building. Brands are clusters of values and, particularly for
corporate brands, these values emanate from people inside the finn (as well as
from corporate communication programmes). In view of the key role staff play in
shaping a brand's values, more emphasis needs placing on internal aspects of
branding. This paper advocates a more effective approach to branding through a
more open style with employees, to enlist their participation and commitment to
delivering a coherent set of values.
If finns are to capitalise on brand reality, this paper proposes a wider remit to
brand management starting with the inclusion of the HRM Director in the
brand's team. Staff recnlibnent policies would benefit from basing selection
criteria on the congnlency of applicants' values with the brand's desired values.
Training programmes for all employees should not just be about skills and
knowledge development but also about individuals' roles in brand building.
Creative approaches are needed for these training programmes to encourage
staff to consider how they can change to reinforce a particular cluster of values
and style of behaviour. New ways of communicating infonnation about branding

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

173

issues are needed, so all staff can relate to these in their specific roles and better
contribute. Only when staff understand the brand vision and are committed,
proud and able to contribute, should advertising claims then be made.
Values are part of the broader concept of culture and this paper further
reinforces the importance of brand reality by considering how culture can affect
brand perfonnance. It has argued that culture is not something management
can rigidly control, but rather is a context within which employees interpret a
brand's identity. From the differentiation paradigm of culture, it is likely that
there will be several sub-cultures in a finn. Based on the brand identity model in
figure 1, managers need to assess the extent to which these sub-cultures support
the desired brand. These findings need communicating to the different groups
of employees and, in a participative style, their commitment sought to stimulate
ideas about adaptations to better support the desired brand identity.
The concept of brand image has not been negated, rather it has been argued
that brand reputation is a more powerful concept It assesses perceptions across
many stakeholder groups, does not just focus on the most recent impression and
is a predictor for stakeholders of future outcomes. The strength of brand reality
is it alerts managers to internal considerations, and when they assess the
congruency between the brand's identity and its reputation, they then have a
balanced approach to brand building as they strive to reduce any gaps.
The model in this paper is grounded in the literature and while it has also
evolved from brand strategy workshops with managers, has not been subjected to
empirical testing. A research programme has started to test sections of this
model and it is planned to report the findings in the future.
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank Fiona Harris for her helpful comments on earlier drafts of
this paper.
References
Aaker, David A (1991), Managing Brand Equity, New York, The Free Press
Aaker, David A (1996), Building Strong Brands, New York, The Free Press
Aaker, Jennifer L (1997), "Dimensions of Brand Personality", ]oumal of Market
Research 34, Aug, pp. 347-356
Abratt, Russell (1989), "A New Approach to the Corporate Image Management
Process", ]oumal of Marketing Management 5, 1, pp. 63-76
Ambler, Tim and Barrow, Simon (1996), ''The Employer Brand", ]oumal of Brand
Management 4, 3, pp. 186-206
Balmer, John M.T. (1995), "Corporate Branding and Connoisseurship", ]oumal of
General Management 21, 1, pp. 24-46
Balmer, John M.T. and Stotvig, Snorre (1997), "Corporate Identity and Private
Banking: A Review and Case Study", lntemational ]oumal of Bank Marketing,
15,5, pp. 169-184

174

Leslie de Chernatony

Belk, Russell W. (1988), "Possessions and the Extended Self, Journal of
Consumer Research 15, Sept, pp. 139-168
Bettencourt, Lance A and Brown, Stephen W. (1997), "Contract employees:
Relationships Among Workplace Fairness, Job Satisfaction and Prosodal
Service Behaviors", Journal of Retailing, 73, 1, pp. 39-61
Bettis, Richard A and Prahalad, C.K (1995), 'the Dominant Logic, Retrospective
and Extensions", Strategic Management]ournal, 1, 16, pp. 5-14
Bhat, Subodh and Reddy, Srinivas K (1998), "Symbolic and Functional
Positioning of Brands", Journal of Consumer Marketing, 15,1, pp. 32-43
Blackston, Max (1992), "A Brand With an Attitude: A Suitable Case for
Treabllent", Journal of the Market Research Society, 34, 3, pp. 231-241
Boulding, Kenneth E. (1956), The Image, Ann Arbour, University of Michigan
Press
Brown, Andrew (1996), Organisational Culture, London, Pibnan
Buchanan, David and Huczynski, Andrzej (1997), Organizational Behaviour,
Hemel Hempstead, Prentice Hall
Collins, James C. and Porras, Jerry I. (1996), Built to Last London, Century
Cooke, Robert A and Szumal, Janet L. (1993), "Measuring Nonnative Beliefs and
Shared Behavioral Expectations in Organizations: The Reliability and Validity
of the Organizational Culture Inventory", Psychological Reports, 72, pp. 12991330

Cowley,Don (1991), Understanding Brands, London, Kogan Page
de Chernatony, Leslie (1993), "Categorising Brands: Evolutionary Processes
Underpinned by Two Key Dimensions" Journal of Marketing Management
9,2, pp. 173-188

de Chernatony, Leslie, Daniels, Kevin and Johnson, Gerry (1993), "A Cognitive
Perspective on Managers' Perceptions of Competition" Journal of Marketing
Management 9, 4 pp. 373-381
de Chernatony, Leslie, Daniels, Kevin and johnson, Gerry (1994), "Competitive
Positioning Strategies Mirroring Sellers' and Buyers' Perceptions?", Journal of
Strategic Marketing, 2, 2, pp. 229-248
de Chernatony, Leslie and Dal),Olmo Riley, Francesca (1997), 'the Chasm
Between Managers' and Consumers' Views of Brands: the Experts'
Perspectives". Journal of Strategic Marketing,S, 2, pp. 89-104
de Chernatony, Leslie and McDonald, Malcolm (1998), Creating Powerful Brands
in Consumer, Service and Industrial Markets, Oxford, ButterworthHeinemann
Deal, Terrence and Kennedy, Allan (1982), Corporate Cultures: The Rights and
Rituals of Corporate Life, Reading Massachusetts, Addison-Wesley
Denison, Daniel R (1990), Corporate Culture and Organizational Effectiveness,
New York, john Wiley
Deshpande, Rohit and Webster, Frederick E. (1989), "Organizational Culture and
Marketing: Defining the Research Agenda, Journal of Marketing, 53, january,
pp. 3-15
Dowling, Grahame, R (1994). Corporate Reputations, London, Kogan Page

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

175

Doyle, Peter (1982), 'What are the Excellent Companies?", Journal of Marketing
Management 8, 2, pp. 101-116
Dutton, Jane E. and Dukerich, Janet M. (1991), "Keeping an Eye on the Mirror.
Image and Identity in Organizational Adaptation", Academy of Management
Journal, 34, 3, pp. 517-554
Finegan, Joan and Theriault Cindy (1997), 'The Relationship Between Personal
Values and the Perception of the Corporation's Code of Ethics", Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 27, 8, pp. 708-724
Fio\, C. Marlene and Huff, Anne Sigismund (1992), "Maps for managers: where
are we? Where do we go from here?" Journal of Management Studies, 29, 3,
pp267-285
Fombnll1, Charles and Shanley, Mark (1990), 'What's in a Name? Reputation
Building and Corporate Strategy, Academy of Management Journal, 33, 2
pp233-258
Fombnll1, Charles (1996). Reputation: Realizing Value from Corporate Image,
Boston, Harvard Business School Press
Fombnll1, Charles and Rindova, Violina P. (1996). 'Who's Tops and Who
Decides? The Social Constmction of Corporate Reputations" New York
University,Stem School of Business, Working Paper
Fombnll1, Charles and Van Riel, Cees (1997), 'The Reputational Landscape",
Corporate Reputation Review, 1, 1 & 2, pp. 5-13
Ford, David, Gadde, Lars-Erik, Hakansson, Haken, Lundgren, Anders, Snehota,
Ivan, Turnbull, Peter and Wilson, David (1998), Managing Business
Relationships, Chichester, John Wiley
Fournier, Susan (1998), "Consumers and their Brands: Developing Relationship
Theory in Consumer Research", Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 4, pp.
343-373.

Gill, John and Johnson, Phil (1991), Researcll Methods for Managers, London,
Paul Chapman Publishing
Goodyear, Mary (1996), "Divided by a Common Language: Diversity and
Deception in the World of Global Marketing", Journal of the Market .Research
Society, 38,2, pp. 105-122
Gordan, George G., and DiTomaso, Nancy (1992), "Predicting Corporate
Perfonnance from Organizational Culture", Journal of Management Studies,
26, 6, pp. 783-798
Gregory, Kathleen L. (1983), "Native-View Paradigms: Multiple Cultures and
Conflicts in Organizations", Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, Sept pp.
359-376
Gutman, Jonathan (1982), "A Means-End Chain Model Based on Consumer
Categorization Processes", Journal of Mar/{eting, 46, Spring, pp. 60-72
Hall, Richard (1992), 'The Strategic Analysis of Intangible Resources". Strategic
Management]ournal, 13, pp. 135-142
Hansen, Flemming (1972), Consumer Choice Behaviour. A Cognitive Theory,
New York, The Free Press
Hatch, Mary 10 and Schultz, Majken (1997), "Relations between organizational

176

Leslie de Chematony

culture, identity and image, European ]oumal of Marketing, 31, 5/6, pp. 356365
Herbig, Paul and Milewicz,John (1995), "To Be or Not To Be...Credible That is:
A Model of Reputation and Credibility Among Competing Finl1S" Marketing
Intelligence & Planning, 13, 6, pp24-33
Hirschman, Elizabeth C. (1986), "Humanistic Inquiry in Marketing Research:
Philosophy, Method and Criteria", ]oumal of Marketing Research, 23, August
pp.237-249
Hofstede, Geert (1980), Cultures Consequences, Beverly Hills, Sage
Hofstede, Geert (1998), '1dentifying Organizational Subcultures: An Empirical
Approach", ]oumal of Management Studies, 35, 1, pp. 1-12
Hogg, Margaret K and Mitchell, Paul CN. (1996), "Identity, Self and
Consumption: A Conceptual Framework", ]oumal of Marketing Management
12,7, pp. 629-644

Hooley, Graham, Broderick, Amanda and Moller, Kristian (1998), "Competitive
Positioning and the Resource-Based View of the Finn" ]oumal of Strategic
Marketing, 6, 2, pp. 97-115
Huff, Anne Sigismund (1997), "A current and future agenda for cognitive
research in organizations", ]oumal of Management Studies, 34, 6, pp. 947952
Ind, Nicholas (1997), The Corporate Brand, Basingstoke, Macmillan
Ind, Nicholas (1998), "An Integrated Approach to Corporate Branding", ]oumal of
Brand Management 5,5, pp. 323-32
Jenkins, Mark (1996), "Making Sense of Customers: An Evaluation of the Role of
the Customer in the Subjective Strategies of Senior Managers", ]oumal of
Strategic Marketing, 4, pp. 95-115
Kanter, Ross M. (1989), Wilen Giants Leam to Dance, New York, Simon &
Schuster
Kapferer, Jean-Noel; (1997), Strategic Brand Management London, Kogan Page
Keller, Kevin Lane (1998), Strategic Brand Management Upper Saddle River,
Prentice Hall
King, Stephen (1991), "Brand-building in the 1990s", Journal of Marketing
Management 7, l,pp. 3-13
Kotter, John P. and Heskett James L. (1992), Corporate Culture and
Performance, New York, The Free Press
Kroeber, Arthur L. and Kluckhohn, Clyde (1952), Culture: A Critical Review of
Concepts and Definitions, New York, Vintage Books
Laforet Sylvie and Saunders, John (1994), "Brand Portfolios: How the Leaders
Do It",]oumal of Advertising Research 34, 5, pp. 64-67
Lambin, Jean-Jacques (1996), Strategic Marketing Management London,
McGraw-Hili
Lee, Dong Hwan (1990), "Symbolic Interactionism:
Some Implications for
Consumer Self-Concept and Product Symbolisn1 Research". In: Advances in
Consumer Research Volume 17 (Eds) Goldberg, Gom and Pollay (Provo,
UT), Association for Consumer Research, pp. 386-393

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

177

Legge, Karen (1995), Human Resource Management Basingstoke, Macmillan
Macrae, Chris (1996a), The Brand Chartering Handbook, Harlow, AddisonWesley
Macrae, Chris (1996b), "An Invitation from MELNET 96 to Contribute to the
Brand Learning Organisation", ]oumal of Brand Management, 3, 4, pp. 226240
Martin, Joanne (1992), Cultures in Organizations: Three Perspectives, Oxford,
Oxford University Press
Marwicl" Nigel and Fill, Chris (1997), "Towards a Framework for Managing
Corporate Identity", European ]oumal of Marketing, 31, 5/6, pp. 396-409
Marziligno, Nicola (1997), "Organizational Images: Between Being and
Appearing", Corporate Reputation Review,!, 1&2, pp. 158-164
McCracken, Grant (1993), "The Value of the Brand: An Anthropological
Perspective". In: Brand Equity and Advertising (Ed) Aaker, David A and Biel,
Alexander L. (Hillsdale, New Jersey), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 125142
Meglino, Bmce M., Ravlin, Elizabeth C. and Adkins, Cheryl L. (1989), "A Work
Values Approach to Corporate Culture: A Field Test of the Value Congmence
Process and Its Relationship to Individual Outcomes", ]oumal of Applied
Psychology, 74, 3, pp. 424-432
Meyerson, D. and Martin, J. (1987), "Culture Change: An Integration of Three
Different Views",]oumal of Management Studies, 24, 6, pp. 623-647
Mistry, Bhavna (1998), "Life and Soul of the Brand", Marketing, 26 March, pp.
47-49
Mitchell, Alan (1994), "In good company", Marketing, 3 March, pp. 22-24
Mitchell, Alan (1997), Brand Strategies in the Infonnation Age, London,
Financial Times Business Limited

Morison, Ian (1997), "Breaking the monolithic mould", Intemational ]oumal of
Bank Marketing, 15,5, pp. 153-162
Morgan, Gareth (1986), Images of Organization, Thousand Oakes, Sage
Mottram, Simon (1998), "Branding the Corporation". In: Brands The New Wealth
Creators (Ed) Hart, Susannah and Murphy, John (Basingstoke), Macmillan, pp.
63-71
Murphy, John (1992), "Assessing the Value of Brands". In Branding a Key
Marketing Tool, (Ed.) Murphy, John (Basingstoke), Macmillan, pp 184-197
Nicholson, John (1997), "Sashaying on the Ice Floe". In: Advantivity Building
Competitive Advantage Through Creative Cultures (Leeds), Elmwood Design
Limited, pp. 26-37
N0n11an, Archie (1997), Untitled Speech. In: Advantivity Building Competitive
Advantage Through Creative Cultures (Leeds), Elmwood Design Limited, pp.
8-16
Ogbonna, Emmanuel and Harris, Lloyd C. (1998), "Organizational Culture: Its not
What You Think", ]oumal of General Management 23, 3, pp. 35-48
Olins, Wolff (1995), The New Guide to Identity, Aldershot Gower
Paras uram an, A and Rohit Deshpande (1984), "The Cultural Context of

178

Leslie de Chernatony

Marketing Management". In AMA Educators Proceedings, Series 50 (Eds)
Belk, Russell W. et al (Chicago), American Marketing Association, pp. 176-179
Peters, Tom and Watennan, RH. (1982), In Search of Excellence, New York,
Harper & Row.
Poeisz, Theo B.C. (1989), "The Image Concept Its Place in Consumer
Psychology" ]oumal of Economic Psychology, 10, pp. 457-472
Reger, Rhonda K (1990), "Managerial Through Stmctures and Competitive
Positioning". In: Mapping Strategic Thought (Ed) Huff, Anne Sigismund
(Chichester), John Wiley, pp. 71-88
Reger, Rhonda K and Huff, Anne S. (1993), "Strategic Groups: A Cognitive
Perspective", Strategic Management]oumal, 14, pp. 103-124
Reynolds, Thomas ]., and Gubllan, Jonathan (1988), "Laddering theory, method,
analysis and interpretation", ]oumal of Advertising Research, 28, Feb/March,
pp. 11-31
Reynolds, Thomas]., Gengler, Charles E. and Howard, Daniel]. (1995), "A meansend analysis of brand persuasion through advertising", Intemational ]oumal
of Research in Marketing, 12, pp. 257-266
Rindova, Violina, P. (1997), "The Image Cascade and the Fonnation of Corporate
Reputations". Corporate Reputation Review, 1, 1&2, pp. 188-194
Roberts, Peter W. and Dowling, Grahame, R (1997), "The Value of a Firm's
Corporate Reputation: How Reputation Helps Attain and Sustain Superior
Profitability", Corporate Reputation Review, 1, 1&2, pp. 72-76
Ruekert, Robert W. and Walker, Orville C. (1987), "Marketings Interactions with
Other Functional Units: A Conceptual Framework and Empirical Evidence",
]oumal of Marketing, 51, January, pp. 1-19
Schein, Edgar H. (1984), "Coming to a New Awareness of Organizational
Culture", Sloan Management Review, Winter, pp. 3-16
Schwenk, Charles, R (1988), The Essence of Strategic Decision Making,
Lexington, Lexington Books
Seigel, Alan (1994), "Clarifyingthe Corporate Voice: The Imperative of the '90s",_
Design Management ]oumal, 6, Winter, pp. 44-46
Shocker, Allan D., Srivastava, Rajendra K. and Ruekert, Robert W. (1994),
"Challenges and Opportunities Facing Brand Management An Introduction to
the Special Issue", ]oumal of Marketing Research 31, May,pp. 149-158
Sirgy, MJoseph (1982), "Self-Concept in Consumer Behavior. A Critical Review",
]oumal of Consumer Research 9, Dec, pp. 287-300
Smircich, Linda (1983), "Concepts of Culture and Organizational Analysis",
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, September, pp. 339-358
Smith, Bryan and Yanowitz, Joel (1996), "The Role of Leadership in a Learning
rd

Organization", Prism, 3 quarter, pp. 57-67
Smythe, John, Dorward, Collette and Reback, Jerome (1992), Corporate
Reputation, London, Century
Spender,]-C (1989) Industry Recipes, Oxford, Basil Blackwell
van Rekom, Johan (1997), "Deriving an Operational Measure of Corporate

Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap

179

Identity", European ]oumal of Marketing, 5/6, 31, pp. 410-422
van Riel, Cees B.M. (1995), Principles of Corporate Communication, Hemel
Hempstead, Prentice-Hall
van Riel, Cees B.M. and Balmer, John M.T. (1997), "Corporate Identity: The
Concept its Measure and Management" European Journal of Marketing, 31,
5/6, pp. 340-355
Weigelt Keith and Camerer, Colin (1988), "Reputation and Corporate Strategy: A
Review of Recent Theory and Applications", Strategic Management ]oumal, 9,
pp.443-454
Wilkins, Alan L. and Ouchi, William G. (1983), "Efficient Cultures: Exploring the
Relationship
between
Culture
and
Organizational
Perfonnance",
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, pp. 468-481
Wilson, David T (1995), "An Integrated Model of Buyer-Seller Relationships,"
]oumal of tile Academy of Marketing Science, 23, 4, pp. 335-345
Zeithaml, Valarie A and Bitner, Mary Jo (1996), Services Marketing, New York,
McGraw-Hili
Wilson, Alan (1997), "The Culture of the Brand Team and its Impact on Service
Delivery and Corporate Identity", lntemational ]oumal of Bank Marketing, 15,
5, pp. 163-168

