Why Get Involved?

Hwang et al.
10.1177/0899764005276435

Why Get Involved? Reasons for
Voluntary-Association Activity Among
Americans and Canadians
Monica Hwang
University of Western Ontario
Edward Grabb
University of Western Ontario
James Curtis
University of Waterloo
Using national representative sample survey data from the United States and Canada,
the authors compare American and Canadian responses to a set of 14 possible reasons for
being active in voluntary associations. They assess the 14 reasons individually and then
conduct analyses in which the 14 measures are grouped into two composite scales: collective reasons and self-oriented motivations. The authors also consider theories for explaining how and why Americans and Canadians might differ in their motivations for volunteering. Analyses are conducted on seven background predictors: gender, race, religious
affiliation, religious attendance, age, education, and socioeconomic status. Findings
show that Americans are more likely than Canadians to mention altruistic rather than
personal reasons for joining voluntary organizations, and Canadians are slightly more
likely than Americans to emphasize personal reasons for their volunteer work, but this
difference is not significant after controls. The implications of the findings for
understanding voluntary activity in the two nations are discussed.
Keywords: voluntary associations; reasons; Americans; Canadians

A number of studies based on representative sample survey data have compared American levels of voluntary association activity with those found in
Canada and a range of other nations (Curtis, 1971; Curtis, Baer, & Grabb, 2001;
Curtis, Grabb, & Baer, 1992; Hallenstvedt, 1974; Hodgkinson, 2003; Inglehart,
Note: We thank Ronald Inglehart and his research colleagues involved with the World Values Surveys and the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, University of Michigan, for making available the data from the surveys. Neither the original investigators nor the
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, vol. 34, no. 3, September 2005 387-403
DOI: 10.1177/0899764005276435
© 2005 Association for Research on Nonprofit Organizations and Voluntary Action

387

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

388

Hwang et al.

2003). Additional research has focused exclusively on the American/
Canadian comparison (see, e.g., Curtis & Grabb, 2002; Curtis, Lambert,
Brown, & Kay, 1989a, 1989b; Grabb & Curtis, 1992, 2005, chap. 11). The results
of these studies generally show that the differences in association activity
between Americans and Canadians (as well as differences involving the
Dutch, the Swedes, and others) are small. Indeed, in a number of these comparisons, the differences are not statistically significant. The latter outcomes
are most common when religious organizations are excluded from the count
of membership types (Curtis et al., 1992; Curtis et al., 2001). Such findings are
consistent with the view that there is a much greater emphasis on and commitment to religion and religious activity in the United States than in Canada and
other Western societies. This higher level of religious involvement in the
United States has been documented in numerous studies over the years (see,
e.g., Bibby, 1987, 1993, 2002; Lipset, 1963, pp. 147-150; 1996, p. 19, p. 62; Ray,
2003; Reimer, 1995; Verba, Schlozman, & Brady, 1995; Watt, 1991, pp. 257-267).
HYPOTHESES ABOUT THE REASONS FOR VOLUNTEERING
Although considerable research has been conducted comparing the levels
of voluntary-association membership of Americans and Canadians, to our
knowledge, no research has yet considered another important question: Do
those Americans and Canadians who actively participate in voluntary associations get involved for the same or different reasons? At one level of reasoning, we might expect that American and Canadian motivations for doing volunteer work would be very much alike because of the similar overall levels of
voluntary activity in the two nations. Another consideration concerns the
numerous social-structural and cultural similarities shared by the two societies. For example, both nations have enjoyed high levels of economic development and living standards, have had a long experience with stable and democratic political institutions, and comprise populations that evince a diverse
mixture of Protestant and other Christian religious affiliations. Each of these
characteristics has been shown to be a significant predictor of high levels of
voluntary activity and to have been important for promoting voluntarism in
the United States, Canada, and elsewhere (see, e.g., Curtis et al., 2001). It seems
likely that these and other shared characteristics of the two nations should
have helped to shape American and Canadian orientations to volunteer
activity in similar ways.

disseminating archive bears any responsibility for the analyses conducted here. Please direct correspondence to James Curtis, Department of Sociology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1; e-mail: curtis@healthy.uwaterloo.ca, or Monica Hwang, Department of
Sociology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C2; e-mail: mhwang2@
uwo.ca; or Edward Grabb, Department of Sociology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C2; e-mail: grabb@uwo.ca.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

389

Nevertheless, there are also some clear social-structural divergences
between the societies that could promote distinctly American and distinctly
Canadian reasons for volunteering. A primary divergence is that Canada,
although it is a liberal democracy similar to the United States, is nonetheless
relatively more social democratic or “statist,” with a more substantial socialwelfare system and more extensive government-funded programs to aid the
poor, the unemployed, and various other underprivileged or needy groups
(see, e.g., Grabb & Curtis, 2005, pp. 168-171; Janoski, 1998, p. 23; Lipset, 1990,
pp. 8, 130-134; Olsen, 2002, pp. 35-41). On this basis, one would hypothesize
that, among Canadians, there is a lesser perceived need to do volunteer work
that helps other citizens because the government more adequately fulfills this
requirement. As a result, those Canadians who choose to join voluntary associations may be more apt than Americans to do so for other than altruistic reasons and more liable to volunteer for personal or self-oriented purposes. In
contrast, Americans, because of the smaller role of their government in assisting individuals or in ensuring the public good, may be more prone than Canadians to see volunteer work as a central means for achieving civic-minded
goals or altruistic ends in their communities. The pattern in previous research,
which shows a greater tendency for Americans to participate in religious
organizations, also suggests that one altruistic reason, religious beliefs,
should be a more significant motivator for voluntary activity in the United
States than in Canada.
The previous literature on reasons for volunteering in the United States
provides us with further working hypotheses. Studies indicate that a mixture
of incentives is often at work and that the same person may engage in civic
participation due to both altruistic and personal considerations (see, e.g.,
Knoke, 1986, pp. 5-7; Smith, 1981, 1994, pp. 251-252; Wilson, 2000, pp. 218-219;
Wilson & Musick, 1997, p. 256). Nevertheless, several studies of the reasons
why Americans engage in volunteer work or join voluntary organizations
have shown that altruistic reasons are usually among the main factors. For
example, using data from a national survey conducted in 1992, Clary and colleagues found that individuals rated altruistic factors as the most important
function of voluntary activity, ranking ahead of such self-oriented motivations as personal development, social rewards, learning, or career enhancement (Clary, Snyder, & Stukas, 1996, pp. 495-496, 487). This research also suggests that altruistic reasons, such as a desire to help others, to do something for
an important cause, or to show compassion for people in need, are apt to be
especially important for certain types of voluntary associations, including
those that are connected to health services, religion, human services, and the
environment (see also Clary et al., 1998, pp. 1517-1518; Clary & Miller, 1986;
Clary & Orenstein, 1991; Smith, 1981, 1994, pp. 251, 258n; Wuthnow, 1991).
Although no directly comparable analyses have been conducted in Canada, some pertinent results are available from Statistics Canada’s National
Survey of Giving, Volunteering, and Participating (NSGVP). This survey
showed that, in both 1997 and 2000, an altruistic factor, that is, believing in an

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

390

Hwang et al.

organization’s cause, ranked as the most important reason for volunteering in
Canada, although self-oriented factors, such as using one’s skills and exploring one’s strengths, also ranked as relatively important (Hall, McKeown, &
Roberts, 2001, p. 43). One other study (Reed & Selbee, 2003), based on national
survey data from 1997, compared the ratings of Canadian volunteers and
nonvolunteers for a general list of 92 values, perceptions, and beliefs. The
analysis showed that the responses of all volunteers differed little from those
of nonvolunteers. However, the responses of genuinely active volunteers
(those who did volunteer work once a week or more) were significantly more
likely to reflect “other-directed” values, including beliefs about the importance of caring for people in the community and having a feeling of responsibility to help the needy in society (Reed & Selbee, 2003, pp. 100-102). Hence,
these findings are consistent with the results from American studies because
they suggest that volunteers, or at least those who are truly active, have a
stronger sense of altruism than do other Canadians.
We would expect from these studies that altruistic factors would be more
prominent than self-oriented factors as reasons for volunteering in both countries, regardless of whether altruistic reasons receive greater endorsement
among Americans. These are our additional working hypotheses.
The American and Canadian waves of the World Values Surveys (WVS)
from the early 1990s include a series of questions that were asked in both countries and that allow respondents to indicate their main reasons for being
actively involved in voluntary organizations. In this article, we use these data
to determine whether and to what extent Americans and Canadians differ in
their motivations for working in voluntary associations. We turn now to a discussion of the data source and the methodological procedures employed in
the analysis.
DATA AND METHODS
Our data come from the World Values Surveys of 1991-1993, a set of international surveys conducted by Ronald Inglehart and associates, involving
more than 40 countries. In each country, a nationally representative sample
was interviewed, using essentially the same questionnaire (Inglehart, 1997,
Appendix 1).1 The present analysis focuses solely on the American and Canadian components of the survey. The samples were weighted to make them representative of the two populations. Only respondents who were 18 years of
age or older at the time of the interview were included. The analysis also
excludes individuals who were not actively involved in doing work with at
least one voluntary association because only these respondents were asked
about possible motivations for volunteering. As a result, 907 (45.6%) of the
total sample of 1,989 Americans and 739 (42.8%) of the total sample of 1,729
Canadians are included in the present analysis.2

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

391

To measure reasons for volunteering, respondents were instructed as follows: “Thinking about your reasons for doing voluntary work, please use the
following scale to indicate how important each of the reasons below have been
in your own case.” Respondents were then given a card showing a scale ranging from 1 (unimportant) to 5 (very important) and were asked to rate each of 14
reasons for engaging in voluntary activity. The reasons were as follows: (1) “a
sense of solidarity with the poor and disadvantaged”; (2) “compassion for
those in need”; (3) “an opportunity to repay something, give something back”;
(4) “a sense of duty, moral obligation”; (5) “identifying with people who were
suffering”; (6) “time on my hands, wanted something worthwhile to do”; (7)
“purely for personal satisfaction”; (8) “religious beliefs”; (9) “to help give disadvantaged people hope and dignity”; (10) “to make a contribution to my
local community”; (11) “to bring about social and political change”; (12) “for
social reasons, to meet people;” (13) “to gain new skills and useful
experience”; and (14) “I did not want to but could not refuse.”
In part because previous research has uncovered evidence of multiple
dimensions represented within inventories of possible motivations for volunteering (see especially Clary et al., 1996; Clary et al., 1998), we conducted a
series of factor analyses of the 14 items used in the WVS. Here, we sought to
determine if a similar factor structure, with much the same set of dimensions,
would emerge from the combined data for the two countries. We used various
rotation techniques and tested for the existence of distinct factors. The final
results reported here are based on a maximum-likelihood extraction with
oblique rotation and Kaiser normalization, which allows the extracted factors
to be intercorrelated. In contrast to previous American research (Clary et al.,
1996; Clary et al., 1998), we uncovered just two identifiable dimensions. This
discrepancy between our factor-analytic results and those found by other
researchers is probably due to several divergences between our measures and
those employed in other studies. In particular, the 14 items from the WVS are
worded differently, are less numerous, and are less wide-ranging. For these
reasons, the simpler factor structure revealed in our analysis is probably not
surprising.
The first of the two factors incorporates nine of the items, including those
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, and 11. This is clearly an altruism measure, as
evidenced by the content of the items that load most highly on this factor. For
example, the top four of these items include “to help give disadvantaged people hope and dignity” (.779), “identifying with people who were suffering”
(.762), “compassion for those in need” (.711), and “a sense of solidarity with
the poor and disadvantaged” (.687). We treat the altruism measure as a
summated scale (while inserting mean scores for the few nonresponses that
occurred with each individual item). The scale shows a high level of internal
consistency reliability, with a standardized item alpha of .80.
The second identifiable dimension emerging from the factor analysis comprises the remaining five items: 6, 7, 12, 13, and 14. This dimension is less

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

392

Hwang et al.

determinate, and the summated scale is less reliable, with a standardized item
alpha of .69. However, this factor has sufficient internal consistency for our
purposes in the present analysis. This measure is also a useful counterpoint to
the first scale because it appears to capture an underlying dimension that,
although not the complete opposite of the altruism scale, is clearly distinct
from it. This seems evident from the content of the items that load most highly
on this second scale, namely, “for social reasons, to meet people” (.678), followed by “to gain new skills and useful experience” (.547), “time on my
hands, wanted something worthwhile to do” (.416), and “purely for personal
satisfaction” (.384). Although this factor does not comprise completely selfish
motivations, it captures a more self-oriented, or what we have labeled a “personal,” set of rationales for doing voluntary work. 3
The altruism and personal-reasons scales are positively and significantly
correlated with each other (r = +.323, p < .001), which shows that those respondents who rate altruistic reasons for volunteering as important also tend to
rate personal motivations as important. This finding is thus consistent with
previous studies that, as noted earlier, show that people who volunteer may
indeed be motivated by a mixture of both altruistic and self-oriented reasons
at the same time (Knoke, 1986, pp. 5-7; Smith, 1994, pp. 251-252).
We begin our analysis with a bivariate comparison of how Americans and
Canadians rate each of the 14 reasons considered individually and also their
scores on the two composite scales. In addition, we look at national differences
with the religious beliefs item removed from the altruism scale. This is to
determine if any differences that we may find between Americans and Canadians regarding their altruistic reasons for volunteering are primarily attributable to the relatively greater emphasis on religion in the United States.
Next, we consider multivariate patterns. For reasons of parsimony and to
conserve space, here we focus only on the two scales as our dependent measures and do not look at the individual component items, although we do consider the altruism scale both with and without the religious beliefs measure
included. The central purpose of the multivariate analysis is to assess whether
controlling for the effects of seven key social-background predictors may
partly or completely account for any American/Canadian differences in people’s ratings of altruistic and personal reasons for doing voluntary work.
These seven predictors are as follows: gender (with men coded as 1 and
women treated as the reference category and coded as 0), race (White = 1, nonWhite = 0), religious affiliation (Protestant = 1, all others = 0), religious attendance (on an 8-point ordinal scale from 1 = lowest to 8 = highest), age in years,
education (as measured by age at completion of schooling, which involved a
10-point scale from 1 = age 12 to 10 = age 21 or higher), and socioeconomic status (as judged by the interviewers’ ratings, on a 4-point scale from 1 = lowest to
4 = highest).
These seven variables have been shown in previous research to be related to
levels of voluntary activity. Although there are some exceptions, particularly
for race, the typical pattern in these studies has been for people with relatively

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

393

more dominant, more central, or more privileged social statuses to exhibit
higher levels of voluntarism and civic participation (see, e.g., Curtis et al.,
1992; Curtis et al., 2001; Curtis, Grabb, Perks, & Chui, 2004; Grabb & Curtis,
1992; Knoke, 1986; Lemon, Palisi, & Jacobsen, 1972; Milbrath & Goel, 1977;
Musick, Wilson, & Bynum, 2000; Smith, 1975, 1994; Wilson, 2000; Wilson &
Janoski, 1995; Wilson & Musick, 1997). Although relevant research literature is
sparse, there is also reason to believe that at least some of these variables may
be related to motivations for volunteering. In particular, Clary et al. (1996, pp.
497-501) found a tendency for some less privileged groups—mainly women
and Blacks—to mention both altruistic and nonaltruistic reasons for volunteering to a greater extent than their more dominant or privileged counterparts. On the other hand, for predictors such as income and education, their
research revealed no clear and consistent pattern.4
RESULTS
BIVARIATE FINDINGS

In Table 1, the two national samples are compared with respect to their ratings of how important each of the 14 reasons is for volunteering. This table
also shows how the American and Canadian respondents compare on the
altruism and personal-reasons scales.
The first point to note is that the two samples generally reveal highly similar rankings of the 14 individual reasons for volunteering. For example,
despite some slight differences in the internal rankings of the top five reasons,
as a group, the leading five motivations are the same in both samples. These
reasons, each of which is altruistic in nature, include compassion for the
needy, a desire to repay or give something back, a sense of moral duty or obligation, contributing to the local community, and helping the disadvantaged
have hope and dignity. Similarly, the three least important reasons given by
Americans and Canadians are the same, and in this case are ranked in the
identical order. All of these are personal in nature and include not wanting to
volunteer but being unable to refuse, for social reasons or to meet people, and
because of having time on their hands.
In fact, the only sizeable difference in the rankings for the two samples is
that religious beliefs is a more important reason for volunteering among
American respondents, who rate this as 6th out of the 14 possible reasons,
compared with a rating of 10th out of 14 in the Canadian sample. The gap
between the American and Canadian scores for the religious beliefs item is
also much larger (3.70 vs. 3.04 on a 5-point scale) than the gap for any of the
other 14 items. These results are consistent with the prediction, based on the
higher levels of religious involvement in the United States, that religious
beliefs will be of greater salience for explaining volunteering among Americans than among Canadians.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

394

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

3.99
3.93
3.88
3.87
3.76
3.61
3.40
3.34
3.24
3.20
3.07
2.81
2.70
1.99
32.86
29.46
13.95

1. Compassion for the needy
2. To repay, give back something
3. Contribute to local community
4. Sense of duty, moral obligation
5. To give hope, dignity to disadvantaged
6. Identify with those who are suffering
7. Religious beliefs
8. Solidarity with poor, disadvantaged
9. To gain skills, experience
10. Purely for personal satisfaction
11. To bring social, political change
12. Time on my hands
13. Social reasons, to meet people
14. Did not want to, couldn’t refuse
Altruism Scale
Altruism Scale, excluding religious beliefs
Personal-reasons scale

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
—
—
—

Rank
4.07
3.98
3.92
3.95
3.83
3.66
3.70
3.34
3.13
3.19
3.13
2.78
2.62
2.02
33.58
29.88
13.73

Score
1
2
4
3
5
7
6
8
11
10
9
12
13
14
—
—
—

Rank

Americans

3.90
3.87
3.83
3.77
3.68
3.55
3.04
3.35
3.38
3.21
3.00
2.86
2.80
1.96
32.00
28.96
14.21

Score

1
2
3
4
5
6
10
8
7
9
11
12
13
14
—
—
—

Rank

Canadians

**
*
ns
***
**
ns
***
ns
***
ns
*
*
**
ns
***
**
*

Significance

Note: Individual items are on 5-point scales where 1 = unimportant, 5 = very important. The maximum possible score on the Altruism scale is 45. The maximum
possible score on the Altruism scale, excluding religious beliefs, is 40. The maximum possible score on the personal-reasons scale is 25. Significance refers to
whether the differences between the American and Canadian scores are statistically significant. ns = not significant.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

Score

Reason

Total

Table 1. American and Canadian Scores on the 14 Individual Reasons for Volunteering, and on the Altruism Scale,
the Altruism Scale Excluding Religious Beliefs, and the Personal-Reasons Scale, Using Data From the 1990s World Values Surveys

Why Get Involved?

395

Table 2. Unstandardized Multiple Regression Analysis Showing National Differences
on the Altruism Scale, the Altruism Scale Excluding Religious Beliefs, and the PersonalReasons Scale, With Controls for Seven Background Variables

Intercept
Predictor
Nation (USA = 1, Canada = 0)
Gender (male = 1, female = 0)
Race (White = 1, non-White = 0)
Religion (Protestant = 1, others = 0)
Religious attendance
Age
Education
Socioeconomic status
2
Adjusted R

Altruism
Scale

Altruism Scale
(Excluding Religious Beliefs)

PersonalReasons Scale

35.17

32.50

18.69

1.07**
–0.27
–2.05***
–0.04
0.61***
0.01
–0.32***
–0.77***
10.9%

0.66*
–0.30
–1.64**
–0.14
0.31***
0.01
–0.26**
–0.60**
5.2%

–0.15
0.38
0.20
–0.68**
0.11*
–0.03***
–0.35***
–0.51***
6.0%

*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

There are some other differences between the American and Canadian
rankings. Specifically, although both samples give altruistic reasons the highest priority, there is a greater tendency for American respondents than for
Canadian respondents to do so. As shown in Table 1, this is evident in the statistically significant differences found for six of the nine individual altruism
items, and also for the overall altruism scale. In the case of the altruism scale,
the American score is 33.58 (out of a possible 45), compared with 32.00 for the
Canadians, and the difference between these scores, although not large, is statistically significant (p < .001). As we would expect, the national difference
becomes noticeably smaller if the religious beliefs item is removed from the
count of altruistic reasons. Then, the difference between Americans and Canadians is less than 1 point on a 40-point scale, although this difference is still statistically significant (p < .01). Finally, we see a weak but significant tendency
for Canadians to rate personal factors for volunteering more highly than do
Americans. This is true for the item dealing with social reasons and meeting
people, the item asking about acquiring skills and experience, the question
about having time on one’s hands, and the overall personal-reasons scale. In
the latter instance, the Canadian score is 14.21 (out of a possible 25), compared
with an American score of 13.73 (p < .05).
In general, then, these bivariate patterns support the conclusion that it is
Americans rather than Canadians who are more apt to be motivated by altruistic factors in their choice to be actively involved in voluntary associations.
For Canadians, on the other hand, there is at least some modest indication that
they find personal factors, especially meeting other people and acquiring
skills and experience, as relatively more important than do Americans.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

396

Hwang et al.

MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS

Altruism. Table 2 presents an ordinary least squares multiple regression
analysis, in which the American and Canadian respondents are compared on
the altruism scale, both with and without religious beliefs included, and on
the personal-reasons scale. Each analysis also assesses the possible effects of
the seven background predictors. The findings indicate that, even with controls, Americans are more likely than Canadians to rate altruistic reasons for
volunteering as important. With controls, the American/Canadian difference
on the 45-point scale is 1.07 (p < .01). The difference reduces to about .66 if the
religious beliefs item is excluded, but it is still statistically significant (p < .05).
As for the effects on altruism of the other predictors, we find no gender difference, no age effect, and no difference between Protestants and other religious faiths. However, regular attendance at religious services, whatever the
faith, is positively related to altruism, and this is true even when the religious
beliefs item is not included in the altruism scale. One of the most interesting
results in Table 2 is the pattern for race, which indicates that non-Whites are
significantly and substantially more likely than Whites to volunteer for altruistic reasons. Here, the difference is more than two points overall (b = –2.05, p <
.001), and more than one and a half points (b = –1.65, p < .01) when the religious
beliefs item is excluded from the count of altruistic motivations. Thus, it is
noteworthy that non-Whites, who are generally acknowledged to be among
the least privileged and least empowered individuals in either country, are relatively more likely than the other respondents in the two national samples to
focus their volunteer efforts on helping the less fortunate and the less powerful in their societies.
In a somewhat similar fashion, we see, as well, that socioeconomic status
and educational attainment are negatively related to altruism. In other words,
it is those volunteers who come from the less advantaged socioeconomic and
educational strata who are the most likely to say that they volunteer for reasons such as giving back to the community or assisting those in need. These
outcomes call into question the notion that the more educated and more prosperous classes in countries such as the United States and Canada are more
likely than other people to be motivated by altruistic considerations when
engaging in voluntary-association activity (for some discussion, see, e.g.,
Curtis et al., 2004).
The personal-reasons scale. Turning to the personal-reasons scale, we see that
the slight tendency, found in Table 1, for Canadians to place a greater importance than Americans on personal reasons for voluntary activity does not
stand up with controls on the effects of the other predictors. This change
appears to stem primarily from the fact that, compared with the Canadian
respondents, Americans are significantly more likely to be Protestants, to be
older, to be higher in socioeconomic status, and to have higher levels of education (data not shown in tables). As we can see in Table 2, each of these four

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

397

factors is associated with placing a lower level of importance on personal reasons for volunteering. Consequently, when we take the effects of these predictors into account, the American/Canadian difference on the personal-reasons
scale becomes statistically insignificant.
Some of the results for the personal-reasons scale may be surprising. Consider, for example, that those who report the highest levels of attendance at
religious services are actually somewhat more likely, not less likely, than other
people to say that they volunteer for personal or self-oriented reasons. This
could be puzzling if we expect that individuals who are more involved in religion are more apt than other people to be selfless or other-directed in their
daily lives and, therefore, more motivated by these considerations when they
participate in community activities. Indeed, this expectation conforms with
our previous finding that religious attendance is positively related to the
altruism scale. Parallel results occur with both education and socioeconomic
status; that is, although, as we have already shown, less-educated people and
those with lower socioeconomic status are more likely than others to say that
they volunteer for altruistic reasons, we see here that these individuals are also
more likely to say that they volunteer for personal reasons. Again, however, if
we recall that the altruism scale and the personal-reasons scale are positively
correlated, then these results for religious attendance, education, and socioeconomic status are not paradoxical. They indicate that those people who volunteer for the first kind of reason have a tendency to volunteer for the second
kind of reason as well. The two broad types of reasons for association involvement are not mutually exclusive.5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this analysis, we have considered whether Americans and Canadians
who are actively involved with voluntary associations differ in their reasons
for doing volunteer work. Although existing research has shown that the two
peoples are generally similar in their levels of voluntary-organization membership, until now, no research has been conducted to determine if this
national similarity extends to Canadian and American reasons for engaging in
voluntary activity. In fact, the comparative literature offers a basis for predicting that American and Canadian reasons for volunteering will not be quite the
same. We have considered the hypothesis that American volunteers are more
likely than their Canadian counterparts to be moved by altruistic considerations, in part because Americans live in a less statist society. As a result of the
latter difference, Americans could feel a greater obligation than Canadians to
apply their volunteer efforts selflessly, assisting individuals and groups who
cannot rely on government agencies or public-sector initiatives to fulfill these
important needs. Another comparative social-structural difference is that
Americans are generally more highly involved in religious activities than are

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

398

Hwang et al.

Canadians and most other peoples. This difference, too, we hypothesized,
may be an important influence promoting greater altruistic volunteering
among Americans.
Our findings indicate that, for the most part, Americans and Canadians
stress similar sets of reasons for doing volunteer work. Both populations tend
to rank a list of 14 different motivations for volunteering in broadly parallel
ways, with collective or “altruistic” considerations being the most important
factors and self-oriented or “personal” reasons having a lower priority in each
nation. However, where Americans and Canadians do differ, the patterns of
results support our working hypothesis. In other words, Americans place
more emphasis than Canadians on six of nine altruistic motivations for volunteering, with higher average scores on compassion for the needy, giving back
to others, a sense of moral obligation, a desire to help the disadvantaged,
to bring social or political change, and especially religious beliefs. The
American/Canadian differences on these six questions are not large, except
for the religious beliefs item, but they are statistically significant. Moreover,
when we analyze the data using a composite scale of the nine altruism measures, the national difference is sustained, even with controls for the possible
confounding effects of seven other predictor variables. That is, the higher level
of altruism expressed by Americans is not attributable to national variations
in gender distribution, racial composition, religious affiliation, frequency of
attendance at religious services, age distribution, educational attainment, or
socioeconomic status. We also find, as expected, that removing religious
beliefs from the scale of altruistic motivations substantially reduces the American/Canadian difference, although it does not eliminate it. Religious issues
provide stronger motives for community and social activities in the United
States than they do in Canada.
In addition to assessing national divergences in the altruism of volunteers,
we also have considered whether Americans and Canadians differ with
respect to the importance that they attach to personal reasons for voluntarism.
Here, the data provide only limited evidence of national differences. We have
found that Canadians are slightly more likely than Americans to point to personal reasons when asked about why they do volunteer work. This pattern is
evident for the overall scale and for three of five personal motivations—to
gain skills and experience, for social reasons, and because of having time on
one’s hands. However, the differences do not hold after controls. These results
indicate that the American/Canadian difference in regard to personal motivations operates through some of the control variables. That is to say, it is
because Canadians are, on average, less likely to be Protestants, are lower in
education, and are lower in socioeconomic status that they stress personal reasons for volunteering more than do Americans. These findings do not negate
the national difference before controls, but they do clarify its causes.
We turn now to the main effects of the seven predictors that were used as
control variables in the present study. Most notable here are the effects for education, socioeconomic status, and race. In the case of education and

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

399

socioeconomic status, previous research has consistently shown that people
with relatively high levels of educational attainment and socioeconomic status are the most likely to join and be active in voluntary associations. What our
analysis indicates, however, is that the reasons why such individuals engage
in volunteer work are less likely to be altruistic than are the motivations of
other, less privileged volunteers. In other words, in those instances where
poorer and less-educated people are able to volunteer, it is these Americans
and Canadians who are more apt to be moved by compassion and a desire to
assist their fellow citizens. Although less advantaged volunteers may have
less in the way of social resources or “social capital” than others have, our
research suggests that they are also more likely to apply whatever resources
they do possess to the general welfare and the public good by helping those in
need, giving hope and dignity to other disadvantaged people, and otherwise
giving back to their communities.
Because of the tendency for volunteers from the lower educational and
socioeconomic strata to rank higher than other volunteers on our altruism
scale, it may seem surprising that they rank higher on the personal-reasons
measure as well. However, it is clear that these two outcomes need not be contradictory because it is conceivable that people who volunteer out of a desire
to help others also can be motivated to help themselves in the process. Our
finding that the two scales used in this analysis are positively intercorrelated is
consistent with this interpretation. Thus, especially in the case of poorer and
less-educated volunteers, who, as noted above, lack the social capital and
related advantages enjoyed by others, volunteering is a potentially important
means for making contacts, acquiring skills, and gaining experience, all of
which could prove useful for personal betterment or advancement. Those volunteers who have higher education and socioeconomic status, on the other
hand, would presumably have sufficient advantages in social connections
and social capital that they would have a lesser need or desire to volunteer for
these more self-oriented reasons.
This brings us to the findings involving race. Here it may be tempting to
draw conclusions that are similar to those that we have made with respect to
education and socioeconomic status because, in this case as well, the results
show that it is the relatively less privileged or powerful individuals, that is,
non-Whites as opposed to Whites, who are more likely to emphasize altruistic
factors as their reasons for doing work with voluntary organizations. However, there are some differences that suggest the patterns for race may not be
quite the same as for education or socioeconomic status. To begin with, unlike
the lower educational and socioeconomic strata, it is not clear from previous
American research that non-Whites, despite also being a relatively less “central” or less “dominant” group, exhibit lower levels of voluntary-association
involvement than Whites, at least if education, socioeconomic status, and
related factors such as income are statistically controlled (recall, e.g., Knoke,
1986; Smith, 1975, 1994; Wilson, 2000). Second, although our results show that,
similar to the less educated and those from the lower socioeconomic strata,

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

400

Hwang et al.

non-Whites rank altruistic motives relatively highly, we have found, unlike
the other two social groupings, that non-Whites do not tend to rank personal
reasons for volunteering more highly than do other respondents. The latter
pattern is not wholly consistent with previous research by Clary et al. (1996),
who found that non-Whites were more likely than Whites to be motivated by
altruistic and by nonaltruistic motivations when engaging in volunteer activity. Here again, we can only speculate about explanations for our results, but
they may indicate that, net of any socioeconomic, educational, religious, or
other considerations, non-Whites simply have a stronger sense of and experience with the unmet needs of the people in their communities. As a result,
non-Whites in both nations would feel a greater desire or obligation than other
people to put a high priority on trying to achieve altruistic ends through their
volunteer work. It is important that this interpretation, along with explanations for the education and socioeconomic-status effects, be tested more fully
with future research.
Certainly, the patterns of reasons for volunteering by race are common
across the two national samples, as are the patterns of effects for the other
social-background factors. Also, as we have shown, the factor structures for
the reasons to volunteer, as well as the rates of volunteering, are very much
alike in the two countries. Taken together, these results strongly suggest similar dynamics for the organization of volunteer work in the United States and
Canada. This makes it even more interesting that we have found evidence of a
national difference in the level of altruistic volunteering. Although these differences are small, they are in the direction that we would predict based on the
differing roles of the state and religion in the United States and Canada. Moreover, they are sustained even with controls for the effects of other predictors. It
appears that the dominant ideologies associated with government and with
religion create somewhat different commitments to altruism in the two nations.
Generally, our findings concerning American and Canadian reasons for voluntary activity are consistent with a large body of comparative research that
shows that the two peoples have many fundamental behavioral and attitudinal similarities, as well as certain subtle and yet important differences (see,
e.g., Grabb & Curtis, 2005; Lipset, 1990, 1996).
Notes
1. Although samples from the United States and Canada were studied in other waves of the
World Values Surveys (WVS), that is, those conducted in the early 1980s and in 1999-2001, neither
of these waves includes questions on people’s reasons for joining voluntary organizations. Therefore, the WVS data from the early 1990s provide the only opportunity in recent decades to do the
kind of comparative analysis presented here.
2. The national difference in the proportion of individuals who actively work for at least one
voluntary association is not statistically significant. Analyses also show that the proportion who
work for at least two voluntary associations are essentially the same, at 23.1% for Americans and
22.5% for Canadians. Respondents were asked about their participation in 16 different types of

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

401

associations. The American and Canadian patterns with respect to the types of associations that
people join were quite similar. The only substantial difference, as expected, is that Americans are
about twice as likely as Canadians to be active in religious organizations (28% vs. 15%), although,
even here, Canadians, similar to Americans, are more active in religious organizations than in any
other types of association. Americans are less likely than Canadians to be active in sports or recreation organizations (8% vs. 12%) but are more likely to be active in youth groups (9% vs. 7%). For
the remaining types of organizations, national differences were very small (usually less than 1%)
and typically were not statistically significant.
3. We conducted parallel factor analyses for the American and Canadian respondents considered separately as a check for whether the factor structures were different in the two samples.
These analyses revealed virtually the same patterns in both national groups. For example, the four
items that loaded most highly on the altruism scale in the American sample also did so in the
Canadian sample, and showed very similar scores. In the same way, the four items that loaded
most highly on the personal-reasons scale in the United States did so in Canada as well, and also
showed very similar scores.
4. One other reason for doing the controlled analyses is that the American and Canadian samples differ somewhat in the distribution of the seven background predictors. Compared with the
Canadian sample, the American sample has proportionally more non-Whites and more Protestants. The American sample is also higher in religious attendance, younger, more highly educated, and higher on the measure of socioeconomic status. The two samples are not significantly
different with respect to gender composition.
5. Separate analyses (not shown in the tables) reveal that all of the significant relationships
between the predictor variables and the two scales are in the same direction in each national sample. We also conducted further multivariate analyses that are not presented here, in which we
compared reasons for voluntary activity across four regional samples: the U.S. North, the U.S.
South, English Canada, and Quebec. Respondents from both the North and the South are higher
on altruism than the English-Canadian reference group, whereas Quebecers are not significantly
different from English Canadians. On the personal-reasons scale, Quebecers are significantly
higher than the other three groups, but these three groups do not differ significantly from each
other.

References
Bibby, R. (1987). Fragmented gods. Toronto, Canada: Irwin.
Bibby, R. (1993). Unknown gods. Toronto, Canada: Stoddart.
Bibby, R. (2002). Restless gods. Toronto, Canada: Stoddart.
Clary, E. G., & Miller, J. (1986). Socialization and situational influences on sustained altruism. Child
Development, 57, 1358-1369.
Clary, E. G., & Orenstein, L. (1991). The amount and effectiveness of help: The relationship of
motives and abilities to helping behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 58-64.
Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., Ridge, R., Copeland, J., Stukas, A., Haugen, J., et al. (1998). Understanding
and assessing the motivations of volunteers: A functional approach. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74(6), 1516-1530.
Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., & Stukas, A.. (1996). Volunteers’ motivations: Findings from a national
survey. Nonprofit and Voluntary Action Quarterly, 25, 485-505.
Curtis, J. (1971). Voluntary associations joining: A cross-national comparative note. American
Sociological Review, 36, 872-80.
Curtis, J., Baer, D., & Grabb, E.. (2001, December). Nations of joiners: Explaining voluntary association membership in democratic societies. American Sociological Review, 66, 783-805.
Curtis, J., & Grabb, E. (2002). Involvement in the organizational base of new social movements in
English Canada and French Canada. In D. Baer (Ed.), Political sociology: Canadian perspectives
(pp. 164-181). Don Mills, UK: Oxford University Press.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

402

Hwang et al.

Curtis, J., Grabb, E., & Baer, D. (1992). Voluntary association membership in fifteen countries: A
comparative analysis. American Sociological Review, 57(2), 139-152.
Curtis, J., Grabb, E., Perks, T., & Chui, T. (2004). Political involvement, civic engagement, and
social inequality. In J. Curtis, E. Grabb, & N. Guppy (Eds.), Social inequality in Canada: Patterns,
problems, policies (4th ed., pp. 431-449). Scarborough, Canada: Pearson Education Canada.
Curtis, J., Lambert, R., Brown, S., & Kay, B. (1989a). Affiliating with voluntary associations:
Canadian-American comparisons. Canadian Journal of Sociology, 14(2), 143-162.
Curtis, J., Lambert, R., Brown, S., & Kay, B. (1989b). On Lipset’s measure of voluntary association
differences between Canada and the United States. Canadian Journal of Sociology, 14(3), 383-389.
Grabb, E., & Curtis, J. (1992). Voluntary association activity in English Canada, French Canada,
and the United States: A multivariate analysis. Canadian Journal of Sociology, 17, 378-388.
Grabb, E., & Curtis, J. (2005). Regions apart: The four societies of Canada and the United States. Don
Mills, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hall, M., McKeown, L., & Karen R. (2001). Caring Canadians, involved Canadians: Highlights from the
2000 national survey of giving, volunteering, and participating (Catalogue 71-542-XIE). Ottawa,
Canada: Ministry of Industry.
Hallenstvedt, A. (1974). Formal voluntary associations in Norway. In D. H. Smith (Ed.), Voluntary
action research (pp. 219-30). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Hodgkinson, V. (2003). Volunteering in global perspective. In P. Dekker & L. Halman (Eds.), The
values of volunteering: Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 35-53). New York: Kluwer Academic/
Plenum.
Inglehart, R. (2003). Modernization and volunteering. In P. Dekker & L. Halman (Eds.), The values
of volunteering: Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 55-70). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
Janoski, T. (1998). Citizenship and civil society. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Knoke, D. (1986). Associations and interest groups. Annual Review of Sociology, 12, 1-21.
Lemon, M., Palisi, B. J., & Jacobsen, P. E. (1972). Dominant statuses and involvement in formal voluntary associations. Journal of Voluntary Action Research, 1(2), 30-42.
Lipset, S. M. (1963). The first new nation. New York: Basic Books.
Lipset, S. M. (1990). Continental divide: The values and institutions of the United States and Canada.
New York: Routledge.
Lipset, S. M. (1996). American exceptionalism: A double-edged sword. New York: Norton.
Milbrath, L., & Goel, M. L. (1977). Political participation: How and why do people get involved in politics? (2nd ed.). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Musick, M. A., Wilson, J., & Bynum, W., Jr. (2000, June). Race and formal volunteering: The differential effects of class and religion. Social Forces, 78(4), 1539-1570.
Olsen, G. M. (2002). The politics of the welfare state: Canada, Sweden, and the United States. Don Mills,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Ray, J. (2003, August 12). Worlds apart: Religion in Canada, Britain, U.S. The Gallup Poll Tuesday
Briefing, pp. 108-109.
Reed, P., & Selbee, L. K. (2003). Do people who volunteer have a distinct ethos? A Canadian study.
In P. Dekker & L. Halman (Eds.), The values of volunteering: Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 91109). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
Reimer, S. (1995). A look at cultural effects on religiosity: A comparison between the United States
and Canada. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 34(4), 445-457.
Smith, D. H. (1975). Voluntary action and voluntary groups. Annual Review of Sociology, 1, 247-270.
Smith, D. H. (1981). Altruism, volunteers, and volunteering. Journal of Voluntary Action Research,
10, 21-36.
Smith, D. H. (1994). Determinants of voluntary association participation and volunteering. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 23, 243-263.
Verba, S., Schlozman, K. L., & Brady, H. E. (1995). Voice and equality: Civic voluntarism in American
politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Watt, D. H. (1991). United States: Cultural challenges to the voluntary sector. In R. Wuthnow (Ed.),
Between states and markets: The voluntary sector in comparative perspective (pp. 243-287). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

Why Get Involved?

403

Wilson, J. (2000). Volunteering. Annual Review of Sociology, 26, 215-240.
Wilson, J., & Janoski, T. (1995). The contribution of religion to volunteer work. Sociology of Religion,
56(2), 137-152.
Wilson, J., & Musick, M. A. (1997). Work and volunteering: The long arm of the job. Social Forces,
76, 251-272.
Wuthnow, R. (1991). Acts of compassion: Caring for others and helping ourselves. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Monica Hwang is a graduate student in sociology at the University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada. Her primary research interests include the study of voluntary associations in Canada and other nations, social inequality, sociological theory, and race and ethnic relations.
Edward Grabb is professor of sociology at the University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. His
research has focused mainly on social inequality in advanced societies and on comparisons of Canada and the
United States. His publications include the books Regions Apart: The Four Societies of Canada and the
United States (2005), which is coauthored with James Curtis, and Theories of Social Inequality: Classical and Contemporary Perspectives (2002), as well as articles that have appeared in the American Sociological Review, Social Forces, Public Opinion Quarterly, the Canadian Review of Sociology and
Anthropology, and elsewhere.
James Curtis is professor of sociology at the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. He has long
been interested in the comparative analysis of the United States, Canada, and other nations, especially in the
areas of voluntary-association involvement, social inequality, and social values. He has published his research in such journals as the American Sociological Review, the American Journal of Sociology, the
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, the Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, and elsewhere. His books include Social Problems: A Canadian Perspective (2004), coauthored
with Lorne Tepperman; Regions Apart (2005), coauthored with Edward Grabb; Social Inequality in
Canada (2004), coedited with Edward Grabb and Neil Guppy; and others.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on April 28, 2015

