International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing Volume 6 Number 3

Brand orientation in the charity sector:
A framework for discussion and research
Philippa Hankinson
University of Surrey Roehampton, 80 Roehampton Lane, London SW15 5SL, UK;
Tel: ⫹44 (0)20 8392 3484; Fax: ⫹44 (0)20 8392 3646; e-mail:
p.hankinson@roehampton.ac.uk

Received (in revised form): 24th January, 2001

Philippa Hankinson is a senior lecturer
in marketing at the University of Surrey
Roehampton with a special interest in brands
and their management. Under her former name
of Cowking, she has co-authored ‘Branding in
Practice’ and ‘The Reality of Global Brands’, as
well as writing several journal articles and
conference research papers in the UK and USA.
She was formerly Director of Research and
Planning at Clarke Hooper Consulting. She has
now extended her research focus into the
charity sector where she acts as a brand
consultant to several charity organisations.

ABSTRACT
Some charity organisations are turning to
charity brand status, not only in terms of a
name and logo but more importantly in terms
of communicating value and meaning to their
stakeholders. Brand orientation is described in
this paper as the extent to which charity
organisations regard themselves as brands, an
indication of how much (or how little) organisations accept the theory and practice of
branding. Through literature-based and fieldbased research, this paper examines the nature
of brand orientation in the charity sector. A
conceptual framework of brand orientation is
proposed with antecedent factors which may
augment or diminish levels of brand orientation
and consequences which may follow its adoption. A number of research propositions are put

forward which constitute both a framework for
discussion and a research agenda for the charity
sector.
INTRODUCTION
Brands have long been an essential
component of the for-profit, marketing
discipline, driven primarily by a need to
create and maintain a point of difference in an increasingly competitive
environment. By contrast, very little
scholarly activity has been devoted to the
development and strategic use of brands
in the charity sector in either the
UK or the USA. Arguably, this has
resulted from the greater complexity of
charity brands as opposed to commercial
brands,1 difficulties in committing internal
stakeholders to branding concepts,2 the
risk of being seen to be ‘too commercial’,3
or even ‘immoral’, (Sargeant).4
Nevertheless, many charity organisations are now turning to charity brand
status, not only in terms of a name and
logo but also in terms of communicating
value and meaning which, in the USA,
represents 6.4 per cent of GDP, and, in the
UK, represents 4.0 per cent.5 Holistically,
a brand may be described as the totality of
perceptions and experiences surrounding a
product, a service, an organisation or,
indeed, a charity. Such perceptions and

International Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
Vol. 6 No. 3, 2001, pp. 231–242.
䉷Henry Stewart Publications,
1465–4520

Page 231

experiences may be grouped according to
two dimensions: the functional, what the
brand does; and the symbolic, what the
brand represents.6 Together, these dimensions constitute the brand personality, the
essence of the brand. Brand orientation
may be described as ‘the extent to which
the organisation regards itself as a brand’.7
It is a measure of how much (or how
little) organisations accept the theory and
practice of branding. Hence a brandoriented organisation is one whose thinking and behaviours are consistent with the
brand construct or the framework within
which brands operate.
Through literature- and field-based research, this paper explores the domain and
boundaries of brand orientation. It seeks
to provide an operational definition of
brand orientation whose constituent parts
may be empirically tested and to develop
a number of research propositions which
may constitute a research agenda for the
charity sector. In this way, the paper hopes
to provide a foundation for the systematic
development of brand orientation in the
charity sector, thereby responding to the
dearth of academic writing in this area
and, in particular, to the challenges made
on both sides of the Atlantic,8,9 of the
need to develop a set of theories and a
framework for discussion which will better equip the charity sector for the 21st
century.
METHODOLOGY
The methodology draws on extant literature in brands and brand orientation and,
in compliance with Hunt’s view10 that
theories should ‘truly say something about
the world’, augments these with findings
from individual, in-depth interviews. Fifteen in-depth interviews were, therefore,
carried out with fundraising and/or communication directors whose decisionmaking remit included whether to ‘brand’

Page 232

their charity organisation or not. The
sample represented key charity sectors
in the UK,11 namely medicine/health,
general welfare, international aid, animal
protection and environment. It was further categorised by size with (almost)
equal representation of large charities,
defined as those with an annual income of
£50m or more; medium-sized charities,
defined as those with an annual income of
£5m and up to £50m; and small charities,
defined as those with an annual income of
less than £5m.
The sample may, therefore, be described
as ‘purposive’,12 ie representative of a
wide range of experience and perspectives, and appropriate to theory building
and the elicitation of constructs and research propositions.13
A topic guide was used to steer the
overall interviewing process in line with
an inductive research approach14 and
qualitative research practices.15 However,
as this was essentially elicitation research,
a ‘rolling approach’ was used, consistent
with qualitative research practice.16 This
typically frees the researcher from the
constraints of a pre-set topic guide by
allowing emerging themes from earlier
interviews to be fed into later interviews.
Hence the basic topic guide included the
following broad areas:
— to what extent do they perceive their
charity organisation as a brand?
— how is this manifested in their thinking
and behaviour?
— what factors augment or diminish this
perception?
— what are the consequences of this
perception?
Each in-depth interview typically lasted
45–60 minutes, was audio-taped and subsequently transcribed. Each transcript was
then subject to detailed content analysis,17
in which common themes were iden-

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

tified. Fieldwork was carried out between
March and June 1999.
Hence, the research methodology was
designed to provide a synthesis of literature-based and field-based propositions
in keeping with the traditions of Kohli
and Jaworski18 and de Chernatony and
Dall’Olmo Riley.19
LITERATURE REVIEW
A review of the literature on brands
and brand orientation in the charity sector reveals a paucity of scholarly activity
on brands until, perhaps, the last decade
and, at the time of writing, none at all
on brand orientation. This is surprising, given the fact that marketing ideas
have been applied to the nonprofit sector
for at least the last 30 years,20–22 and
that brands and their management are
an integral part of the marketing discipline. However, examples of marketing
concepts and techniques as applied to
the charity sector, do exist and include
donor modelling studies,23–25 the nature
of exchange,26,27 market orientation,28–30
relationship marketing,31 and cause-related
marketing,32,33 all of which suggest that
the charity sector may already benefit
from ideas from neighbouring disciplines.
Recent brand-focused articles, however, bear witness to three core themes,
derived principally from case study reports
and brand practice papers. The three
themes are as follows: 1) analysing the
brand, 2) communicating the brand, and
3) using the brand as a strategic resource.
Understanding the brand
Case studies such as Crisis,34 the
Children’s Society,35 and Barnardo’s36
highlight the need for charities to develop
and build attractive brand personalities for
their organisations, both as a means of
differentiation in an increasingly competitive environment and as a means of

building meaning into relationships with
charity stakeholders. The trigger to a
re-branding exercise was often a
fundraising crisis when it was discovered
that the ‘old’ brand personality no longer
‘fitted’ politically correct thinking, for
instance the move from disabled to
enabling charities, or when the existing
charity brand personality no longer
provided a satisfying relationship with
stakeholders, for example, the metamorphosis of Greenpeace’s ‘blokes in boats’ to
a scientifically based, environmental
charity with global responsibilities. These
studies lend credence to the view that
charity brands are not easily explained by
definitions that focus on a name and logo
alone,37,38 but require a more complex
analysis that distinguishes between the
functional attributes of the brands — its
cause — and the symbolic values of the
brand — its beliefs.39
Communicating the brand
Tapp40 raises the issue of ‘soundbite
fundraising’ when brands are used to
communicate complex messages, briefly
and simply, capitalising on the a priori
reputation or personality of the brand.
Roberts-Wray41 emphasises the importance of choosing appropriate and
contextually sensitive communication
channels which are consistent with the
brand reputation or personality. Telephone
fundraising, for example, may be
appropriate for the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(RSPCA), with its brand reputation for
direct action, but it would not be
appropriate for Imperial Cancer Research
Fund. Saxton42 argues that different
messages should be used for different
stakeholders, such as the press, volunteers,
donors or politicians. The issue here,
however, is to ensure that multiple
messages still communicate the brand in a
clear and consistent way so that the

Page 233

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Hankinson

integrity of the brand personality is
maintained.
Using the brand as a strategic
resource
There was little recognition in the
literature of using brands as a strategic
resource with some exceptions, for instance, Lindsy and Murphy’s study43 of
charity brands to change public opinion
and Tonkiss and Passey’s study,44 of brands
to build donor trust. Yet this is an
important area in the for-profit sector, as
evidenced by the willingness of companies
to offer hugely inflated prices in takeover
battles for well-known brands. Nestle,
for instance, paid £2.5bn in 1988 for
Rowntree’s tangible net assets which were
worth around £300m at the time. The
rationale behind such extraordinary valuations is the perception that successful
brands are a company’s lifeblood, their
future source of income, and there is no
reason to suppose that charity brands
might not be used similarly.
The literature review has identified
three key areas of brand research, although
none is particularly well documented. It is
perhaps indicative of the fact that too little
attention has been given to the topic of
brands and the branding process within
the charity sector, lending additional
support to Tapp’s view45 that ‘charities are
under-using one of their most powerful
assets: their brands’.

IN-DEPTH INTERVIEWS
Charity managers were able to provide
clear examples of how and in what circumstances they perceived their charity as a
brand and, in so doing, helped develop the
brand orientation construct more precisely.
The same three themes emerged as from
the academic literature, but in addition a
fourth theme proved important to charity
managers, that of managing the brand.

Page 234

Understanding the brand
Most charity managers agreed that in
perceiving their organisation as a brand,
it was important to analyse how
different stakeholders in the organisation understood the values it represented. Hence an important first step
was to undertake a brand audit
among its various stakeholders including
employees, trustees, donors, non donors,
journalists, government representatives
and so on. Sometimes the audit revealed
a ‘confused’ personality for the brand,
with different stakeholders perceiving
the brand in different ways. Hence, it
was important for charity managers to
agree a ‘template’ or common personality for the organisation which
would reflect more accurately (and more
consistently) its functional attributes, its
charity cause and its symbolic values —
those to which stakeholders might align
their own values in mutually satisfying
relationships.
Communicating the brand
Charity managers distinguished more
clearly than is apparent from the literature
review that brand communication comes
in more than one guise. It may be visual,
scripted or behavioural. Visual communicators, arguably the most highly
developed form of brand communication,
included name and logo, media coverage
and websites. Scripted communicators
included straplines such as ‘tackling
disadvantage by realising people’s potential’, used by Voluntary Service Overseas
(VSO), while behavioural communicators
provided opportunities to bring the
charity’s brand values ‘alive’. For instance,
the RSPCA may be seen to be behaving
consistently with its cause and its symbolic
values of being ‘caring’, ‘responsible’,
‘authoritative’ and ‘effective’, by pursuing
those who perpetrate cruelty to animals,
through the courts.

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

Using the brand as a strategic
resource
Charity managers used their brands,
strategically, as a shorthand communication of what the brand was, its cause, and
what it represented, its values. This
enabled charities to communicate large
amounts of complex information, clearly
and consistently. Most frequently, charities
used their brands to: aid staff/volunteer
recruitment; educate and, sometimes, to
change public opinion; offer opportunities for conscientious consumption
through cause-related marketing partnerships; lobby parliament on issues such as
child abuse or environmental pollution;
and build trust in the absence, sometimes,
of more complete knowledge about the
charity organisations. Charity brands were,
therefore, being used by charity managers
to fulfil a more extensive range of
organisational objectives than was apparent from the academic literature, and
arguably, in a more effective way than
‘unbranded’ charity organisations could
hope to achieve.
Managing the brand actively and
deliberately
This was an area that charity managers
were only just beginning to address. They
did not consider it a frontline responsibility, nor did they anticipate much support from within the charity organisation.
Indeed, some reported that ‘conservatism
from the top’ was a significant barrier to
the introduction of new ideas and techniques, particularly by those from noncommercial backgrounds who perceived
their role as guardians of the charity cause
and its finances rather than marketers of a
competitive product. As a result, some
charity brands survived by default. On
the other hand, several charity managers
from the in-depth interviews did regard
their organisations as brands and had been
practising brand management skills, albeit

in a fragmented way, over a number of
years. Nevertheless, they often felt isolated in their thinking and commitment to
brand practices. They felt their efforts were
being hampered by a lack of organisational
responsibility for the brand, so that brand
management was carried out piecemeal and
without central co-ordination. Managing
the brand actively and deliberately was a
crucial step in co-ordinating brand activity
for the charity and engaging others in that
process.
DEVELOPING THE BRAND
ORIENTATION CONSTRUCT
Drawing together the themes from the
academic literature and the in-depth interviews which characterise the way in
which brands are regarded in the charity
sector, the following working definition
of brand orientation is offered.
Brand orientation involves:

— an understanding of what the brand
does and the values it represents
— communicating the charity brand to
both external and internal audiences
— using the brand as a strategic resource
— managing the brand actively and
deliberately.
It may be more useful to define brand
orientation as a continuum rather than a
dichotomous construct which implies
either presence or absence. A consequence of this will be to facilitate
measurement of the construct by allowing
respondents to indicate the degree to
which their charity is brand-oriented,
rather than whether brand orientation
exists or not. Furthermore, it may be
useful to consider antecedents which may
augment or diminish levels of brand
orientation in charities, and consequences
that may follow its adoption. Thus, in
outline, the brand orientation construct

Page 235

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Hankinson

Figure 1 Outline
model of brand
orientation construct

Antecedent

Brand orientation

includes the three steps shown in Figure
1. These are discussed below together
with appropriate research propositions
which may further the discussion of brand
orientation in the charity sector.

Consequences

into a brand. Hence the following
research proposition may be formulated:
P1 The greater the personal vision of
key charity managers, the greater the
degree of brand orientation in charity
organisations.

RESEARCH PROPOSITIONS
Antecedents
Four factors consistently emerge from the
literature and field interviews that seem to
impact on levels of brand orientation in
charities. These are:

— personal vision
— relevant educational and job experience with brands
— a supportive organisational culture and
— environmental factors that may influence organisational objectives.
Personal vision
The academic literature, mostly from
outside the charity sector, emphasises the
importance of personal vision in developing and implementing new ideas within
organisations.46,47 Leadership studies48–50
also indicate the importance of commitment and, at times, a willingness to take
risks in order to achieve acceptance of
new ideas within a company. From the
in-depth interviews, it was clear that often
kick-starting a change of status from
charity organisation to charity brand was
a high-level appointment to a key post
such as Fundraising Director, Communication Director, or, as in one case,
Brand Director, of someone totally committed to transforming the organisation

Page 236

Relevant educational and job experience
with brands
Hankinson and Cowking51 report that
brand managers are well educated and that
some have management-related graduate
qualifications such as an MBA. The
in-depth interviews also indicated that
those most committed to the brand
construct had qualifications at undergraduate or postgraduate level in management- or marketing-related programmes.
Almost certainly, these programmes would
include courses in brands and their
management. In addition, the field interviews also revealed that several charity
managers in key positions had cut their
branding teeth in the commercial sector.
Hence, the following research propositions may be formulated:

P2 The more relevant the educational
achievement of charity managers, the
greater the degree of brand orientation.
P3 Senior management experience of
brand orientation in the for-profit sector will increase brand orientation in
the charity sector.
Supportive organisational culture
The academic literature, again mostly from

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

outside the charity sector, argues in favour
of supportive organisational cultures to
encourage the successful adoption of new
ideas.52,53 Companies such as 3M and
Microsoft ‘allow’ employees to experiment
and sometimes to fail, in order to foster a
climate of innovation and change. The
depth interviews, however, suggested a
more cautious culture in charity organisations which, in some cases, went so far as
resistance to change. Brand knowledge
and training, for instance, were not
always considered a priority among charity
trustees, whose power and influence would
be crucial to the introduction of brand
orientation. Hence, the following research
proposition may be formulated:
P4 Charities with supportive organisational cultures demonstrate higher
levels of brand orientation than charities
with more cautious cultures.
Environmental factors
The academic literature points to a
range of factors which are shaping a
new environment for charities to which
brand orientation could offer a successful
response.54 Charitable giving, for instance,
has changed over the last 20 years,55 with
fewer households giving to charities and
younger households giving the least of all.
The lottery has often been blamed for
declining levels of charitable giving,
although the evidence does not support
this.56,57 Balabanis et al,58 report a significant increase in the use of a market
orientation in the Top 200 UK charities
over the last five years. Cause-related
marketing (CRM) is on the increase and
may provide a long-term survival strategy
for charities.59 Donor behaviour is becoming more complex with donors
more demanding of greater transparency
and of more information on financial
accountability.60 The in-depth interviews
also confirmed that the increasing number

of charities in the sector were putting
pressure on the donor’s dollar, highlighting the need for greater differentiation
between charities. Charities need to assess
the resilience of their organisations to a
changing and more complex environment
and, if necessary adopt an alternative
strategic response, such as brand orientation. Hence, the following research
proposition is formulated:
P5 The greater the degree of environmental change, the more likely the
adoption of brand orientation.
Brand orientation dimensions
The academic literature and in-depth
interviews suggest brand orientation
encompasses four conceptually distinct
dimensions. However, it is not yet clear
whether these dimensions are interconnected or whether each dimension
represents a distinct component. Hence
the following propositions may be
formulated:

P6 Although brand orientation is conceptualised as consisting of four distinct
components, these may be combined
into a single factor, a general factor of
brand orientation.
P7 Brand orientation consists of four
independent and conceptually distinct
dimensions.
Brand consequences
Three factors emerged from the academic
literature and the in-depth interviews as
consequences of brand orientation. These
were:

— the development of a strong brand
— the successful fulfilment of organisational objectives
— an inclusive employee culture.

Page 237

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Hankinson

Figure 2 The brand
orientation construct

Antecedents

Brand orientation

Consequences

Personal vision

Understanding
the brand

Developing a
strong brand

Communicating
the brand

Successful
fulfilment of
organisational
objectives

Relevant
educational and
job experience
Supportive
organisational
culture

Using the brand
as a strategic
resource

Environment
factors

Managing the
brand deliberately
and actively

The development of a strong brand
Saxton61 argues that strong brands come
from strong beliefs (values) and this is
supported by case study reports such as
Crisis,62 The Children’s Society,63 and
Barnardo’s.64 Clarifying a charity’s brand
values is a vital step in building a strong
brand65 and one that may help differentiate charities operating within the same
sector. The in-depth interviews also
endorsed the importance of understanding
the values of the brand and thereafter their
clear and consistent communication. Only
then can donors perceive the kind of ‘fit’
that exists between their values and those
of the charity which enables them to
support those whose values most closely
match their own. Hence, the following
research proposition may be formulated:

P8 Strong brands are more likely to
result from brand-oriented charities.
Successful fulfilment of organisation
objectives
Using the brand as a strategic resource is
being increasingly adopted by the charity
sector,66 mirroring its rather longer estab-

Page 238

Inclusive
employee culture

lishment in the for-profit sector.67–69 As
such it may be used to fulfil a variety of
organisational objectives by capturing the
essence of what the charity does and the
values it represents. Hence, the following
research proposition may be formulated:
P9 The greater the level of brand
orientation, the greater the likelihood
of fulfiling organisational objectives.
Inclusive employee culture
The academic literature emphasises the
importance of ‘taking employees with you’
when successfully branding or re-branding
a charity organisation.70,71 Additionally, the
in-depth interviews confirmed the importance of involving employees both in the
initial brand development process and the
subsequent brand launch or re-launch.
Usually this took the form of staff meetings,
training seminars and, sometimes, roadshows to the charity’s regional affiliates.
Hence, the following research proposition
may be formulated:

P10 The greater the level of brand
orientation, the more likely the
achievement of staff involvement.

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

Thus the brand orientation construct with
antecedents and consequences, as described above, may be illustrated as shown
in Figure 2.
The ten research propositions identified above fit the broad framework of
brand orientation as shown in Figure 2.
Nevertheless, these propositions are not
finite in number. Opportunities exist for
extending the research agenda by adding
further antecedents or consequences of
brand orientation, which in turn will
increase opportunities for further research
propositions.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The paper explores the domain of the
brand orientation construct. It provides
a working definition of the construct
with antecedents which may increase or
diminish levels of brand orientation and
consequences which may result from its
adoption. The paper puts forward a
number of research propositions which
constitute a framework for discussion and
a research agenda for the charity sector.
For instance, questions might be asked
on how much understanding charity
employees have of the specific values their
charity represents (brand orientation construct), how much training is directed to
achieve that understanding (antecedent)
and the extent to which subsequent
employee understanding leads to the
development of a stronger brand (consequence). Alternatively, questions might be
posed on how actively and deliberately
the charity brand is being managed (brand
orientation construct), how much this is
driven by personal vision (antecedent),
and whether this results in the more
successful fulfilment of organisational objectives (consequence). In addition, a
suitable measure of brand orientation
needs to be developed in order to test the
construct empirically. Item statements

which are thought to reflect the brand
orientation construct will need to be
generated and then correlated against a
suitable validation scale.
Three further points also need to be
addressed. First, the financial implications
of building and sustaining a charity brand
require considerable time and financial
resources which inevitably means that
finances will be diverted from service
provision. Therefore, the introduction and
adoption of brand orientation in charities
may only be perceived as a benefit if the
positive consequences exceed the costs
of implementation, which is arguably of
greater significance to smaller charities.
Secondly, for the larger charities, particularly those which already operate at a
global level, for instance, Oxfam, the Red
Cross and Save the Children, transforming
a global organisation into a global brand
may help reduce the inevitable tensions
that result from merging national charities
into global charities. By making the brand
an intellectual and behavioural priority
for all national affiliates, a greater sense
of oneness and intra-organisational cooperation might be achieved. Thirdly, it is
worth noting the particular appropriateness of brand orientation to the charity
sector. By its very nature, branding is a
medium- to long-term process. Some of
the most successful brands in the forprofit sector are more than 100 years old,
a result of years of strategic development and sustained levels of financial
investment.72 Charities generally have far
more complex organisational aims than
commercial enterprises, for instance, ‘alleviating world hunger’ rather than selling 10 per cent more cars. They are
also less subject to the short-term pressures of satisfying shareholder demands for
the City or Wall Street. Charities can,
therefore, ‘afford’ to take a longer-term
perspective which places them in a good
position to develop a brand-oriented ap-

Page 239

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Hankinson

proach in their thinking and managerial
practices.

REFERENCES
(1) Hankinson, P. (2000) ‘Brand
Orientation in Charity Organisations:
Qualitative Research into Key Charity
Sectors’, International Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 5,
No. 3, pp. 207–219.
(2) Grounds, J. and Harkness, J. (1998)
‘Developing a Brand from Within:
Involving Employees and Volunteers
when Developing a New Brand
Position’, Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 3, No. 2,
pp. 179–184.
(3) Richie, R., Swami, S. and Weinberg,
C. (1999) ‘A Brand New World for
Non Profits’, International Journal of
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 26–42.
(4) Sargeant, A. (1999), ‘Editorial’,
International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4, No. 1,
pp. 14–17.
(5) Anheier, H. and Salamon, L. (1998)
‘Facets of the Nonprofit Sector: Policy
Implications of Scale and Structure in
Third Sector Organisation in a Changing
Policy Context’, Proceedings of the 20th
Anniversary Conference of the Centre
for Voluntary Organisations, CVO.LSE.
(6) Hankinson, G. and Cowking, P. (1995)
‘What do You Really Mean by a
Brand?’ The Journal of Brand Management,
Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 43–50.
(7) Hankinson (2000) op. cit.
(8) Paton, R. (1996) ‘What’s Different
About Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing? A Research Agenda’, Journal
of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 23–31.
(9) Ferris, J. (1998) ‘The Role of the
Nonprofit Sector in a Self-governing
Society: A View from the US’, Voluntas,
Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 137–157.
(10) Hunt, S. (1990) ‘Truth in Marketing

Page 240

Theory and Research’, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 54, pp. 1–15.
(11) CAF/Mintel (1996) Marketing
Intelligence Report, March.
(12) Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967) ‘The
Discovery of Grounded Theory’, Aldine
Publishing Company, Chicago, USA.
(13) Zaltman, G., LeMasters, K. and
Heffring, M. (1982) ‘Theory
Construction in Marketing’, John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., Chicago, US.
(14) Judd, C., Smith, E. and Kidder, A. L.
‘Research Methods in Social Relations’,
6th edn, Harcourt Brace, London.
(15) Gordon, W. and Langmaid, R. (1988)
‘Qualitative Market Research’, Gower,
London.
(16) Blyth, W. and Robson, S. (1981)
‘Resolving the Hard/Soft Dilemma’,
MRS Conference, UK.
(17) Weik, K. (1985) ‘Systematic
Observational Methods’ in Lindzey, G.
and Aronson, E, (Eds) ‘The Handbook
of Social Psychology’, Vol. 1, pp.
567–634.
(18) Koyli, A. and Jaworski, B. (1990)
‘Market oOrientation: The Construct,
Research Propositions and Managerial
Implications’, Journal of Marketing, Vol.
54, pp. 1–18.
(19) De Chernatony, L. and Dall’Olmo, R.
F. (1998) ‘Defining a ‘‘Brand’’: Beyond
the Literature with Experts’
Interpretations’, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 14, No. 5, pp.
417–443.
(20) Kotler, P. and Levy, S. (1969)
‘Broadening the Concept of Marketing’,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp.
10–15.
(21) Kotler, P. and Zaltman, G. ‘Social
Marketing: An Approach to Planned
Social Change’, Journal of Marketing, Vol.
35, pp. 3–12.
(22) Shapiro, B. (1973) ‘Marketing for
Nonprofit Organisations’, Harvard
Business Review, Vol. 51, pp. 123–132.
(23) Burnett, K. (1992) ‘Relationship
Fundraising’, White Lion Press,
London.

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

(24) Saxton, J. (1994) ‘A Strong Charity
Brand Comes from Strong Beliefs and
Values’, The Journal of Brand Management,
Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 211–220.
(25) Sargeant, A. (1999) ‘Charitable Giving:
Towards a Model of Donor Behaviour’,
Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 15,
No. 4, pp. 215–238.
(26) Ibid.
(27) Kotler, P. and Andreasen, A. (1991)
‘Strategic Marketing for Nonprofit
Organisations’, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA.
(28) Ibid.
(29) Andreasen, A. (1982) ‘Nonprofits:
Check Your Attention to Customers’,
Harvard Business Review, Vol. 60,
May–June, pp. 105–110.
(30) Balabanis, G., Stables, R. and Phillips,
H. (1997) ‘Market-orientation in the
Top 200 Charity Organisations and its
Impact on their Performance’, European
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 31, No. 8, pp.
583–603.
(31) Brennan, L. and Brady, E. (1999)
‘Relating to Marketing? Why
Relationship Marketing Works for
Not-for-profits Organisations’,
International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4, No. 4,
pp. 327–337.
(32) Haggberg, M. (1992) ‘Why Donors
Give’, Fundraising Management, April, pp.
39–40.
(33) Thompson, M. (1998) ‘Marketing for
Change — Giving Brands a Soul’,
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 107–113.
(34) Dixon, M. (1996) ‘Small and
Medium-sized Charities need a Strong
Brand Too: Crisis’ Experience’, Journal
of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 52–57.
(35) Kennedy, S. (1998) ‘The Power of
Positioning: A Case History from The
Children’s Society’, Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 3,
No. 3, pp. 224–230.
(36) Denney, F. (1998) ‘Not-for-profit
Marketing in the Real World: An

Evaluation of Barnardo’s 1995
Promotional Campaign’, International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 153–162.
(37) Aaker, D. (1991) ‘Managing Brand
Equity, Capitalising on the Value of a
Brand Name’, The Free Press, New
York.
(38) Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Saunders, J.
and Wong, V. (1999) ‘Principles of
Marketing’, Prentice Hall Europe,
Hemel Hempstead.
(39) Hankinson and Cowking (1995) op. cit.
(40) Tapp, A. (1996) ‘The Use of Brand
Management Tools in Charity
Fundraising’, The Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 3, No. 6, pp. 400–410.
(41) Roberts-Wray, B. (1994) ‘Branding,
Product Development and Positioning
the Charity’, The Journal of Brand
Management, Vol. 1, No. 6, pp. 3–370.
(42) Saxton (1994) op. cit.
(43) Lindsay, G. and Murphy, A. (1996)
‘NSPCC: Marketing the ‘‘Solution’’ not
the ‘‘Problem’’ ’, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 12, pp. 707–718.
(44) Tonkiss, F. and Passey, A. (1999) ‘Trust,
Confidence and Voluntary
Organisations: Between Values and
Institutions’, Sociology, Vol. 33, No. 2,
pp. 257–274.
(45) Tapp, A. (1996) ‘Charity Brands, a
Qualitative Study of Current Practice’,
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 327–336.
(46) Levitt, T. (1969) ‘The Marketing
Mode’, McGraw-Hill, New York.
(47) Hankinson, P. and Hankinson, G.
(1998) ‘The Role of Organisational
Structure in Successful Global Brand
Management: A Case Study of the
Pierre Smirnoff Company’, Journal of
Brand Management, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp.
29–43.
(48) House, R. and Singh, J. (1998)
‘Organisational Behavioural: Some New
Directions for I/O Psychology’, Annual
Review of Psychology, Vol. 38, pp.
669–718.
(49) Bass, B. (1990) ‘Bass and Stodgill’s

Page 241

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Hankinson

Handbook of Leadership: Theory,
Research and Managerial Applications’,
3rd edn, Free Press, New York.
(50) Cibin, R. and Grant, R. (1996)
‘Restructuring among the World’s
Leading Oil Companies’, British Journal
of Management, Vol. 77, No. 4, pp.
283–307; and ‘Cause-related Marketing’,
(1998) Mintel Special Report.
(51) Hankinson, G. and Cowking, P. (1997)
‘Branding in Practice: Profile and Role
of Brand Managers’, Journal of Marketing
Management, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp.
239–264.
(52) Rhodes, C. (1997) ‘The Legitimation of
Learning in Organisational Change’,
Journal of Organisational Change
Management, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 10–20.
(53) Hankinson, P. and Hankinson, G.
(1999) ‘Managing Successful Brands: An
Empirical Study Which Compares the
Corporate Cultures of Companies
Managing the World’s Top 100 Brands
with those Managing Outsider brands’,
Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 15,
Nos. 1–3, pp. 135–155.
(54) Hankinson (2000) op. cit.
(55) Pharoah, C. and Tanner, S. (1997)
‘Trends in Charitable Giving’, Fiscal
Studies, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 427–443.

Page 242

(56) Ibid.
(57) Hems, L. (1999) ‘Editorial’, The
International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Marketing, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp.
100–104; and Mintel Special Report
1998.
(58) Balabanis et al. (1997) op. cit.
(59) Hens (1999) op. cit.
(60) Gaskin, K. (1999) ‘Blurred vision:
Public trust in charities’, International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 163–178.
(61) Saxton (1994) op. cit.
(62) Dixon (1996) op. cit.
(63) Kennedy (1998) op. cit.
(64) Denney (1998) op. cit.
(65) Saxton (1994) op. cit.
(66) Hankinson (2000) op. cit.
(67) Anheier and Salamon (1998) op. cit.
(68) De Chernatony, L. and McDonald, M.
(1994) ‘Creating Powerful Brands’,
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
(69) Urde, M. (1994) ‘Brand Orientation —
A Strategy for Survival’, Journal of
Consumer Marketing, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp.
18–32.
(70) Grounds and Harkness (1998) op. cit.
(71) Kennedy (1998) op. cit.
(72) Hankinson and Hankinson (1998) op.
cit.

1479103x, 2001, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nvsm.149 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Brand orientation in the charity sector

