See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361823193

Business-Like and Still Serving Society? Investigating the Relationship
Between NPOs Being Business-Like and Their Societal Roles
Article in Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly · July 2022
DOI: 10.1177/08997640221106979

CITATIONS

READS

8

192

4 authors:
Ben Suykens

Florentine Maier

Ghent University

Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien

30 PUBLICATIONS 188 CITATIONS

42 PUBLICATIONS 1,415 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Michael Meyer

Bram Verschuere

Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien

Ghent University

159 PUBLICATIONS 8,437 CITATIONS

149 PUBLICATIONS 3,545 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Ben Suykens on 07 July 2022.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Business-like and Still Serving Society?
Investigating the Relationship between NPOs Being
Business-like and their Societal Roles
Ben Suykens, Florentine Maier, Michael Meyer & Bram Verschuere

PREPRINT
An updated version of this manuscript has been accepted for publication in Nonprofit Voluntary
Sector Quarterly

To cite this article:
Suykens, B., Maier, F., Meyer, M., & Verschuere, B. (2022). Business-like and Still Serving
Society? Investigating the Relationship between NPOs Being Business-like and their Societal
Roles, Nonprofit Voluntary Sector, Early view:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/08997640221106979

1

Abstract
NPOs becoming business-like is a contested issue. Some understand the adoption of businesslike practices by NPOs as a case of adopting rational myths through institutional isomorphism
and thus potentially dangerous for NPOs' ability to fulfill their unique societal roles. Others are
more optimistic, arguing that technical rationality is possible in the adoption of business-like
practices, and that such practices can therefore support NPOs in fulfilling a wide range of
societal roles. Drawing on survey data of NPOs in Flanders, we examine the relationship
between the extent to which NPOs use business-like practices, and the extent to which they
engage in various societal roles. We find that business-like practices are weakly related to
NPOs’ societal roles. All roles are positively related to nonprofit managerialism and unrelated
to NPOs’ reliance on commercial funding. Our results suggest that a certain optimism regarding
the rational use of business-like approaches is justified.

Keywords
Business-like, hybrid, nonprofit organization, societal roles, neo-corporatist welfare state

2

1

Introduction

For the past decade, nonprofit organizations (NPOs) adopting practices from for-profit
businesses have been a major topic in nonprofit management studies. This phenomenon has
been referred to as marketization (e.g., Eikenberry & Kluver, 2004), rationalization (Hwang &
Powell, 2009), managerialization (e.g., Shirinashihama, 2019), hybridization towards the
market domain (Suykens, De Rynck, & Verschuere, 2019), and NPOs being business-like
(Dart, 2004a; Maier, Meyer, & Steinbereithner, 2016). In this study, we use the concept of
‘business-like’ to refer to NPOs becoming more similar to businesses by adopting practices
ideal-typically associated with the market.
The observation that many NPOs have become more business-like has generated a critical
debate. Eikenberry and Kluver (2004) have warned that the introduction of business-like
practices can deter NPOs from fulfilling their societal roles. Some studies show that businesslike approaches encourage NPOs to focus on service delivery, and less so on encouraging
people to participate in political processes (Baines, Charlesworth, Turner, & O’Neill, 2014;
Keevers, Treleaven, Sykes, & Darcy, 2012). In a similar vein, Backman and Smith (2000)
theorize that contributions to social capital may be eroded by participants becoming selfinterested consumers. In recent years, however, an increasing number of well-designed
quantitative studies have identified a positive impact of NPOs using business-like approaches,
e.g., strengthening financial stability (Horvath, Brandtner, & Powell, 2018; Shirinashihama,
2019) and improving the perceived organizational performance (Hersberger‐Langloh,
Stühlinger et al. 2020, Suykens, Meyfroodt et al. 2021).
Yet, in many aspects, the theorized effects of NPOs being business-like on NPOs’ societal
roles lack comprehensive large-N empirical testing. Such studies are necessary to promote an
evidence-based debate. Considering the many findings from qualitative studies that point to
possible negative consequences (e.g., Baines, Cunningham, & Fraser, 2011; Kreutzer & Jager,

3

2011), it is important to understand whether these findings are typical for the whole sector. Our
study contributes to this debate by asking: How are NPOs’ business-like practices related to
their engagement in various societal roles?
We base our research on a survey of NPOs in Flanders (N = 496), the northern region of
Belgium. We conduct linear regression analyses to test whether commercial revenue and
managerial practices influence the extent to which NPOs engage in service delivery, political
advocacy, community building, and civic engagement efforts. Flanders, a typical neocorporatist welfare regime, constitutes a salient research context to address this issue. It has a
large nonprofit sector that has historically been intertwined with the public sector. In
comparison to the Anglo-Saxon context, New Public Management reforms were only
moderately implemented in Flanders, leading to a less pronounced shift from collaboration to
competition in nonprofit-public interactions (Pauly, Verschuere et al. 2020), and a less
pervasive introduction of business-like practices in Flemish NPOs (Suykens, De Rynck et al.
2020).
Our study contributes to nonprofit management research and practice in three ways. First,
we apply a two-dimensional framework for analyzing NPOs being business-like:
commercialism and managerialism. Second, we provide an evidence-based overview of how
business-like practices might be beneficial, detrimental, or unrelated to the fulfillment of
particular societal roles. Third, we provide a first inspection to what extent the findings of
previous, often qualitative, studies hold beyond their substantial and institutional boundary.
Doing so, we analyze a large-N sample in a continental European institutional environment,
thereby contributing to a more empirically grounded debate about the effects of NPOs being
business-like. In the remainder, we clarify the key concepts used, spell out possible causal
mechanisms, formulate hypotheses, and discuss our research design. We then present our

4

research findings. We conclude by discussing the implications for nonprofit management
research and practice.

2

Being business-like and NPOs’ societal roles

NPOs being business-like can refer to a wide range of practices (Dart, 2004a; Maier et al., 2016;
Suykens et al., 2019). Major aspects of being business-like include applying corporate
management practices such as business management tools (Hvenmark, 2016) and various forms
of performance measurement (see, e.g., Hwang & Powell, 2009, p. 289), and generating
commercial revenue through selling products and services (Suykens, De Rynck et al. 2019,
Suykens, George et al. 2020). While the former can be couched under the ‘nonprofit
managerialism’ umbrella, the latter can be referred to as ‘nonprofit commercialism` (Maier,
Meyer et al. 2016). Both are part of being business-like as a coherent culturally shared template
for organizing that, depending on theoretical background, may be conceptualized as an
institutional logic (Knutsen, 2012) or a discourse (Eikenberry, 2009).
Influential studies conclude that becoming more business-like threatens NPOs’
contributions to society (e.g., Dart, 2004a; Eikenberry & Kluver, 2004; Maier et al., 2016) by
making NPOs concentrate on services that generate a financial surplus, or engage in cherrypicking clients, and by making them reduce costs that do not contribute to these services.
Management tools and managerialist understandings of performance focus on efficiency and
effectiveness in ways that can conflict with pursuing the common good (Hwang and Powell
2009).
The societal contributions of nonprofits can be conceptualized as their societal roles.
Synthesizing from previous work (e.g., Frumkin, 2009; Ivanova & Neumayr, 2017; Moulton &
Eckerd, 2012), we distinguish between the following roles:

5

(1)

Service delivery is about delivering intangible or tangible goods that are used by
beneficiaries. These outputs may be private goods (such as a counselling talk), club goods
(such as a library), or public goods (such as a marked hiking trail).

(2)

Political advocacy aims at influencing public policy. NPOs often give a voice to
minorities and particularistic interests when performing advocacy.

(3)

Community building refers to activities that build trust and reciprocity between people
and foster inclusion into communities and society.

(4)

Civic engagement is about empowering people to participate in politics and stand up for
their interests. NPOs may promote civic engagement through programs specifically for
that purpose (e.g., voter education campaigns), or by functioning as “schools of
democracy” that use democratic procedures for decision-making, thus nurturing habits
and skills of self-rule.

3

How being business-like affects NPOs’ societal roles

Previous studies have often brushed over the causal mechanisms how becoming business-like
might affect NPOs’ societal roles (e.g., Backman and Smith 2000, Eikenberry and Kluver
2004). Looking at studies that more specifically spell out causal transmission mechanisms, we
can identify three effects how becoming more business-like may change societal roles: through
an interpretation frame effect, through a commercial revenue effect, or through a production
effect.
First, the interpretation frame effect is central to institutional theory; it is inspired by
studies focusing on the micro-foundations of institutions (e.g., Beaton, DeJordy, & Foster,
2020; Horvath et al., 2018). This effect occurs as individual decision-makers in organizations
perceive and interpret signals from the organization and its environment, make sense of these
signals against the backdrop of their culturally shared knowledge and, using their individual

6

agentic capabilities, make decisions about maintaining or changing the practices or the goals of
their organization (Powell & Colyvas, 2008). Applied to the problem of business-like practices
possibly causing a shift of nonprofits’ societal roles, this means that in tandem with businesslike practices, nonprofit leaders may also be internalizing the values that undergird business
enterprises. They adopt business practices as a means to achieve their mission, but as business
values become shared in an organization, they become part of its enduring character. If
nonprofit leaders do not take intentional action, business-like means become taken for granted
and divorced from their ends, and the organization experiences goal displacement (Beaton et
al., 2020, p. 26f.).
Second, the commercial revenue effect has primarily been dealt with in literature from an
economic perspective (e.g., Enjolras, 2002; Wilsker & Young, 2010). It occurs due to the nature
of the produced goods. The commercial potential of goods is determined by the possibility to
exclude them from free use, and by the extent to which these goods can generate market demand
(Enjolras, 2002). The majority of services provided by nonprofits are not pure public goods,
but club goods or private goods with positive externalities, thus contributing to public goods
(e.g., social security). Providing private goods has the highest commercial potential (Suykens,
George et al. 2020). There is less commercial potential in community building, advocacy or
civic engagement; these roles are typically about providing club goods or contribute to public
goods. Nonprofits can generate commercial revenue from mission-based core programs (e.g., a
symphony orchestra selling admission tickets for its concerts), from activities that use the same
technologies or target the same audience like mission-based core programs (e.g., a symphony
orchestra recording behind-the scenes podcasts for fans), or from activities external to the
mission (e.g., a symphony orchestra offering a valet service, see Levine Daniel & Kim, 2018).
Third, the production effect has been illuminated by analyses of how community building
and civic engagement are achieved in nonprofits (e.g., Backman & Smith, 2000; Eikenberry &

7

Kluver, 2004). These societal roles are often fulfilled as a planned or unplanned by-products of
nonprofits’ other activities. For example, a bowling league may produce strong ties of trust
among members in the course of providing a sports service (Putnam, 2000); a social movement
organization may increase the civic skills of activists as they advocate for a cause (Skocpol,
2013). Managerialist methods of organizing give little place to democratic participation
(Eikenberry, 2009), and commercial activities tend to have few positive side-effects in terms of
community-building (Backman & Smith, 2000). Therefore, we may expect business-like
methods to produce less community and civic engagement.
Considering these potentially problematic effects, it seems puzzling why nonprofits
would choose to become business-like. In response to this puzzle, many scholars identify
institutional isomorphism as the main driver of the diffusion of business-like practices in the
nonprofit domain (e.g., Hersberger‐Langloh et al., 2020; Hwang & Powell, 2009). This
theoretical perspective argues that business-like practices spread because (a) the government
demands so (i.e., coercive isomorphism), (b) NPOs copy them from other organizations that
they consider as successful (i.e., mimetic isomorphism), or (c) they are instilled through formal
education and professional networks (i.e., normative isomorphism; DiMaggio & Powell, 1983).
In all of these scenarios, it is essentially the global spread of neoliberalism and its “pervasive
faith in the market and business-based approaches and solutions” (Eikenberry, 2009, p. 584)
that are viewed as the main institutional force behind the becoming business-like of NPOs. In
such a climate, NPOs that present themselves as business-like can gain a legitimacy advantage
over more ‘traditional’ NPOs in the eyes of resource holders (see e.g., Dart 2004, Andersson
and Self 2015, Dey and Teasdale 2016, Willems, Waldner et al. 2017).
With all the spotlights on institutional isomorphism, it has become neglected that
isomorphism is not only caused by institutional pressures, and business-like management is not
only “myth and ceremony” (Meyer & Rowan, 1977). Isomorphism can also be the result of

8

rational considerations and practical proof of more efficient approaches. DiMaggio and Powell
(1983, p. 149) distinguish institutional from “competitive isomorphism”. For NPOs adopting
business-like practices, institutional isomorphism implies that they adopt these practices for
mimetic, coercive, or normative reasons. ‘Pure’ institutional isomorphism is likely to result in
negative implications for NPOs’ fulfillment of societal roles, if business-like rationality is not
appropriate for the kind of work that they are doing (e.g., forcing social work into a procrustean
bed of client prioritization while cutting down on advocacy, neglecting community
participation in housing projects for the sake of efficiency). In such cases, business-like NPOs
would tend to myopically foster service delivery while neglecting community building,
advocacy and civic engagement, because in line with the interpretation frame effect and the
production effect, processes of producing goods and services and also political advocacy fit
more neatly with managerial methods and tools that have been developed for business than
other societal roles.
In contrast, if competitive isomorphism were a major driver behind NPOs using businesslike approaches, this would mean that business-like practices enhance NPOs’ positions in a
broad competitive field (not just vying for commercial revenue but also for donations, public
funding, volunteers, etc.). In this scenario, a broad range of stakeholders is likely to assess NPOs
positively because they perceive them as better equipped to make societal contributions (e.g.,
Andersson and Self 2015, Carré, Suykens et al. 2021). It is competitive isomorphism that the
large body of literature on NPOs from a management and economics perspective has in mind
when arguing that a proper application of management techniques will enhance goal attainment
in all areas, and that an increase of commercial revenue will boost NPOs’ capacity also in their
non-market roles. It is also competitive isomorphism that micro-level institutional theorists
imply when they make the qualification that by taking intentional action, nonprofit leaders can
avoid letting managerial methods lead to goal displacement (Beaton et al., 2020, p. 26f.).

9

In the following subsections, we further review the literature about business-like
practices' effects on nonprofit organization’s roles, and deduct hypotheses for empirical testing.

3.1

Service delivery

Resonating with the commercial revenue effect, fulfilling a service role typically has higher
commercialization potential than fulfilling other societal roles (Enjolras, 2002; Fischer,
Wilsker, & Young, 2011; Suykens, George, De Rynck, & Verschuere, 2020; Wilsker & Young,
2010). Descriptive analyses of large-N studies point in this direction. Suykens et al. (2020,
p.1472), for instance, observe that “those [NPOs] relying considerably on commercial income
tended to generate this through mission-related activities” that in essence aim to fulfill the
needs of the target population. In a similar vein, nonprofit service providers appear to be among
the most commercialized segments of the nonprofit sphere in the United Kingdom (McKay,
Moro, Teasdale, & Clifford, 2015), the United States (Kerlin & Pollak, 2011) and the Czech
Republic (Vaceková, Valentinov, & Nemec, 2017). Based on this, we expect that:
H1a:

The extent to which NPOs generate commercial revenue is positively related to
nonprofit service delivery.
Typical managerialist practices are quite amenable to service provision. Several

qualitative studies have examined the consequences of NPOs adopting systems of tight
managerial control and performance management in response to the demands of public funders
(Baines et al., 2014; Irvine, Lazarevski, & Dolnicar, 2009; Keevers et al., 2012). In line with
the interpretation frame effect and the production effect mentioned above, these studies find
that after making these changes, NPOs begin to prioritize service delivery in a narrow sense
over more community-engaged, social justice-directed activities to fulfill other societal roles.
We therefore hypothesize:

10

H1b: The extent to which NPOs adopt managerial practices is positively related to nonprofit
service delivery.

3.2

Community building

Concerning the effect of commercial activities on the community-building role of NPOs,
Backman and Smith (2000), and Eikenberry and Kluver (2004) theorize an adverse production
effect. The argument is that “commercialization has the potential to change the nature of the
ties between key stakeholder groups and nonprofits, moving them from the goodwill ties
traditionally posited for transactions in the charitable realm to arms-length exchanges that
characterize market transactions” (Backman & Smith, 2000, p. 363). Some empirical support
for this argument has been provided (Galaskiewicz, Bielefeld, & Dowell, 2006). Furthermore,
raising participation fees inherently goes hand in hand with the risk of excluding those who
cannot afford.
It should be noted, though, that several studies have painted a more nuanced picture,
suggesting that community building can occur as a byproduct of commercial activity if the
nonprofit engages in a community-oriented form of commercialism (Bertotti, Harden, Renton,
& Sheridan, 2012; Teasdale, 2010; Tello-Rozas, 2016). There have also been quantitative
studies, specifically in the field of sports, that do not find a negative effect of commercialization
on community building (Enjolras, 2002; Kumar, Downward, Hodgkinson, & Manoli, 2019).
These may be atypical cases however, and so, in line with the commercial revenue effect, we
hypothesize that:
H2a

The extent to which NPOs generate commercial revenue is negatively related to
nonprofit community-building.

11

Concerning the implications of business-like management practices for community building,
contradictory arguments have been put forward. In line with the interpretation frame effect, it
has been argued that managerialist practices entail a unilateral focus on efficiency and thus
harm social capital building (Backman & Smith, 2000). The contrary argument is that “the
intelligent adoption of business practices could make many nonprofit organizations even more
effective in creating social capital” (Dees & Anderson, 2017, p. 23). For example, marketing
techniques may enable nonprofits to reach new target groups; diversity management
instruments may make nonprofits more inclusive. Substantial empirical support for either of
these arguments is missing. At the same time, there is evidence that the community-building
effects of NPOs have little or nothing to do with NPOs’ internal structures (e.g., Lindberg &
Farkas, 2016; Sivesind, Pospíšilová, & Frič, 2013).
Overall, the practices typically subsumed under managerialism (and which we have
measured empirically in this study) are more about increasing efficiency than about promoting
participation. An adverse interpretation frame effect of managerialism on community building
therefore seems likely. We hence formulate the following hypothesis:
H2b: The extent to which NPOs adopt managerial practices is negatively related to nonprofit
community building.

3.3

Political advocacy

NPOs typically do not generate commercial revenue directly from advocacy. If we assume that
nonprofit managers prefer engaging in commercial activities that directly support their mission
(Levine Daniel & Kim, 2018), we can conclude in line with the commercial revenue effect that
commercial activities will lead to a reduction of advocacy efforts. However, a meta-analysis by
Lu (2018a) finds no overall significant effect of commercialism on advocacy, as there is support

12

for both positive and a negative relations.. . Commercial revenues may increase the autonomy
of nonprofits, thus supporting advocacy by reducing dependency on other funders (Lu, 2018,
p. 189S [sic]). Recently, Zhang and Guo (2021) revealed specific configurations that enable
nonprofits to continue active political advocacy despite commercialization (Zhang & Guo
2021). They also argues that the financial autonomy gained by commercial revenues alone does
not translate into efforts in political advocacy. Rich resources play no role in the causal
pathways, and in specific configurations political advocacy is endangered (ibid., 938).
Research on the impact of other funding sources shows positive relations to advocacy for
government funding and individual donations (Lu 2018b, Silverman & Patterson 2011). These
findings harmonize with the commercial revenue affect theorized above, therefore we formulate
the hypothesis:
H3a:

The extent to which NPOs generate commercial revenue is negatively related to
nonprofit political advocacy.

Concerning nonprofit managerialism, previous research suggests a complex relationship with
NPOs’ political advocacy. By operating more like businesses, NPOs seem not to cut back on
advocacy, but rather to shift towards more professionalized advocacy forms (i.e., hire
professional staff to engage in advocacy) and non-confrontational advocacy (e.g., Skocpol,
2013; Tatarchevskiy, 2011). This is consistent with King’s (2017) analysis of how becoming
professionalized as a nonprofit leader shapes identity as a political activist. For community
foundations, Suárez, Husted, and Casas (2018) show that managerial professionalization is
positively related to engagement in advocacy. These findings make sense against the backdrop
of an interpretation frame effect of managerialism, since ideas such as stakeholder
communication, lobbying, and public relations are part of the conventional managerialist set of
ideas. Management tools for performance measurement are quite amenable to managing
advocacy activities (e.g., formulating SMART advocacy goals, benchmarking advocacy
13

success). We hence hypothesize that managerialism tends to be positively associated with
fulfilling an advocacy role,
H3b: The extent to which NPOs adopt managerial practices is positively related to nonprofit
political advocacy.

3.4

Civic engagement

It has been argued that commercially funded NPOs fulfill less of a civic engagement role,
because in terms of the production process, civic engagement is not necessary for commercial
activities (Eikenberry & Kluver, 2004, p. 137). Speaking in terms of interpretation frames,
engaging in commercial activities may entail a strongly marketized perspective that downright
contradicts civic engagement (Eikenberry, 2009). Kim (2017) documents a negative
relationship between commercial revenue and the civic engagement role in a quantitative study
of nonprofit arts organizations. We hence hypothesize based on the production effect as well as
the interpretation frame effect:
H4a:

The extent to which NPOs generate commercial revenue is negatively related to
nonprofit civic engagement.

Business-like practices are clearly a different set of organizational practices than those typical
of civic engagement (Knutsen, 2012; Maier & Meyer, 2011): top-down management for the
former, bottom-up participation and self-management for the latter. Although managerialist and
democratic practices can be combined in an organization, and management practices may
include stakeholder participation, in practice there often seems to be an interpretation frame
effect in which organizations favor one set of practices over the other. Qualitative studies are
fairly unanimous in finding that managerialist practices undermine participation and
organizational democracy (e.g., Eizenberg, 2012; Hvenmark, 2013; Kreutzer & Jager, 2011;

14

Skocpol, 2013) and weaken the role of NPOs as facilitators of civic engagement. For example,
Baines et al. (2011) find that the standardization of operational processes leads to reduced
opportunities for employee participation in decision-making processes. The main reason for
this tendency appears to be that mainstream management methods prioritize efficiency and
effectiveness, which may conflict with more participatory methods in terms of time
requirements and diversity of perspectives. Mainstream management methods hardly include
any element of civic engagement. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H4b: The extent to which NPOs adopt managerial practices is negatively related to nonprofit
civic engagement

4

Methods

4.1

Sampling and data collection

We examine NPOs in Flanders, the northern region of Belgium. We started data collection with
a systematic mapping, as there is no comprehensive database listing all Flemish NPOs. We
screened government’s and umbrella associations’ databases. We limited our focus to NPOs
that are active at the Flemish level in the domains of human wellbeing, social economy, or
socio-cultural activities. Human wellbeing nonprofits include care initiatives targeting minors,
people with disabilities, and other underprivileged groups. The social economy domain consists
of work integration social enterprises. Here, mission and market overlap because the programs
for fulfilling prosocial goals are market-based by nature. The socio-cultural includes
professional associations, patient associations, social movement organizations, political
organizations, socio-cultural associations, youth associations, ethnic-cultural associations, and
faith-based associations. The sample of included nonprofits is diverse, including pure service
providers, pure advocacy organizations, pure community builders, but mostly organizations
engaging in a mix of societal roles.

15

To take account of the population's diversity, we extracted a disproportionate sample
stratified by the three domains mentioned above (N = 747). We invited these NPOs to
participate in the study. We designed a two-wave survey aimed at the NPOs’ directors. Starting
in September 2017, we sent introductory letters to the NPOs. The first wave was a personal
interview. Respondents then had the choice to complete the second wave in a personal
interview, by mail, or online. The first wave included questions on societal roles, commercial
revenue, management tools, and performance measurement. The second wave included
questions about the composition of the board and the size of the organization. We sent several
reminders and received 496 responses to the first wave and 403 responses to the second wave
by June 2018. This corresponds to response rates of 66.4% and 53.9%. A Chi-squared test
confirmed that respondents reflected the composition of our sampling frame.

4.2

Measures

For measuring the dependent variables in this study, i.e., the extent to which NPOs fulfill
various societal roles, we constructed indices. We mainly followed the nonprofit role indices
developed by Moulton and Eckerd (2012). However, pre-tests with nonprofit directors showed
that some items suggested by Moulton and Eckerd did not fit the Flemish context or the
diversity of the NPOs. Therefore, we slightly adapted the indices (see online appendix). We
measured all items with a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘a lot.’ Based on
principal component analyses, we calculated factor scores for ‘community building’ (Cronbach
alpha = .744), ‘civic engagement’ (.775), ‘political advocacy’ (.808) and ‘service delivery’
(.812).
The independent variables cover two dimensions of NPOs being business-like:
commercialism (i.e., business-like funding), and managerialism (i.e., the use of typical
management tools and performance measurement). We operationalized commercialism as the
16

proportion of revenue resulting from the profitable sale of products and services relative to the
organization's total revenue. To ensure a common understanding, we provided respondents with
our definition of commercial revenue, supported by examples indicating what does (e.g., service
fees) and does not (e.g., membership fees) count as commercial revenue. We operationalized
managerialism with two variables: use of management tools, and performance measurement.
Regarding the use of management tools, we asked respondents to indicate on a 5-point Likert
scale (from ‘not present’ to ‘often used’) to what extent they use the following management
tools: SWOT analysis, SMART goals, lean management, benchmarking, pay for performance,
quality management (e.g., ISO), and key performance indicators (e.g., based on a balanced
scorecard). This selection of management tools was based on previous studies on nonprofit
managerialism (e.g., Hvenmark, 2013) and consultation with nonprofit directors. Regarding
performance measurement, we asked respondents to indicate on a 4-point Likert scale (from
‘not measured’ to ‘often measured’) to what extent their organization measures the following
aspects of nonprofit performance: (1) openness towards beneficiaries, (2) efficient spending,
(3) mission fulfillment, (4) meeting expectations of beneficiaries, (5) service quality, and (6)
making programs known to stakeholders. We provided respondents with explanations for each
management tool and each performance measurement dimension to ensure common
understanding. From these items we constructed one index for ‘management tool use’
(Cronbach alpha = .809) and one for ‘performance measurement’ (.834) by calculating the sum
scores. Interestingly, these two aspects of managerialism could not be combined into one index
(principal component analyses identified two distinct indices), yet each aspect contributes to
the explanatory power of our regression models. We hence included the aspects as two distinct
indices. We provide the items for both aspects of managerialism in the online appendix.
We add four control variables for which previous research and theory suggest that they
influence which societal roles NPOs fulfill: The organization’s field of activity (ICNPO

17

category), its age (due to imprinting), size (more paid staff making service delivery more
likely), and reliance on non-commercial funding (a higher proportion of public funding making
service delivery more likely, a higher proportion of philanthropic funding making community
building more likely).

4.3

Statistical analysis

Since our dependent variables are composite indexes, they can be considered continuous,
thereby making linear regression an appropriate statistical technique to test our hypotheses. We
tested whether the assumptions underlying multiple linear regression are met, finding no issues
concerning (1) model specification (Ramsey-Reset tests insignificant), (2) normality
(standardized predictor values and residuals show a normal distribution when plotted), or (3)
autocorrelation of unstandardized residuals (Durbin-Watson test 1,5<d<2,5). For three models
(civic engagement, advocacy, service) the assumption of homoscedasticity was initially not met
(significant White’s tests), but resolved by recalculating our models using the HC3 estimator in
the HCREG macro of Hayes and Cai (2007). Our models were not impacted by
multicollinearity (VIF < 10) or influential outliers (Cooks distance <1).
Because we collected our data through the same method, we took measures to limit the
risk of common method bias (CMB). Ex-ante, we subjected the dependent and independent
variables to proximal separation by means of buffer items, and variated the scale properties.
We mostly used factual independent variables. Ex post, we controlled for CMB with the
Harman one-factor test. We imputed the dependent and independent variables into an unrotated
factor analysis limited to one factor. Because this score did not exceed the 50% mark, we can
conclude that CMB is not likely an issue. Lastly, because business-like behavior can be a
sensitive topic in a nonprofit setting, social desirability bias might be at play. We limited social
desirability bias by not using the term ‘business-like’ throughout the survey, separating the
18

questions about business-like manifestations in space (i.e., buffer items), and formulating our
questions in a fact-based manner.

5

Findings

Descriptive analysis shows that the NPOs at hand focus most on service delivery, followed by
community building, advocacy, and civic engagement (see Table 1). In this section, we present
the results of the linear regression analyses (see Table 2).
[INSERT TABLE 1]
[INSERT TABLE 2]
First, our model explains 14.6% of the variance of how much NPOs provide services.
Here, being business-like accounts for 5.6% of the variance. Contrary to our theoretical
expectation, commercial funding is unrelated to service delivery (reject H1a). In line with our
expectations, managerial practice, operationalized as management tool use and performance
measurement, is positively related to service (accept H1b). Looking at the control variables,
NPOs in the social services and health fields engage most strongly in service delivery. In
contrast, organizational size and dependency on public or philanthropic funding are unrelated
to the extent to which NPOs engage in service delivery. Lastly, but remarkably, younger NPOs
engage more in service delivery than their older counterparts.
Second, our model explains 20.0% of the variance in how much NPOs engage in
community-building. Looking at independent variables, being business-like only accounts for
4.3% of the variance in the extent to which NPOs fulfill a community-building role. Contrary
to our hypotheses, we find no significant relationship between community building and
commercial funding or management tool use, and even a positive relationship between
community building and performance measurement (reject H2a and H2b). Looking at control
variables, we find that compared to NPOs providing social services, NPOs that focus on
19

environmental or international issues, represent the interests of a particular profession, or are
included in the ‘other category’ engage significantly less in community-building. Lastly,
organizational size, age, and dependency on public or philanthropic funding are not significant
predictors of the extent to which NPOs engage in community building.
Third, our model explains 20.1% of the variance of how much NPOs engage in political
advocacy. Being business-like accounts for 6.5% of the variance. We find no significant
relationship between advocacy and nonprofit commercialism (reject H3a). Hypothesis H3b
about a positive relationship between managerialism and advocacy is partly confirmed, as we
find a significant positive relationship with management tool use, but not with performance
measurement. Looking at control variables for field of activity, we find that NPOs that focus
on environmental issues, development and housing, law, advocacy and politics, or professions
and work-related issues engage more in advocacy than NPOs from the social services field. In
contrast, NPOs in the fields of religion, education or health, and NPOs that are organized
internationally engage less in advocacy than NPOs from the social services field. The extent to
which NPOs rely on public or philanthropic funding is positively associated with nonprofit
advocacy efforts. Lastly, whereas organizational size is not a significant predictor, we find that
organizational age is positively associated with the extent to which NPOs assume an advocacy
role.
And fourth and finally, our model explains 20.5 % of the variance of how much NPOs
promote civic engagement. However, looking at independent variables, being business-like
only accounts for 2.0% of the variance explained. Similar to community building, hypotheses
about a negative relationship between NPOs being business-like and promoting civic
engagement are not confirmed. There is no significant relationship between fulfilling a civic
engagement role and commercial funding or management tool use, and a border significant
positive relationship with performance measurement (reject H4a and H4b). When considering

20

the control variables, we find that NPOs from the social services and health fields are less
preoccupied with engaging people in the public debate than NPOs in other fields. Public and
philanthropic funding is positively associated with fulfilling a civic engagement role.
Organizational size and age add no explanatory value to the model. Table 3 summarizes
findings across all models in comparison to the hypotheses.

[INSERT TABLE 3]

6

Discussion and conclusion

Although NPOs adopting business-like practices generates a critical debate (see, e.g.,
Eikenberry & Kluver, 2004; Maier et al., 2016; Suykens et al., 2019), there have been few
quantitative studies examining its effects on nonprofit role uptake. Furthermore, theorizing on
the effects of business-like practices on societal roles has rarely gone beyond institutional
isomorphism and critical theory and has not detailed out concrete effects. Inspired by
institutional and economic theories, we have therefore conceptualized three distinct potential
effects of business-like practices on societal role uptake: the interpretation frame effect, the
commercial revenue effect, and the production effect. Based on regression analyses of data
collected from Flemish NPOs (N = 496), we find that business practice use only holds limited
explanatory power regarding the extent to which NPOs engage in different societal roles.
We observed two distinct patterns. First, managerial practices appear to be positively
related to all societal roles, although for some roles this positive relationship is limited to either
managerial tool use or performance measurement. Corroborating previous research (cf. Baines
et al., 2014; Irvine, Lazarevski, & Dolnicar, 2009; Keevers et al., 2012; Suarez, Husted and
Casas, 2018), we find support for a positive interpretation frame effect of managerialism
21

leading to greater emphasis on the service delivery and advocacy role. However, we do not find
support for a negative interpretation frame effect of managerialism detracting from community
building or civic engagement. To the contrary, the performance measurement aspect associated
with managerialism seems to emphasize community building and civic engagement.
Presumably, this is owed to the fact that some prior qualitative studies documenting adverse
effects of nonprofit managerialism (e.g., Baines et al., 2011; Hall, 1990; Kreutzer & Jager,
2011) may have focused on cases sporting extremely high levels of managerial practice, or on
instances of mismanagement which also occur in for-profit businesses. We by no means want
to denigrate the explanatory value of such case studies, but the range of their findings is
arguably different from quantitative studies. Essentially, our findings suggest that warnings
about managerialism endangering the nonprofit domain – likely underpinned by extreme cases
– might be somewhat overdrawn for the majority of nonprofits, as competitive isomorphism, in
addition to institutional isomorphism, is likely at play.
Second, commercial revenue appears to be unrelated to nonprofit role uptake.
Accordingly, we cannot confirm any commercial revenue effects, in the sense of
commercialized NPOs putting more emphasis on service delivery at the cost of other, less
marketable, societal roles. This may indicate that, despite having a broader base to
commercialize (Suykens, De Rynck et al. 2019), commercialization is by no means the
prerogative of nonprofit service providers. All types of NPOs can generate commercial income
via the sale of mission-unrelated items like candy, plants, t-shirts, flags and so forth, which
subsequently can be used to cross-subsidize both service and non-service roles (cf. Guo 2006,
Toepler 2006).
Needless to say, our findings should be interpreted with the study’s limitations in mind.
At first, we need to consider the particularities of the institutional context. We conducted our
study in Flanders, which is a typical neo-corporatist welfare regime (Pauly, Verschuere, De

22

Rynck, & Voets, 2020). Here, business-like practices are less diffused in the nonprofit domain
compared to Anglo-Saxon countries (Pauly et al., 2020; Suykens et al., 2020) which have been
the context of the most influential studies on NPOs becoming more business-like (e.g.,
Backman & Smith, 2000; Dart, 2004a; Eikenberry, 2009; Eikenberry & Kluver, 2004). Our
findings may reflect the absolute level to which business-like practices are diffused in a
particular nonprofit domain. Hence, the relationship between the degree of being business-like
and the emphasis on societal roles may correspond with an inverted U-shaped curve. By
adopting business-like practices to a moderate extent, many Flemish NPOs might be entering
the Goldilocks zone by reaping the benefits while staying clear of the pitfalls. A more intensive
introduction of business-like practices may cause a ‘too much of a good thing’ effect, justifying
the influential warning by Eikenberry and Kluver (2004). Hence, differences across institutional
contexts basically disallows a black-or-white positioning on the notion that NPOs becoming
more business-like is a wrong-headed idea from the outset. We encourage future research to
pursue this argument further by systematically comparing societal role uptake of NPOs in
institutional settings characterized by a limited, moderate and extensive business practice
diffusion.
In addition to the institutional context, we want to underline that our findings are bound
by (a) our focus on business-like practices materializing within NPOs, and (b) our measurement
of nonprofit role uptake. Though commercialism and managerialism are widely considered as
key manifestations of NPOs becoming more business-like (Maier et al, 2016), many harmful
effects identified by previous studies should more accurately be attributed to changes in NPOs’
political and economic environment (e.g., marketization of public procurement) rather than to
changes in NPOs’ internal structures (see, e.g., Considine, O’Sullivan, & Nguyen, 2014; Gallet,
2016). Hence, future research can complement this study by examining to what extent dynamics
such as resource competition for public service contracting and performance-based

23

accountability demands by resource holders induces NPOs to rebalance their contributions to
society.
In a similar vein, our measurement of societal role uptake is necessarily lopsided, though
we did our best to cover a broad spectrum of roles. Specifically, we measured the quantitative
increase/decrease in organizational focus on different societal roles, thereby neglecting ‘how’,
i.e. by which specific practices, and perhaps more importantly, ‘how effectively’ NPOs fulfill
a particular role. For instance, although we find support for an interpretation frame effect of
management tools strengthening the focus on service delivery, we cannot verify whether these
services are offered within the esprit of the prosocial mission, or alternatively, increasingly
corroded by exclusion mechanisms (e.g., Hustinx and De Waele 2015), or driven by a one-sizefits all approach (e.g., Dart 2004, Gallet 2016). Typically, these qualitative shifts in nonprofit
role uptake take center stage in qualitative studies. Experimental survey designs might be a
promising way to analyze such mechanisms quantitatively. By providing nonprofit executives
with fictitious scenarios that contain varying information on business practice use, research can
tease out its impact on nonprofit role uptake by subsequently questioning executives on
decisions they would take regarding the fictitious NPO’s contributions to society.
Finally, we should note that our study draws on single respondent survey data. Although
common in the nonprofit management field, we cannot rule out that the surveyed nonprofit
directors have an overly positive view of their organizations’ fulfillment of societal roles.
Different stakeholders may have different perceptions regarding the extent to which NPOs (a)
engage in business-like practices, and/or (b) fulfill various roles (Carré, Suykens & Verschuere,
2021). Future studies could overcome these limitations by adopting a multi-informant research
design that combines qualitative and quantitative data about the extent and mode of role
fulfillment (Enticott, Boyne et al. 2009, Mele and Belardinelli 2019).

24

Despite these caveats, the take-home argument of our study lies in the observation that
both facets of managerialism – managerial tools and performance measurement – are positively
related with societal roles. Performance measurement in particular positively links with service
delivery, community building, and civic engagement. Managerial tools link positively with
service delivery and advocacy. Overall, this supports the assumption that reflected and educated
management of nonprofits does strengthen their contributions to society. Commercial funding,
however, has neither positive nor negative effects on these contributions. From this, we derive
the following implications for nonprofit research and practice.
For nonprofit research, our study paints a first broad-brush picture of the large-N
relationship between business practice use and nonprofit role uptake, and offers a concise
research agenda on how future research can uncover more fine-grained insights. For nonprofit
practice, the observation that managerial practice is weakly, yet positively associated with
nonprofit role uptake tentatively suggests that it is likely to contribute to goal fulfillment.
Hence, for practitioners, our findings can be understood as an encouragement to use the tools
that business management has to offer, but cautiously and with utmost care about the
organization’s mission and values. Practitioners should use their judgment to consider the use
of business-like or alternative methods, and they should be wary of adopting business practices
in excess. As Paracelsus has suggested, the dose makes the medicine.

25

References
Andersson, F. O., & Self, W. (2015). The social-entrepreneurship advantage: An experimental
study of social entrepreneurship and perceptions of nonprofit effectiveness. Voluntas,
26, 2718–2732.
Backman, E. V., & Smith, S. R. (2000). Healthy organizations, unhealthy communities?
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 10, 355–373.
Baines, D., Charlesworth, S., Turner, D., & O’Neill, L. (2014). Lean social care and worker
identity: The role of outcomes, supervision and mission. Critical Social Policy, 34, 433–
453.
Baines, D., Cunningham, I., & Fraser, H. (2011). Constrained by managerialism: Caring as
participation in the voluntary social services. Economic and Industrial Democracy, 32,
329–352.
Beck, T. E., et al. (2008). "Solutions out of context: Examining the transfer of business concepts
to nonprofit organizations." Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 19(2), 153-171.
Beaton, E. E., DeJordy, R., & Foster, P. (2020). The Lived Experience of Managerialization:
Understanding Values Conflict in Non‐profits through a Pragmatic Institutionalism.
Journal of Management Studies, 1-36.
Bertotti, M., Harden, A., Renton, A., & Sheridan, K. (2012). The contribution of a social
enterprise to the building of social capital in a disadvantaged urban area of London.
Community Development Journal, 47, 168–183.
Bode, I. (2006). Disorganized welfare mixes: Voluntary agencies and new governance regimes
in Western Europe. Journal of European Social Policy, 16, 346–359.
Carré, B., et al. (2021). "Balancing Legitimacy in a Context of Nonprofit-Business Hybridity:

26

The Case of the Flemish Wellbeing and Social Economy Sector." Voluntas:
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 1-20.
Considine, M., O’Sullivan, S., & Nguyen, P. (2014). Governance, Boards of Directors and the
Impact of Contracting on Not‐for‐profit Organizations: An Australian Study. Social
Policy & Administration, 48, 169–187.
Dart, R. (2004a). Being “business-like” in a nonprofit organization: A grounded and inductive
typology. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 33, 290–310.
Dart, R. (2004b). The legitimacy of social enterprise. Nonprofit Management and Leadership,
14, 411–424.
Dees, J. G., & Anderson, B. B. (2017). Sector-bending: Blurring the lines between nonprofit
and for-profit. In In search of the nonprofit sector, 51–72, London, Routledge.
Dey, P., & Teasdale, S. (2016). The tactical mimicry of social enterprise strategies: Acting ‘as
if’in the everyday life of third sector organizations. Organization, 23, 485–504.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism
and collective rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 147–
160.
Eikenberry, A. M. (2009). Refusing the market: A democratic discourse for voluntary and
nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 38, 582–596.
Eikenberry, A. M., & Kluver, J. D. (2004). The marketization of the nonprofit sector: Civil
society at risk? Public Administration Review, 64, 132–140.
Eizenberg, E. (2012). Actually existing commons: Three moments of space of community
gardens in New York City. Antipode, 44, 764–782.

27

Enjolras, B. (2002). The commercialization of voluntary sport organizations in Norway.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 31, 352–376.
Enticott, G., et al. (2009). "The use of multiple informants in public administration research:
Data aggregation using organizational echelons." Journal of public administration research and
theory 19(2): 229-253.
Fischer, R. L., Wilsker, A., & Young, D. R. (2011). Exploring the revenue mix of nonprofit
organizations: Does it relate to publicness? Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
40, 662–681.
Frumkin, P. (2009). On being nonprofit: A conceptual and policy primer. Cambridge, Mass. et
al.: Harvard University Press.
Galaskiewicz, J., Bielefeld, W., & Dowell, M. (2006). Networks and organizational growth: A
study of community based nonprofits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51, 337–380.
Gallet, W. (2016). Marketized employment services The impact on Christian-based service
providers and their clients. International Journal of Public Sector Management, 29,
426–440.
Guo, B. (2006). "Charity for Profit? Exploring Factors Associated with the Commercialization
of Human Service Nonprofits." Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 35(1): 123-138.
Hall, P. D. (1990). Conflicting Managerial Cultures in Nonprofit Organizations. Nonprofit
Management & Leadership, 1, 153–165.
Han, J. (2017). Social marketisation and policy influence of third sector organisations: Evidence
from the UK. Voluntas, 28, 1209–1225.

28

Hayes, A. F., & Cai, L. (2007). Using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error estimators in
OLS regression: An introduction and software implementation. Behavior Research
Methods, 39, 709–722.
Hersberger‐Langloh, S. E., Stühlinger, S., & von Schnurbein, G. (2020). Institutional
isomorphism and nonprofit managerialism: For better or worse? Nonprofit Management
and Leadership, 31, 461-480.
Horvath, A., Brandtner, C., & Powell, W. W. (2018). Serve or conserve: Mission, strategy, and
multi-level nonprofit change during the great recession. Voluntas, 29, 976–993.
Hustinx, L. and E. De Waele (2015). "Managing hybridity in a changing welfare mix: Everyday
practices in an entrepreneurial nonprofit in Belgium." Voluntas: International Journal of
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 26(5): 1666-1689.
Hvenmark, J. (2013). Business as usual? On managerialization and the adoption of the balanced
scorecard in a democratically governed civil society organization. Administrative
Theory & Praxis, 35, 223–247.
Hvenmark, J. (2016). Ideology, practice, and process? A review of the concept of
managerialism in civil society studies. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary
and Nonprofit Organizations, 27, 2833–2859.
Hwang, H., & Powell, W. W. (2009). The rationalization of charity: The influences of
professionalism in the nonprofit sector. Administrative Science Quarterly, 54, 268–298.
Irvine, H., Lazarevski, K., & Dolnicar, S. (2009). Strings attached: New public management,
competitive grant funding and social capital. Financial Accountability & Management,
25, 225–252.

29

Ivanova, E., & Neumayr, M. (2017). The multi-functionality of professional and business
associations in a transitional context: Empirical evidence from Russia. 8, 45–70. De
Gruyter.
James, E. (1983). How nonprofits grow: A model. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
2, 350–365.
Keevers, L., Treleaven, L., Sykes, C., & Darcy, M. (2012). Made to measure: Taming practices
with results-based accountability. Organization Studies, 33, 97–120.
Kim, M. (2017). Characteristics of civically engaged nonprofit arts organizations: The results
of a national survey. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 46, 175–198.
King, D. (2017). Becoming business-like: Governing the nonprofit professional. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 46, 241–260.
Knutsen, W. L. (2012). Adapted institutional logics of contemporary nonprofit organizations.
Administration & Society, 44, 985–1013.
Kreutzer, K., & Jager, U. (2011). Volunteering versus Managerialism: Conflict over
Organizational Identity in Voluntary Associations. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly, 40, 634–661.
Kumar, H., Downward, P., Hodgkinson, I., & Manoli, A. E. (2019). Means as well as ends:
Some critical insights for UK sport policy on the impact of facility ownership and
configuration on sports participation. International Journal of Sport Policy and Politics,
11, 415–432.
Levine Daniel, J., & Kim, M. (2018). The scale of mission-embeddedness as a nonprofit
revenue classification tool: Different earned revenue types, different performance
effects. Administration & Society, 50, 947–972.

30

Lindberg, E., & Farkas, G. M. (2016). Much Ado about nothing? A multilevel analysis of the
relationship between voluntary associations’ characteristics and their members’
generalized trust. Journal of Civil Society, 12, 33–56.
Lu, J. (2018a). Organizational antecedents of nonprofit engagement in policy advocacy: A
meta-analytical review. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 47, 177-203.
Lu, J. (2018b). Fear the government? A meta-analysis of the impact of government funding on
nonprofit advocacy engagement. The American Review of Public Administration, 48(3),
203-218.
Maier, F., & Meyer, M. (2011). Managerialism and beyond: Discourses of civil society
organization and their governance implications. Voluntas: International Journal of
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 22, 731-756.
Maier, F., Meyer, M., & Steinbereithner, M. (2016). Nonprofit organizations becoming
business-like: A systematic review. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45, 64–
86.
Mele, V. and P. Belardinelli (2019). "Mixed methods in public administration research:
Selecting, sequencing, and connecting." Journal of public administration research and
theory 29(2): 334-347.
Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth
and ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 340–363.
Moulton, S., & Eckerd, A. (2012). Preserving the publicness of the nonprofit sector: Resources,
roles, and public values. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 41, 656–685.

31

Pauly, R., Verschuere, B., De Rynck, F., & Voets, J. (2020). Changing neo-corporatist
institutions? Examining the relationship between government and civil society
organizations in Belgium. Public Management Review, 23 (8), 1117-1138.
Powell, W. W., & Colyvas, J. A. (2008). Microfoundations of institutional theory. The Sage
Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism, Sage, London, 276-298.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New
York, NY: Simon & Schuster. (AC03045016).
Shirinashihama, Y. (2019). The positive and negative consequences of “managerialization”:
Evidence from Japanese nonprofit elderly care service providers. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 48, 309–333.
Sivesind, K. H., Pospíšilová, T., & Frič, P. (2013). Does volunteering cause trust? A comparison
of the Czech Republic and Norway. European Societies, 15, 106–130.
Silverman, R. M., & Patterson, K. L. (2011). The effects of perceived funding trends on non‐
profit advocacy: A national survey of non‐profit advocacy organizations in the United
States. International Journal of Public Sector Management, 24(5), 435-451.
Skocpol, T. (2013). Diminished democracy: From membership to management in American
civic life. Norman, Okla. et al.: University of Oklahoma Press.
Suárez, D. F., Husted, K., & Casas, A. (2018). Community foundations as advocates: Social
change discourse in the philanthropic sector. Interest Groups & Advocacy, 7, 206–232.
Suykens, B., De Rynck, F., & Verschuere, B. (2019). Nonprofit organizations in between the
nonprofit and market spheres: Shifting goals, governance and management? Nonprofit
Management and Leadership, 29, 623–636.

32

Suykens, B., et al. (2019). "Examining the influence of organizational characteristics on
nonprofit commercialization." Nonprofit Management and Leadership 30(2): 339-351.
Suykens, B., et al. (2020). "Examining the Extent and Coherence of Nonprofit Hybridization
Toward the Market in a Post-corporatist Welfare State." Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly 49(5), 909-930.
Suykens, B., George, B., De Rynck, F., & Verschuere, B. (2020). Determinants of non-profit
commercialism.

Resource

deficits,

institutional

pressures

or

organizational

contingencies?, Public Management Review, 1–23.
Suykens, B., et al. (2021). "Does performance-based accountability impact how non-profit
directors perceive organizational performance? Insights from rational planning, Public
management review, 1-28.
Tatarchevskiy, T. (2011). The ‘popular’culture of internet activism. New Media & Society, 13,
297–313.
Teasdale, S. (2010). How can social enterprise address disadvantage? Evidence from an inner
city community. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 22, 89–107.
Tello-Rozas, S. (2016). Inclusive innovations through social and solidarity economy initiatives:
A process analysis of a Peruvian case study. Voluntas, 27, 61–85.
Toepler, S. (2006). "Caveat Venditor? Museum Merchandising, Nonprofit Commercialization,
and the Case of the Metropolitan Museum in New York." Voluntas: International Journal of
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 17(2): 95-109.
Vaceková, G., Valentinov, V., & Nemec, J. (2017). Rethinking nonprofit commercialization:
The case of the Czech Republic. Voluntas, 28, 2103–2123.

33

Wilsker, A. L., & Young, D. R. (2010). How does program composition affect the revenues of
nonprofit organizations?: Investigating a benefits theory of nonprofit finance. Public
Finance Review, 38, 193–216.
Zhang, Z., & Guo, C. (2021). No advocacy without representation? Nonprofit representational
mix and nonprofit advocacy. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 32(2), 219-239.

34

Tables

35

Dependent variables

Table 1: Means, standard deviations & correlations

Obs.

Mean (SD)

Min
(Max)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

493

16.03 (3.96)

4 (20)

1

.187***

.053

-.175***

.032

.209***

.248***

492

15.52 (3.60)

4 (20)

1

-.031

.156***

.043

.099*

.220***

490

10.18 (3.08)

3 (15)

1

.489***

-.147***

.163***

.105*

492

11.17 (4.14)

4 (20)

1

-.069

.053

.109*

5. Commercial
revenue

486

15.15 (25.75)

0 (100)

1

.239***

.167***

7. Management tool
use

468

16.66 (6.65)

7 (35)

1

.508***

8. Performance
measurement

470

16.86 (4.58)

6 (24)

1. Service delivery
2. Community
building
3. Political advocacy

Independent variables

4. Civic engagement

Note: +p < .10, *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

36

1

Table 2: Linear regression results (Note: +p < .10, *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001)
Service
delivery

Community
building

Political
advocacy

Civic
engagement

• Commercial funding

-.018

.042

-.015

.042

• Management tool use

.158*

-.018

.196***

-.032

• Performance measurement

.131+

.235***

-.008

.123+

• Size

-.007

.042

.053

.077

• Age

-.101+

-.070

.101**

.017

• Public funding

.042

.065

.311***

.316*

• Philanthropic funding

-.096

.079

.257***

.263*

• ICNPO 1. Culture and recreation

-.238***

-.002

-.002

.157*

• ICNPO 2. Education and research

-.175*

-.035

-.136***

.126*

• ICNPO 3. Health

.092+

.009

-.036+

-.023

• ICNPO 4. Social services

Reference

Reference

Reference

Reference

• ICNPO 5. Environment

-.069

-.221***

.037+

.196***

• ICNPO 6. Development & Housing

-.134+

.054

.083***

.173*

• ICNPO 7. Law, Advocacy and
Politics

-.167**

-.061

.126***

.407***

• ICNPO 9. International

-.132*

-.196***

-.047*

.104+

• ICNPO 10. Religion

-.039

.052

-.135***

.051

• ICNPO 11. Business and
Professional Associations, Unions

-.087

-.306***

.280***

.150*

• ICNPO 12. Other

.012

-.110*

.027

.095

Adjusted R2 of the independent
variables

.056

.043

.065

.020

Adjusted R2 full model

.146

.200

.201

.205

F

4.004
(p <.000)

5.389
(p <.000)

5.393
(p < .000)

5.502
(p < .000)

N

299

300

297

298

Independent variables

Control variables

37

Table 3: Overview of findings (n.s. = no significant relationship)
Service
delivery

Community

Political

building

advocacy

Civic
Engagement

Theory

Findings

Theory

Findings

Theory

Findings

Theory

Findings

+

n.s.

-

n.s.

-

n.s.

-

n.s.

Management tool use

+

+

-

n.s.

+

+

-

n.s.

Performance
measurement

+

+

-

+

+

n.s.

-

+

Commercialism

Managerialism

38
View publication stats

