Communication
Theory

Communication
Theory

Thirteen:
Two

May
2003

Pages
164–183

Martin Fishbein
Marco C. Yzer

Using Theory to Design Effective
Health Behavior Interventions

This article demonstrates the usefulness of two theories for the development of
effective  health  communication  campaigns.  The  integrative  model  of  behav-
ioral prediction focuses on changing beliefs about consequences, normative is-
sues, and efficacy with respect to a particular behavior. Media priming theory
focuses  on  strengthening  the  association  between  a  belief  and  its  outcomes,
such as attitude and intention toward performing the behavior. Both the inte-
grative model of behavioral prediction and media priming theory provide guid-
ance with respect to the selection of beliefs to target in an intervention. The
article describes the theories, shows how they can be applied to the selection of
target beliefs, and, for each theory, defines the criteria for belief selection. The
two theories as well as their appropriate analytic strategies are complementary
rather than conflicting.

Those who design interventions that aim to increase health behavior are
faced with a number of decisions when developing the intervention. For
example, decisions need to be made concerning the primary goal of the
intervention, its target population, and the selection of messages for the
intervention. As we will try to demonstrate, two theoretical approaches
provide powerful tools for identifying the specific beliefs that need to be
addressed if one wishes to change or maintain a given behavior. The two
theories exemplify two ways to change a variable, for example, a person’s
intention to perform a health-protective behavior. First, the integrative
model of behavioral prediction represents the more conventional view
that  changing  beliefs  underlying  the  intention  to  perform  a  behavior
ultimately results in changes in intention. Second, media priming theory
represents a more recent account of change. It focuses on the association
between beliefs and intention and predicts that a strengthened associa-
tion between beliefs and intention ultimately results in a change in in-
tention. In this article, we will describe the integrative model of behav-
ioral prediction and media priming theory and demonstrate how these
theories make complementary rather than conflicting contributions to
the development of effective health communication campaigns.

Copyright © 2003 International Communication Association

164

Theory and Health Interventions

Behavioral Prediction
Although many theories have been applied to health-related behavioral
research and to the development of behavioral interventions, some con-
tend that there are only a limited number of variables that need to be
considered in predicting and understanding any given behavior (see, e.g.,
Fishbein et al., 2002; Fisher & Fisher, 1992; Petraitis, Flay, & Miller,
1995; Slater, 1999; Witte, 1995). These variables are contained in three
theories that have been widely used in health behavior research and in-
terventions.

Health Belief Model. The health belief model (Janz & Becker, 1984;
Rosenstock,  1974)  proposes  that  in  order  for  someone  to  perform  a
recommended health behavior, the person must first believe that he or
she is at risk for acquiring a serious and severe negative health outcome
(e.g., coronary heart disease, HIV/AIDS). At the same time, the person
must believe that the benefits of performing the recommended protec-
tive behavior outweigh the costs of performing that behavior. Note that
the costs and benefits of performing one behavior (e.g., using condoms
with main partners) may be very different from costs and benefits of
another behavior (e.g., using condoms with nonmain partners). For
example, although a person might believe that using condoms with
main partners could “suggest that I do not trust my partner,” he or
she may not hold this belief with respect to using condoms with non-
main partners.

Social Cognitive Theory. According to social cognitive theory (Bandura,
1977, 1986, 1997), there are also two primary factors that determine
the likelihood that someone will adopt a health-protective behavior. First,
the person must believe that the positive outcomes (benefits) of performing
the behavior outweigh the negative outcomes (costs). Second, the per-
son must have a sense of personal agency or self-efficacy with respect to
performing the behavior. That is, the person must believe that she or he
can perform the recommended behavior, even in the face of various cir-
cumstances or barriers that make it difficult to perform that behavior.

Theory of Reasoned Action. According to the theory of reasoned ac-
tion (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), performance of
a given behavior is primarily determined by the strength of a person’s
intention  to  perform  that  behavior.  The  intention  to  perform  a  given
behavior  is,  in  turn,  viewed  as  a  function  of  two  factors,  namely  the
person’s attitude toward performing the behavior (i.e., one’s overall posi-
tive or negative feeling about personally performing the behavior) and/
or the person’s subjective norm concerning the behavior (i.e., the person’s
perception that his or her important others think that he or she should
or should not perform the behavior). Attitudes are a function of behav-
ioral beliefs (i.e., beliefs that performing the behavior will lead to certain

165

Communication
Theory

outcomes) and their evaluative aspects (i.e., the evaluation of those out-
comes); subjective norms are viewed as a function of normative beliefs
(i.e., beliefs that a specific individual or group has regarding whether
one should or should not perform the behavior in question) and motiva-
tions to comply (i.e., the degree to which, in general, one wants to do
what the referent thinks one should do).

Taken together, these three theories identify a limited number of vari-
ables that serve as determinants of any given behavior. Although there is
considerable empirical evidence for the role of attitude, perceived norms,
and  self-efficacy  as  proximal  determinants  of  intention  and  behavior
(e.g.,  Sheeran,  Abraham,  &  Orbell,  1999;  Sheppard,  Hartwick,  &
Warshaw, 1988), the support for the role of perceived risk is inconsis-
tent.  Whereas  methodological  and  conceptual  flaws  in  perceived  risk
research may account for part of this inconsistency (Poppen & Reisen,
1997;  Weinstein  &  Nicolich,  1993),  available  evidence  suggests  that
perceived risk is best viewed as a “distal” rather than as a “proximal”
predictor of intention and behavior (e.g., Gerrard, Gibbons, & Bush-
man, 1996). Thus, most behavioral theories suggest three critical deter-
minants of a person’s intentions and behaviors: (a) the person’s attitude
toward performing the behavior, which is based upon one’s beliefs about
the positive and negative consequences (i.e., costs and benefits) of per-
forming that behavior; (b) perceived norms, which include the percep-
tion that those with whom the individual interacts most closely support
the person’s adoption of the behavior and that others in the community
are  performing  the  behavior;  and  (c)  self-efficacy,  which  involves  the
person’s  perception  that  she  or  he  can  perform  the  behavior  under  a
variety of challenging circumstances. These variables have recently been
incorporated in an integrative model of behavioral prediction (Fishbein,
2000; Fishbein et al., 2002).
An Integrated Theoretical Model
According to the model, any given behavior is most likely to occur if one
has a strong intention to perform the behavior, if a person has the neces-
sary skills and abilities required to perform the behavior, and if there are
no  environmental  constraints  preventing  behavioral  performance  (see
Figure 1). Indeed, if a person has formed a strong intention to perform a
given behavior and has the necessary skills and abilities to perform the
behavior, and if there are no environmental constraints to prevent the
performance of that behavior, there is a high probability that the behav-
ior will be performed (Fishbein, 2000; Fishbein et al., 2002).

One immediate implication of this model is that very different types
of interventions will be necessary for people who have formed an inten-
tion but are unable to act upon it, than for people who have little or no
intention to perform the recommended behavior. In some populations

166

Theory and Health Interventions

Behavioral
beliefs &
outcome
evaluations

○

○

○

○

Attitude

Skills

Figure 1.
An
Integrative
Model of
Behavioral
Prediction

Normative
beliefs &
motivation to
comply

Perceived
norm

Intention

Behavior

○

○

Efficacy
beliefs

○

Self-efficacy

Environmental
constraint

Distal variables

Demographic
variables

Culture

Attitudes toward
targets, e.g.,
stereotypes
and stigmas

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

Personality,
moods,
and emotions

○
○
○

○

Other individual
differences
variables, e.g.,
perceived risk

Exposure to
media and
other
interventions

or cultures, the behavior may not be performed because people have not
yet formed intentions to perform the behavior, whereas in others, the
problem may be a lack of skills or the presence of environmental con-
straints. Clearly, if people have formed the desired intention but are not
acting  on  it,  a  successful  intervention  will  be  directed  either  at  skills
building or at removing (or helping people to overcome) environmental
constraints.

On the other hand, if strong intentions to perform the behavior in
question have not been formed, the model suggests that there are three
primary determinants of intention: the attitude toward performing the
behavior, perceived norms concerning performing the behavior, and one’s
self-efficacy with respect to performing the behavior. It is important to
recognize that the relative importance of these three psychosocial vari-
ables as determinants of intention will depend upon both the behavior
and the population being considered. Thus, for example, one behavior
may be primarily determined by attitudinal considerations while another
may be primarily influenced by feelings of self-efficacy. Similarly, a be-
havior that is attitudinally driven in one population or culture may be
normatively driven in another. Thus, before developing communications
to change intentions, it is important to first determine the degree to which
that intention is under attitudinal, normative, or self-efficacy control in
the population in question.

The model in Figure 1 also recognizes that attitudes, perceived norms,
and self-efficacy are all, themselves, functions of underlying beliefs about

167

Communication
Theory

the outcomes of performing the behavior in question, the normative pro-
scriptions of specific referents, and specific barriers to (or facilitators of)
behavioral performance. For example, the more one believes that per-
forming the behavior in question will lead to “good” outcomes and pre-
vent “bad” outcomes, the more favorable one’s attitude should be to-
ward performing the behavior. Similarly, the more a person believes that
specific others think he or she should or should not perform the behav-
ior in question, and the more motivated a person is to comply with those
specific others, the stronger will be the subjective norm to perform or
not perform the behavior. Finally, the more a person perceives that he or
she can (i.e., has the necessary skills and abilities to) perform the behav-
ior, even in the face of specific barriers or obstacles, the stronger will be
the person’s self-efficacy with respect to performing the behavior.

At this level the substantive uniqueness of each behavior comes into
play.  For  example,  the  barriers  to  getting  a  mammogram  or  the  out-
comes (or consequences) of getting a mammogram may be very differ-
ent from those associated with taking a PSA test (Protein Specific Anti-
gen for prostate cancer) or getting genetic screening. Yet these specific
beliefs must be addressed in a communication if one wishes to change
intentions and behavior. Although investigators can sit in their offices
and develop measures of attitudes, perceived norms, and self-efficacy,
they  cannot  tell  what  a  particular  population  (or  a  given  person)  be-
lieves about performing a given behavior. The investigator must go to
members of that population to identify salient outcome, normative, and
efficacy beliefs. That is, one must understand the behavior from the per-
spective of the population under consideration.

Finally, Figure 1 also shows the role played by more traditional de-
mographic, personality, attitudinal, and other individual difference vari-
ables  (such  as  perceived  risk  or  sensation  seeking).  According  to  the
model, these types of variables play primarily an indirect role in influ-
encing behavior. These distal variables such as cultural and personality
differences should be reflected in the underlying belief structure.
Applying the Model
The first implication in using the integrated model is identifying the be-
havior that is the target for change or reinforcement. Unfortunately, this
is not nearly as simple or straightforward as is often assumed. First, it is
important to distinguish between behaviors, behavioral categories, and
goals. One of the lessons we have learned is that the most effective inter-
ventions will be those directed at changing specific behaviors (e.g., walk
for  20  minutes  three  times  a  week)  rather  than  behavioral  categories
(e.g., exercise) or goals (e.g., lose weight; see, e.g., Fishbein, 1995, 2000).
The definition of a behavior involves several elements: the action (get-
ting/using/buying), the target (a mammogram/a condom), and the con-

168

Theory and Health Interventions

text (at the women’s clinic/for vaginal sex with my spouse). Clearly, a
change in any one of the elements changes the behavior under consider-
ation. Thus, for example, getting a mammogram is a different behavior
than getting a PSA test (a change in target). Similarly, getting a mammo-
gram at the woman’s clinic is a different behavior than getting a mam-
mogram at the university hospital (a change in context). Moreover, it is
also important to include an additional element of time. Getting a mam-
mogram in the next 3 months is a different behavior than getting a mam-
mogram in the next 2 years.

Once one or more behaviors have been identified, the model can be
utilized to help explain why some members of a target population are
performing the behavior and others are not. That is, by obtaining mea-
sures of beliefs, attitudes, norms, self-efficacy, intention, and behavior,
an investigator can determine whether people are not performing a spe-
cific behavior, such as getting a colonoscopy, because they have not formed
an intention to get a colonoscopy or because they are unable to act on
their intention. Similarly, an investigator can (a) determine whether in-
tention is influenced primarily by attitudes, norms, or self-efficacy in the
population under consideration, and (b) identify the specific beliefs that
discriminate  between  those  who  do  or  do  not  intend  to  perform  the
behavior. It is these discriminating beliefs that need to be addressed in a
theory-based communication. That is, although the ultimate goal of health
communication should be to reinforce or change a given health-related
behavior, it should be recognized that communication, at best, creates
or changes specific beliefs. When the beliefs are appropriately selected,
these changes should, in turn, influence attitudes, perceived norms, or
self-efficacy—the proximal determinants of the intention to engage in
the behavior.
Identifying Intervention Goals and
Target Populations
The model suggests that a given behavior may not be performed either
because a person has formed an intention to perform the recommended
behavior but is unable to act upon it, or because the person has little or
no intention to perform the recommended behavior. The importance of
this classification is that very different types of interventions will be nec-
essary if one has formed an intention and acts accordingly, if one has
formed an intention but is unable to act upon it, or if one has little or no
intention to perform the behavior.

Let  us  illustrate  the  point.  Project  RESPECT  is  a  randomized  trial
designed to increase condom use with both regular and occasional part-
ners among clients attending inner-city STD clinics (Kamb et al., 1996;
Kamb et al., 1998). Table 1 shows that in the RESPECT data set, most
people (72%) intended to always use condoms for vaginal sex with their

169

Communication
Theory

Table1.
Intention–
Behavior
Configuration:
Condom
Use

  Consistent condom use

    No

              Yes

                Total

Intention to always
use condoms

No

Yes

383 (25%)

41    (3%)

424 (28%)

567 (37%)

536 (35%)

1103 (72%)

Total

950 (62%)

577 (38%)

1527 (100%)

Note. Intention measured immediately after the intervention. Condom use measured 3 months
after the intervention.

main partners, but that only half of these people acted upon their inten-
tion and used condoms consistently. In contrast, of the 424 people who
did not intend to always use condoms, 90% acted in keeping with their
intention, that is, they did not use condoms consistently.

It should be clear that the four cells have different implications for the
development of interventions. These implications can be derived directly
from the integrative model. Table 2 shows that if people have not formed
the  desired  intention,  an  intervention  should  be  directed  at  changing
attitudes, norms, or self-efficacy. On the other hand, if people have formed
the desired intention but are not acting on it, the intervention should be
directed either at skills building or at removing (or helping people to
overcome) environmental constraints. However, if people have formed
a strong intention to perform the recommended behavior and act ac-
cordingly,  one  may  not  need  to  intervene,  or  the  intervention’s  focus
should be on helping people maintain their positive intention.

Table 1 reveals that 424 people, or 28% of the total sample, had not
formed intentions to use condoms, whereas 567 people, or 37% of the
sample, intended to use condoms but did not end up consistently using
them 3 months later. This information raises important questions for
the health educator. First, should the intervention be designed to change
intentions or to help people with positive intentions act on those inten-
tions?  If  the  latter,  the  health  educator  needs  to  know  whether  these
people were unable to act upon their intentions because they lacked the
skills to perform the behavior, because environmental factors hindered
performing the behavior, or because they changed their intention in the
3 months between intervention and follow-up.

The  health  educator  needs  to  decide  how  important  it  is  to  target
these different groups. How many people who intend to perform a rec-
ommended behavior but do not act upon it are needed to justify focus-
ing  on  this  group?  In  the  example  above,  it  would  appear  that  more
benefit would be obtained if one focused on helping people act on their
intentions (37%) rather than trying to get those who did not intend to

170

Theory and Health Interventions

            Performance of the recommend behavior

        No

       Yes

    Intention to
    perform the
    recommended
    behavior

No

Yes

Change outcome, normative,
and/or self-efficacy beliefs

Change outcome, normative,
and/or self-efficacy beliefs

•  Improve skills
•  Reduce/help overcome
   environmental barriers

No intervention necessary
or maintain positive intention

Table 2.
Intention–
Behavior
Configura-
tion:
Implications
for Interven-
tions.

use condoms to intend to do so (28%). However, given the large propor-
tion of the population in each of these groups, both types of interven-
tion may be necessary. In a similar vein, the health educator needs to
have some estimate of the expected effectiveness of both strategies. For
example, it may prove more difficult for a communication campaign to
change skills and/or environmental constraints than to change the deter-
minants underlying people’s intentions to perform a behavior. Thus, al-
though the RESPECT example suggests that a communication that fo-
cuses on skills and/or environmental constraints would help more people
than one that tries to change intentions, the net result in terms of those
who ultimately perform the recommended behavior may be highest when
a communication aims at changing intentions.

In many cases, however, longitudinal data on the intention-behavior
relationship are not available. For example, consider the data in Table 3,
which comes from a mall-based survey of 600 adolescents (ages 11 to
19) conducted by Opinion One, a market research firm, for researchers
at the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg School for Communica-
tion. Table 3 shows the percentage of adolescents who have and have
not used marijuana in the past 12 months and who do or do not intend
to  use  marijuana  in  the  next  12  months.  It  can  be  seen  that,  in  this
sample, about 25% have used marijuana in the past year. Among those
who have never used marijuana, over 75% (338 persons, or 57% of the
total sample) say they definitely will not use marijuana in the coming
year.  In  contrast,  among  those  who  have  used  marijuana  in  the  past
year, only 12% (17 persons, or 3% of the total sample) say they defi-
nitely will not use marijuana in the coming year. The health educator is
faced with a dilemma once again. Should the intervention try to (a) in-
crease the number of people who say they will definitely not use mari-
juana in the next year (i.e., change 40% of the total sample) or (b) help
those who say they definitely will not use marijuana act on those inten-
tions (60%)? Equally important, should the intervention try to help non-
users who say they will definitely not use marijuana (57% of the total
sample) act on their intentions, or should the intervention try to change

171

Communication
Theory

Table 3.
Intention–
Past
Behavior
Configura-
tion:
Marijuana
Use

                                                            Used marijuana in past 12 months

Intention

     No                    Yes                     Total

Definitely won’t use

338 (57%)

17 (3%)

355 (60%)

Other than definitely won’t

110 (18%)

129 (22%)

239 (40%)

Total

448 (75%)         146 (25%)        594 (100%)

the intentions of nonusers (18% of the total sample) or of current users
(22% of the total sample) who may intend to use marijuana in the next
12 months? Although the first impression might be to direct an inter-
vention at helping the never-users act on their negative intentions (57%
of the total sample), it is quite likely that most of these adolescents will
act in accord with their intentions whether one intervenes or not. In-
deed, the greatest benefit may be obtained if one could convince nonus-
ers  who  are  somewhat  uncertain  about  future  use  (19%  of  the  total
population)  to  form  intentions  to  definitely  not  use  marijuana  in  the
future. Although it would also be beneficial to change the intentions of
current  users  (22%  of  the  total  population),  this  would  probably  be
much more difficult than changing the intentions of current nonusers.
Moreover, because nonusers and current users represent two different
populations, changing the intentions of current users may require a very
different intervention than changing the intentions of current nonusers.
For example, although nonusers’ intentions may be largely attitudinally
controlled, current users’ intentions may be primarily influenced by nor-
mative considerations or feelings of self-efficacy. The above examples
show that the position of the target population in the intention-behavior
configuration  determines  the  type  of  intervention  that  is  needed.  The
examples also show that the same intervention may not be equally effec-
tive in all populations.
The Selection of Beliefs to Target in a
Communication
As indicated above, proper use of theory should help the researcher iden-
tify  whether,  in  any  given  population,  a  particular  behavior  is  deter-
mined primarily by attitudinal, normative, or efficacy considerations, or
some combination thereof. It should further lead to the identification of
a number of behavioral, normative, or control beliefs that clearly dis-
criminate between people who do or do not engage in the behavior in
question, that is, beliefs that are highly correlated with the intention or
behavior. The question is which of these beliefs a communication should
address.

Hornik and Woolf (1999) examined the characteristics of candidate

172

Theory and Health Interventions

                                                    % saying

        % saying

Belief                                             extremely likely           quite likely

         % saying
         either

Makes you relaxed

Makes partner relaxed

Feels cleaner

Less messy

Responsible thing to do

Show partner you care

Prolong sex

Make insertion easier

27.0

28.4

26.1

21.8

51.7

27.5

11.4

5.2

20.9

25.1

11.8

19.0

27.5

28.0

16.6

7.6

47.9

53.5

37.9

40.8

79.2

55.5

28.0

12.8

Note. Adapted from Fishbein, von Haeften, and Appleyard (2001).

Table 4.
Behavioral
Beliefs
About
Positive
Outcomes
of Condom
Use

beliefs for interventions that are grounded in behavioral theory, which
attempt to ultimately affect intention and behavior. According to these
authors, there are three things to consider in identifying beliefs to target
in an intervention. First, Hornik and Woolf suggest that, in the popula-
tion  under  consideration,  the  belief  should  be  strongly  related  to  the
intention  or  behavior  one  wishes  to  change.  Second,  there  should  be
enough people who do not already hold the targeted belief (e.g., who do
not  believe  that  consistent  condom  use  will  lead  to  a  positive  conse-
quence or who believe that consistent condom use will lead to a negative
consequence) to warrant trying to change it. Thus one must consider
whether an intervention designed to change a given belief has the poten-
tial of moving enough people to make the intervention worthwhile. Fi-
nally, one must consider whether it is in fact possible to change the be-
lief: Can one support the belief with a plausible argument based on strong
evidence?

Correlation With Intention and Behavior. Clearly, with respect to
the first criterion, it is relatively easy to use theory-based survey data to
identify beliefs that discriminate between intenders and nonintenders or
that are highly correlated with the intention or behavior one wishes to
change.

How Many People Already Hold the Targeted Belief? Even though
a belief may be significantly correlated with the intention and behavior
one wishes to change, little will be accomplished if most people already
strongly hold the belief in question. However, this does not necessarily
mean  that  moving  people  from  being  “somewhat  positive”  to  “very
positive”  will  yield  negligible  effects.  To  illustrate  this  point,  Table  4
presents data from Project SAFER, a longitudinal study of condom use
behaviors in a number of “at-risk” populations (Fishbein, von Haeften,

173

Communication
Theory

Table 5.
Percentage
of People
With Strong
Intentions to
Always Use
Condoms as
a Function
of the
Strength of
Their
Behavioral
Beliefs
About
Positive
Outcomes

                                                              % having very strong intentions
                                                              among those who believe the outcome is

Belief                                                     Extremely likely          Quite likely

Makes you relaxed

Makes partner relaxed

Feels cleaner

Less messy

Responsible thing to do

Show partner you care

Prolong sex

Make insertion easier

66.7%

27.3%

61.7

56.4

39.1

45.9

56.9

54.2

81.8

24.2

16.0

22.5

8.6

22.0

31.4

37.5

Note. Adapted from Fishbein, von Haeften, and Appleyard (2001).
Note. Adapted from Fishbein, von Haeften, and Appleyard (2001).

& Appleyard, 2001; Kasprzyk, Montano, & Fishbein, 2001).

Table 4 shows the percentage of people who said it was “quite likely”
or “extremely likely” that consistent condom use for vaginal sex with
their main partner would lead to a number of positive outcomes. It can
be seen that even the belief that is held most strongly by this population
(i.e., the belief that consistent condom use is the responsible thing to do)
is only fully accepted (i.e., rated “extremely likely”) by 51.7% of the
population.  Because  another  28.5%  say  that  this  positive  outcome  is
quite likely, one could argue that almost 80% strongly hold this belief.
Thus, it becomes important to determine whether moving people from
“quite likely” to “extremely likely” could make a difference.

For each of the behavioral beliefs in Table 4, Table 5 shows the poten-
tial impact on intention of moving people from “quite likely” to “ex-
tremely likely.” More specifically, it shows the percentage of people from
among those who said a given belief was either “quite likely” or “ex-
tremely likely” who also hold very strong intentions (i.e., have a score of
+3 on a -3 to +3 scale) to always use condoms for vaginal sex with their
regular partners. For example, of those who think it is “extremely likely”
that condom use “is the responsible thing to do,” 45.9% hold very strong
intentions to always use condoms, but of those who think it is “quite
likely”  that  condom  use  “is  the  responsible  thing  to  do,”  only  8.6%
hold equally strong intentions. Similarly, of the people who believe it is
“extremely likely” that consistent condom use “would make them feel
more relaxed,” 66.7% hold very strong intentions to always use condoms,
but of those who think it is “quite likely,” only 27.3% hold such strong
intentions. These data make it clear that the criterion of “enough people
to move” does not simply imply that when most people already hold a

174

Theory and Health Interventions

belief, this belief cannot be a candidate to target in an intervention. On
the contrary, a message that moves people from believing that a given
consequence of condom use is “quite likely” to believing that the conse-
quence is “extremely likely” can have significant impacts on the forma-
tion of very strong intentions to always use condoms. Thus, when se-
lecting a belief to change in an intervention, we should not only know
how many people already hold that belief, but also examine the impact
that moving people to fully accept the belief has on their intention to
adopt the recommended behavior. The example presented here illustrates
that very substantial effects on intended health behavior may occur when
a message produces relatively little belief change.

Can the Belief Be Changed? In stark contrast to the first two crite-
ria, which are empirically based, the third criterion suggested by Hornik
and Woolf (1999) is largely a subjective judgment. Clearly, not all be-
liefs are equally amenable to change, and relatively little will be accom-
plished by attacking a belief that is very difficult, if not impossible, to
change. For example, if a man has used a condom and, as a result, strongly
believes that “using a condom decreases my sexual sensation,” it may
not be possible to change this belief with a communication. Common
sense suggests that beliefs based on one’s own direct experience will be
more difficult to change than those based on information provided by
others.

Media Priming
Corresponding to the integrated model of behavioral prediction, most
research involving interventions typically starts from the premise that
the interventions (should) change beliefs and related variables. Media
priming  theory  refocuses  the  researchers’  attention  in  a  second  direc-
tion. Whereas the integrated model of behavioral prediction postulates
that an intervention can produce an effect by changing the mean value
of a variable, priming theory proposes that such effects can also occur
by changing the association between a predictor and its outcome, even
while the means for the predictor remains the same. The process that
yields this effect has come to be known as media priming (e.g., Domke,
Shah, & Wackman, 1998; Iyengar & Kinder, 1987; Mendelsohn, 1996).
To illustrate the process of media priming, recall that attitudes toward
marijuana use are determined by beliefs about negative and positive con-
sequences of marijuana use. Suppose that one message tells about nega-
tive outcomes of marijuana use, while a second message tells about posi-
tive outcomes of marijuana use. Media priming predicts that, in com-
parison to nonexposure, exposure to the first message alone strengthens
the  correlation  between  beliefs  about  negative  outcomes  and  attitude

175

Communication
Theory

and  that  exposure  to  the  second  message  strengthens  the  correlation
between beliefs about positive outcomes and attitude. Such priming ef-
fects presumably occur because exposure to a message increases the ac-
cessibility of information that is presented in the message and, the more
accessible the information, the more it influences attitude, norms, and
self-efficacy (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987).

The  integrated  model  of  behavioral  prediction  and  media  priming
theory are not mutually exclusive. That is, an intervention can simulta-
neously  yield  changes  in  mean  values  and  changes  in  the  association
between a predictor variable and its outcome. At the same time, how-
ever, it is clear that priming theory offers a different account of message
effects on beliefs and intentions than the integrated model of behavioral
prediction. To illustrate the differences between these approaches, we
present a hypothetical example. The example assumes that an interven-
tion targets the attitude toward trying marijuana in the next 12 months.
A further assumption is that two beliefs are relevant, namely that trying
marijuana damages the brain (belief A) and that it leads to acceptance
by  your  friends  (belief  B).  Table  6  describes  four  hypothetical  condi-
tions: (a) baseline, preintervention, (b) an intervention primes belief A,
(c) an intervention changes the mean of belief A, and (d) an intervention
primes and changes belief A.

At baseline, the relative importance (or regression weight) of belief A
as a predictor of attitude is –.3. The negative sign denotes that the belief
that marijuana trial damages one’s brains negatively affects one’s atti-
tude toward trying marijuana. The mean of belief A is 1 on a –2 (the
outcome of marijuana trial is very unlikely) to +2 (the outcome of mari-
juana trial is very likely) scale, denoting that on average people find it
somewhat likely that marijuana trial will do damage to the brain. For
belief B, the weight is .5 and the mean value is –1, suggesting that on
average people think that it is somewhat unlikely that friends will accept
them if they try marijuana. Thus, given the regression equation of pre-
dicted attitude as attitude = [(weight of belief A) x (mean of belief A)] +
[(weight of belief B) x (mean of belief B)], attitude at baseline is slightly
negative (–0.8).

The assumption underlying the remaining three conditions is that an
intervention focuses on belief A only. Condition 2 represents pure prim-
ing: There is no effect on the mean of belief A, but its weight, that is, the
association  between  belief  A  and  attitude,  is  stronger  compared  to
baseline. As a result of priming the belief that marijuana trial damages
your brain, the attitude toward trying marijuana now is more negative,
–1.0 compared to –0.8. In Condition 3 the weight of belief A is unaf-
fected, but its mean value has changed from 1 to 2. Correspondingly,
attitude is more negative, –1.1 compared to –0.8. Finally, when belief A

176

Theory and Health Interventions

   Predicted     Wt. of      Mean of      Wt. of      Mean of
Condition                                                   attitude         belief A   belief A       belief B   belief B

Baseline

Intervention primes belief A

Intervention changes mean of belief A

Intervention primes and changes belief A

-0.8

-1.0

-1.1

-1.5

-.3

-.5

-.3

-.5

1

1

2

2

.5

.5

.5

.5

-1

-1

-1

-1

Note. Beliefs measured on -2 (very unlikely) to +2 (very likely) scale. Belief A: Marijuana trial
damages your brains; belief B: marijuana trial yields acceptance by friends. Predicted attitude =
[(regression weight of belief A) x (mean of belief A)] + [(regression weight of belief B) x (mean of
belief B)]. Example adapted from Cappella et al. (2000).

Table 6.
Comparison
of Media
Priming
Theory and
Theory of
Behavioral
Prediction:
A Hypotheti-
cal Example
of Effects
on Attitude

is both primed and changed (Condition 4), attitude toward marijuana
trial changes from slightly negative (–0.8) to negative (–1.5). Thus, the
example shows that an intervention can change attitude toward a par-
ticular behavior by persuading someone to believe differently about the
behavior and by augmenting the association between the belief and atti-
tude. In addition, the example shows that belief change and priming can
have complementary effects on attitude change.
Analyzing Intervention Effects
Table 6 suggests that the integrated model of behavioral prediction and
priming theory point to different analytic approaches to investigating
intervention effects. The integrated model can be used to examine changes
in means by comparing means in an intervention condition to those in a
baseline or a control condition. Priming theory will lead one to look for
changes in the association between the primed variable and its outcomes.
For example, change in attitude toward using marijuana, says priming
theory, can be found in changes in the correlation with key beliefs that
predict attitude. Because a correlation between a belief and attitude is
the ratio of the covariance between the belief and attitude to the vari-
ance of the belief times the variance in attitude, differences in correla-
tion can be traced to differences in variance, covariance, or both.1 Yzer,
Cappella, Fishbein, Hornik, and Ahern (2003) used this technique in a
study on the effects of an antimarijuana intervention that targeted be-
liefs about negative outcomes of regular marijuana use. Unexpectedly,
they found lower correlations between these beliefs and attitude in the
intervention  condition  than  in  the  control  condition.  By  applying  the
covariance-variance technique, the authors found that the variance in
attitude did not differ between the control and the intervention condi-
tion. The results also suggested that the difference in covariance between
the  control  and  intervention  condition  was  very  small.  However,  the
variance in the beliefs was significantly lower in the control condition

177

Communication
Theory

than in the intervention condition. It thus appears that the attenuated
correlations with attitude in the intervention condition were due to in-
creased variability of belief scores in the intervention condition rather
than  to  a  weakened  association.  A  further  exploration  of  the  results,
using the same covariance-variance technique, showed that the attenu-
ated correlation between beliefs and attitude was primarily the result of
increasing  separation  between  adolescents  at  low  and  at  high  risk  in
beliefs about negative outcomes of regular marijuana use. At-risk ado-
lescents in the intervention condition moved toward disbelieving that
regular marijuana use has negative outcomes. This is a subtle and im-
portant effect, given that no differences in means were found. Thus, the
covariance-variance  technique  helps  us  understand  priming  effects  by
showing whether a difference in correlation is due to movements in co-
variance (association), variance, or both.
Media Priming as an Alternative
Approach to Selecting Beliefs
Given  that  priming  theory  proposes  a  different  route  to  attitude  and
behavior change than the integrated model of behavioral prediction, what
would priming theory recommend for selecting beliefs for a communi-
cation campaign? In essence, priming theory does not require a belief to
meet any one of the three considerations outlined by Hornik and Woolf
(1999). Priming theory assumes only that exposure to the targeted belief
activates the belief and, hence, increases its association with attitude or
intention. Therefore, a strong correlation between a belief and its out-
come is not required, nor is it necessary that strong arguments are used
in the message. We already discussed that a belief may even be a target
candidate when most members of a population already hold the belief,
because  minor  changes  in  already  positive  beliefs  can  produce  strong
intention effects. Priming theory suggests a second reason for sometimes
recommending the targeting of beliefs that are already held by the ma-
jority of the population. To illustrate this, Table 7 presents data from a
research study on the effects of antimarijuana messages on adolescents
(see Yzer et al., 2003). The data were taken from a sample of adoles-
cents who are at increased risk for using marijuana and pertain to 10
beliefs about the outcomes of using marijuana regularly.

The beliefs are rank-ordered in terms of extremity, that is, the list runs
from outcomes that are believed to be either very unlikely or very likely
(scores near –2 or +2) to outcomes that are believed to be neither un-
likely  nor  likely  (a  score  near  0).  The  at-risk  adolescents  believe  that
outcomes 1–4 are most likely. The mean values of these beliefs are in the
“right” direction, that is, they do not support marijuana use. The means
of outcomes 5–10 are closer to the midpoint of the scale, that is, they are
believed to be somewhat unlikely or somewhat likely. More importantly,

178

Table 7.
Beliefs
About
Outcomes of
Regularly
Using
Marijuana

Theory and Health Interventions

Correlation with

M

       Attitude

  Intention

If I used marijuana regularly, I would . . .

Damage my lungs

Upset my parents

Be a bad role model

Damage my brain

Lose my friends

Lose my friends’ respect

Have a good time with my friends

Feel lonely

Be like other teens my age

Not be able to get a job

1.10

1.06

.97

.83

-.61

-.40

.37

-.32

.32

-.21

-.17

-.28

-.31

-.32

-.49

-.46

.39

-.36

-.02

-.41

-.22

-.25

-.27

-.26

-.41

-.38

.39

-.37

-.02

-.43

Note. All beliefs measured on a -2 (very unlikely) to +2 (very likely) scale.
Note: All beliefs measured on a -2 (very unlikely) to +2 (very likely) scale.

however, they are in the “wrong” direction, that is, they are supportive
of  marijuana  use.  For  example,  at-risk  adolescents  believe  that  mari-
juana use does not result in their losing their friends or in feeling lonely.
They further believe that marijuana use will result in having a good time
with their friends and being like other teens their own age. It is reason-
able  to  assume  that  the  mean  values  of  these  beliefs  are  the  result  of
directly experiencing the consequences of marijuana use. Thus, for ex-
ample, it will be very hard if not impossible to persuade at-risk adoles-
cents that marijuana use will make them feel lonely if they know from
experience that it will not.

Priming  theory  proposes  that  the  best  strategy  here  is  to  focus  on
outcomes 1–4. Note that this strategy is at odds with Hornik and Woolf’s
(1999) consideration that there is too little room to move these beliefs.
Priming theory does not require that beliefs can be moved; its only con-
sideration is that exposure to a message about the belief can increase the
association of the belief with attitude and intention. The rationale for
priming outcomes 1–4 is that activating these outcomes increases the
likelihood that a person’s attitude and intention toward using marijuana
are based on the primed beliefs, that is, beliefs that do not support mari-
juana use. As a result, attitude and intention would also be unfavorable
toward marijuana use. A focus on outcomes 5–10 could have adverse
effects. These beliefs meet two of Hornik and Woolf’s (1999) criteria:
There is room to move these beliefs, and all are correlated with attitude
and intention. However, it may prove to be difficult to mount strong

179

Communication
Theory

arguments  to  change  these  beliefs.  If  the  intervention  fails  to  change
these beliefs, it may still have primed them, thereby increasing the im-
portance of beliefs that support marijuana use. This would be an unde-
sirable result.

In sum, in terms of priming theory, an effective communication cam-
paign increases the association between beliefs that are consonant with
the recommended behavior and the more proximal determinants of that
behavior (i.e., attitudes, norms, self-efficacy, and intention). That is, the
campaign’s message strategy would be to identify and target attitudinal,
normative, or self-efficacy beliefs that are consonant with the behavior.
The example presented in Table 7 shows that in some situations the best
target candidates are beliefs that are already held by the majority of a
population.
Conclusions
In this article we have tried to show that theory is a powerful tool in
helping  make  informed  decisions  when  developing  a  communication
campaign. For the purpose of illustration we focused on health commu-
nication and behavior, but most of our recommendations can also be
applied  to  other  behavioral  domains,  such  as  consumer  and  political
behavior.

On the basis of an integrative model of behavioral prediction we pre-
sented an intention–behavior configuration that provides a useful ma-
trix for classifying one’s target population in terms of whether or not
they  intended  to  perform  a  behavior,  and  whether  or  not  they  acted
upon their intention. Importantly, each of the cells in the intention–be-
havior configuration implies different interventions. For example, to help
people who do not act upon their positive intentions overcome environ-
mental barriers calls for a fundamentally different intervention than to
induce people to form positive intentions. It is recognized that the inte-
grative model of behavioral prediction is particularly useful for inter-
ventions  that  aim  to  develop  and  strengthen  intentions  to  perform  a
recommended behavior. For such interventions, appropriate application
of the integrative model can identify the critical determinants of a given
intention  (or  behavior)  as  well  as  the  critical  beliefs  underlying  these
determinants.

In addition to the integrative model of behavioral prediction, priming
theory also provides guidance with respect to the selection of beliefs to
target in an intervention. The integrative model of behavioral predic-
tion, which focuses on changing beliefs, holds that a belief is a target
candidate if it is not accepted by all, if it is associated with attitude or
intention, and if credible arguments can be mounted. Priming theory,
which focuses on strengthening the association between a belief and its

180

Theory and Health Interventions

outcomes, holds that a belief is a target candidate if it is consonant with
the recommended behavior, and—especially when dissonant beliefs are
important in a population—if most people already hold the consonant
belief.  The  two  theories  and  their  appropriate  analytic  strategies  are
complementary. A health educator can therefore design an intervention
to both change beliefs and strengthen the association between the belief
and attitude and/or intention.

Although theory can help select target beliefs for an intervention, it
does not tell one how to best change these beliefs or whether these be-
liefs are amenable to change. Consistent with this, Hornik and Woolf
(1999)  have  distinguished  between  message  strategy  and  the  message
per se. According to these authors, message strategy refers “to the essen-
tial  belief(s)  that  a  message  will  be  designed  to  impart”  whereas  the
message per se is “the product of a creative process that will turn the
strategy into a specific realization.” Unfortunately, there are no general
theories of message creation to guide one in turning a given strategy into
a specific realization. There are, however, a number of theoretical ap-
proaches  to  messages  and  persuasion,  such  as  exemplification  theory
(Zillmann, 1999), fear appeals (Witte, 1992), and the activation model
of information exposure (Donohew, Lorch, & Palmgreen, 1991, 1998).
These theories provide insight into possible effects of certain message
characteristics, but they do not clearly define the circumstances under
which they can be applied. More importantly, these theories do not con-
sider which beliefs to target in an intervention. It is at this point where
the usefulness of the integrative model of behavioral prediction and prim-
ing theory become apparent.

It  is  clear  that  theory  is  an  important  tool  for  the  development  of
effective communication campaigns that aim to change people’s inten-
tions  to  engage  in  a  health  behavior.  This  article  shows  that  in  such
campaigns, theory helps identify the beliefs that need to be targeted in
order to change people’s intention. Campaigns that target people who
have formed a positive intention but do not act upon it may need to
focus on other variables than beliefs. The integrative model of behav-
ioral prediction suggests that people do not act upon their intentions
because they lack the skills to perform the behavior, because there are
environmental barriers that hinder performance of the behavior, or both.
Therefore, an intervention should aim to improve people’s skills or help
people overcome barriers to performing the behavior, or both. It may be
that communication campaigns are not the most effective means to bring
about changes in these factors. Rather, it may prove necessary to train
people to develop skills to perform the behavior and overcome barriers.

181

Communication
Theory

Author

Martin Fishbein (PhD, UCLA) is Harry C. Coles, Jr., Distinguished Professor of Communication at
the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg Public Policy Center. Marco C. Yzer (PhD, University
of Groningen) is at the Amsterdam School of Communications Research (ASCoR), University of
Amsterdam,  the  Netherlands.  The  authors  are  grateful  to  Joseph  Cappella  for  his  helpful  com-
ments. Address correspondence to M. Fishbein, Annenberg Public Policy Center, University of Penn-
sylvania, 3620 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104–6220; email mfishbein@asc.upenn.edu.

Note

1 Many if not most current structural equation software packages can handle such a covariance-
variance technique nicely.

References

Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy theory: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psycho-

logical Review, 84, 191–215.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Cappella, J. N., Fishbein, M., Hornik, R., Ahern, R. K., & Sayeed, S. (2000). Using theory to select
messages in antidrug media campaigns: Reasoned action and media priming. In R. Rice & C. K.
Atkins (Eds.), Public communication campaigns (pp. 214–230). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Domke, D., Shah, D. V., & Wackman, D. B. (1998). Media priming effects: Accessibility, associa-

tion, and activation. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 10, 51–74.

Donohew, L., Lorch, E., & Palmgreen, P. (1991). Sensation seeking and targeting of televised anti-
drug PSAs. In L. Donohew, H. E. Sypher, & W. J. Bukoski (Eds.), Persuasive communication
and drug abuse prevention (pp. 209–226). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Donohew, L., Lorch, E. & Palmgreen, P. (1998). Applications of a theoretic model of information

exposure to health interventions. Health Communication Research, 24, 454–468.

Fishbein,  M.  (1995).  Developing  effective  behavior  change  interventions:  Some  lessons  learned
from behavioral research. In T. E. Backer, S. L. David, & G. Soucy (Eds.), Reviewing the behav-
ioral sciences knowledge base on technology transfer (NIDA Research Monograph No. 155,
NIH Pub. No. 95–4035, pp. 246–261). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Fishbein, M. (2000). The role of theory in HIV prevention. AIDS Care, 12, 273–278.
Fishbein,  M.,  &  Ajzen,  I.  (1975).  Belief,  attitude,  intention,  and  behavior:  An  introduction  to

theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Fishbein, M., Cappella, J. N., Hornik, R., Sayeed, S., Yzer, M. C., & Ahern, R. K. (2002). The role
of theory in developing effective anti-drug public service announcements. In W. D. Crano & M.
Burgoon (Eds.), Mass media and drug prevention: Classic and contemporary theories and re-
search (pp. 89–117). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Fishbein, M., von Haeften, I., & Appleyard, J. (2001). The role of theory in developing effective
interventions: Implications from Project SAFER. Psychology, Health & Medicine, 6, 223–238.
Fisher, J. D., & Fisher W. A. (1992). Changing AIDS-risk behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 111,

455–474.

Gerrard, M., Gibbons, F. X., & Bushman, B. J. (1996). Relation between perceived vulnerability to

HIV and precautionary sexual behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 390–409.

Hornik, R., & Woolf, K. D. (1999). Using cross-sectional surveys to plan message strategies. Social

Marketing Quarterly, 5, 34–41.

Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. (1987). News that matters: Television and American opinion. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Janz, N. K., & Becker, M. H. (1984). The health belief model: A decade later. Health Education

Quarterly, 11, 1–47.

Kamb, M. L., Dillon, B. A., Fishbein, M., & Willis, K. L. (1996). Quality assurance of HIV
prevention  counseling  in  a  multi-center  randomized  controlled  trial.  Public  Health  Re-
ports, 111, 99–107.

182

Theory and Health Interventions

Kamb, M. L., Fishbein, M., Douglas, J., Rhodes, F., Rogers, J., Bolan, G., Zenilman, J., Hoxworth,
T., Malotte, K., Iatesta, M., Kent, C., Lentz, A., Graziano, S., Byers, R., & Peterman, T. (1998).
Efficacy of risk-reduction counseling to prevent human immunodeficiency virus and sexually
transmitted diseases. Journal of the American Medical Association, 280, 1161–1167.

Kasprzyk, D., Montano, D. E., & Fishbein, M. (2001). Application of an integrated behavioral
model to predict condom use: A prospective study among high HIV risk groups. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 28, 1557–1583.

Mendelsohn,  M.  (1996).  The  media  and  interpersonal  communications:  The  priming  of  issues,

leaders, and party identification. Journal of Politics, 58, 112–125.

Petraitis, J., Flay, B. R., & Miller, T. Q. (1995). Reviewing theories of adolescent substance use:

Organizing pieces in the puzzle. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 67–86.

Poppen, P. J., & Reisen, C. A. (1997). Perception of risk and sexual self-protective behavior: A

methodological critique. AIDS Education and Prevention, 9, 373–390.

Rosenstock, I. M. (1974). Historical origins of the health belief model. Health Education Mono-

graphs, 2, 1–8.

Sheeran, P., Abraham, C. S., & Orbell, S. (1999). Psychosocial correlates of heterosexual condom

use: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 90–132.

Sheppard,  B.  H.,  Hartwick,  J.,  &  Warshaw,  P.  R.  (1988).  The  theory  of  reasoned  action:  A
meta-analysis of past research with recommendations for modifications and future research.
Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 325–343.

Slater, M. (1999). Integrating application of media effects, persuasion and behavior change
theories  to  communication  campaigns:  A  stages  of  change  framework.  Health
Communication, 11, 335–354.

Weinstein,  N.  D.,  &  Nicolich,  M.  (1993).  Correct  and  incorrect  interpretations  of  correlations

between risk perceptions and risk behaviors. Health Psychology, 12, 235–245.

Witte, K. (1992). Putting the fear back into fear appeals: The extended parallel process model.

Communication Monographs, 59, 329–349.

Witte, K. (1995). Fishing for success: Using the persuasive health message framework to generate
effective campaign messages. In E. Maibach & R. Parrott (Eds.), Designing health messages:
Approaches from communication theory and public health practice (pp. 145–166). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.

Yzer, M. C., Cappella, J. N., Fishbein, M., Hornik, R., & Ahern, R. K. (in press). The effectiveness
of gateway communications in anti-marijuana campaigns. Journal of Health Communication.
Yzer, M. C., Cappella, J. N., Fishbein, M., Hornik, R., Sayeed, S., & Ahern, R. K. (2003). The role
of external variables in an integrative model of behavior change: The effects of adolescents’ risk
for regular marijuana use on intention to use marijuana. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Zillmann, D. (1999). Exemplification theory: Judging the whole by some of its parts. Media Psy-

chology, 1, 69–94.

183