DBS Business Review

01 | 2023

ARTICLE | dbsbusinessreview.ie

The effects of brand equity on millennials’ purchase
decision for sports nutrition products in Ireland
Denise Louvet
MSc in Marketing
Department of Business and Management, Dublin Business School
Dublin, Ireland

© Denise Louvet. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this
license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/ .

Abstract
Based on the theory of planned behaviour, this study investigated whether brand equity
influences the purchase intention for sports nutrition products among millennials in Ireland
and what factors influence their purchase decision. This research reports the results of a
survey of 102 millennials. The results suggest that brand equity influences millennials'
purchase intention and that it is also influenced by subjective norms and perceived
behavioural control. Furthermore, the analysis shows a correlation between brand equity and
its subdimensions (brand awareness/associations, perceived quality, brand loyalty) and
purchase intention. This study contributes to the brand management literature in the sports
nutrition industry and provides brand managers with various suggestions on how to build
brand equity in their business practices.
Keywords: Brand equity, theory of planned behaviour, sports nutrition products, purchase
intention, consumer behaviour, millennials, brand management

Introduction
Within only 83 years, the global sports nutrition industry has skyrocketed (Tricarico,
2021). In 2019 and 2020, the industry experienced a decline due to the pandemic.
Nevertheless, a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 7% is forecast for Ireland,
reaching €72 million by 2026 (Euromonitor International, 2021) and 12.50% globally
by 2027 (Mordor Intelligence, 2021). Some contributing factors to the industry growth
are: A greater demand for health-promoting products and consumers adopting more
active lifestyles (Glanbia, 2021; Magill, 2022); the greater emphasis on preventative
healthcare in Ireland, leading to strong demand for sports nutrition products, vitamins
5

Denise Louvet
and supplements (Euromonitor International, 2021); and the targeting of recreational
users and women, signifying the transition from a niche to a mass market (Keogh, Li
and Gao, 2019; Kades, 2022).
During the pandemic, fitness became a key element as consumers showed a greater
interest in health and well-being (Euromonitor International, 2021b). Currently, the
majority of Irish people try to stay active by exercising several times a week (Magill,
2022). Since restrictions on exercise have been relaxed, there is also a growing
demand for sports nutrition products (The Market Research Society, 2021).
Millennials born between 1981 and 1996 in particular (Beresford Research, 2022)
want to exercise more and improve their diet (Deloitte, 2021). This generation takes
a holistic view of health and considers exercise and nutrition very important to their
overall health (Panner, 2019). They are seen as the fittest generation: 76% of
millennials exercise at least once a week, and the average millennial spends $56 a
month on supplements (Billitz, 2022). A report by Innova Market Insights (2021)
states that millennials are very adventurous when it comes to trying new flavours and
are the most likely to add sports nutrition products to their typical shopping basket.
As competition increases and the number of new entrants rises, brands must
discover a way to differentiate themselves. Therefore, brand equity is becoming
increasingly important in the sports nutrition industry. The concept refers to a strong
brand which uses its value to gain a competitive advantage, differentiate itself and
drive brand success (Rossi, Borges and Bakpayev, 2015). However, understanding
the customer perspective of a strong brand can be a complex process. For this
reason, Keller (1993) and Aaker (1996) developed the Consumer-Based Brand
Equity (CBBE) model, which captures the value of a brand from the customer's
perspective.
CBBE can have a positive impact on a brand, for example by increasing consumer
purchase intention (Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony, 2013; Azzari and Pelissari,
2020). However, it appears that the sports nutrition industry has received little
attention from researchers, and only one study by Wesana et al. (2020) examined
the value of sports nutrition brands in Belgium and consumer preference by profiling
users and non-users of sports nutrition products. However, it did not investigate
whether consumer purchase intention was influenced by brand equity, nor what
factors influence consumer purchase intention for sports nutrition brands. The theory
of planned behaviour can be applied to the study of intentions and behaviour, using
its three dimensions: Attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control.
The model has been used by researchers to study consumer purchase intention and
behaviour for dietary supplements (Pawlak et al., 2008; El Khoury et al., 2021; Chen,
6

Denise Louvet
Chao and Chu, 2022). Nevertheless, it seems that it has not been associated with
sports nutrition brand equity, nor has it been studied in the Irish market.
This study complemented the findings of Wesana et al. (2020) to shed more light on
the importance of branding and, furthermore, the factors that influence consumer
purchase intention in the sports nutrition industry. It was attempted to answer the
following research questions:
1. Is millennials' purchase intention for sports nutrition products influenced by brand
equity?
2. What is driving Irish millennials' purchase intention for sports nutrition products?
Research Model and hypothesis
The study model examines the factors that capture the value of a brand from the
customer’s perspective through the adoption of CBBE and TPB model.
The conceptual framework (Figure 1) was adopted from Abdullah et al. (2018), who
appear to have been one of the first to link Aaker's (1996) brand equity model with
Ajzen's (1991) TPB model to examine the impact of both models on consumers'
willingness to pay premium prices. The conceptual framework was adapted for the
purpose of this study by replacing the variable "willingness to pay premium prices"
with "purchase intention". As suggested by scholars and conducted by Wesana et al.
(2020), brand equity was assessed using three indirect measures: Brand
awareness/associations, perceived quality and brand loyalty. In addition, overall
brand equity was measured as an individual construct to assess the additional value
of a brand due to its brand name and to better understand how the three
sub-dimensions contribute to brand equity.

7

Denise Louvet

Figure 1: Conceptual Framework adapted from Aaker (1996) and Ajzen (1991)

CBBE
Keller (1993, p. 8) defines CBBE “as the differential effect of brand knowledge on
consumer response to the marketing of the brand”. In other words, brand knowledge
stored in a consumer’s memory might elicit a more favourable brand response when
exposed to the same marketing efforts of a familiar versus unfamiliar brand. For
example, a consumer who sees an advertisement for whey protein on social media
might respond positively when they see that the advertisement is from the sports
nutrition brand they know, whereas they might not respond to an unfamiliar brand’s
advertisement. Therefore, consumer behaviour can be influenced by CBBE and
benefit a brand. Keller identifies four sequential steps that are critical when building a
strong brand: (1) creating a brand identity, (2) creating brand meaning through
unique and favourable brand associations, (3) generating positive brand responses,
and (4) building consumer-brand relationships that are characterised by loyalty
(Keller, 2001).
In contrast, Aaker (1991, p. 15) defines brand equity as “a set of brand assets and
liabilities linked to a brand, its name and symbol that add to or subtract from the
value provided by a product or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers”. He
identifies four dimensions that can assess brand equity from the customer
perspective: awareness, associations, perceived quality, and loyalty. Furthermore,
brand equity can be assessed from a company perspective by looking at market
8

Denise Louvet
behaviour (Aaker, 1996). Although the approach to assessing brand equity differs
between the two scholars, the dimensions chosen are similar and have brand loyalty
as the core and desired outcome. Nevertheless, research indicates that most
scholars use Aaker’s approach by assessing CBBE with three indirect measures:
awareness/associations, perceived quality, and brand loyalty (Yoo, Donthu and Lee,
2000; Yoo and Donthu, 2001; Brunetti, Confente and Kaufmann, 2019; Wesana et
al., 2020). This study adopts the CBBE scale proposed by Yoo, Donthu and Lee
(2000) as it has been recommended and validated by Brunetti, Confente and
Kaufmann (2019) and Wesana et al. (2020).
Brand awareness/associations
Brand awareness refers to “customers’ ability to recall and recognize a brand”
(Keller, 2001, p. 8), while brand associations are “anything linked in memory to a
brand” (Aaker, 1991, p. 15). The terms tend to be linked, as brand awareness
reflects the level of brand knowledge that goes beyond mere brand name recognition
and includes various brand associations stored in the consumer's memory (Çifci et
al., 2016). For example, a consumer might recognise the logo of a sports nutrition
brand or some product features that they have been exposed to before. In addition,
various brand associations are linked together in a consumer’s memory, which
together create a brand image and make up the consumer’s brand knowledge (Yoo,
Donthu and Lee, 2000). Ideally, associations are formed that the consumer
associates with a need to be satisfied or a product/service category (Keller, 2001). In
such cases, brand recall can be greater when consumers want to satisfy a need and
the brand might be in the top-of-mind. Therefore, brand awareness/associations are
often considered a crucial precursor to perceived quality, as they influence its
strength and emergence (Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony, 2013).
Yoo, Donthu and Lee (2000), Keller (2001), and Sasmita and Suki (2015) argue that
brand awareness/associations positively influence brand equity whereas Wesana et
al. (2020) discovered that this influence is insignificant. However, the researchers
argue that perceived quality and brand loyalty offset the insignificant effect of brand
awareness/association on brand equity. Therefore, further research should be
conducted to investigate the impact of brand awareness/associations on brand
equity. To investigate the findings of Wesana et al. (2020), this study hypothesised:
H1: Brand awareness/associations does not influence brand equity.
Perceived quality
ZeithamI (1988, p. 3) defines perceived quality as “the consumer’s judgement about
a product’s overall excellence or superiority”. In this case, a consumer's subjective
9

Denise Louvet
judgement determines product quality rather than actual manufacturing quality.
Therefore, consumers’ feelings reflect their perceived quality of a particular brand
(Aaker, 1991). Since consumers tend to transfer their perceived quality to products of
the same brand, they prefer to buy brands they know (Azzari and Pelissari, 2020).
Moreover, perceived quality tends to be higher when consumers perceive a brand as
credible, which could influence their purchase intention. However, this relationship is
moderated by pleasure-seeking behaviour (Saleem, Rahman and Omar, 2015).
Many scholars discovered that perceived quality positively influences brand equity
(Yoo, Donthu and Lee, 2000; Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony, 2013; Wesana et al.,
2020). Therefore, a positive effect of perceived quality on brand equity was expected
in this study:
H2: Perceived quality positively influences brand equity.
Brand loyalty
Brand loyalty is at the core of brand equity, which refers to “the attachment that a
customer has to a brand” (Aaker, 1991, p. 39). It reflects the relationship between the
consumer and a brand and its strength (Keller, 2001). Loyal consumers are
committed to a brand and prefer to buy its products. Consequently, switching to
competitive brands is less likely (Yoo and Donthu, 2001; Wesana et al., 2020).
To date, brand loyalty has been studied by many researchers in different industries,
and many agree that brand loyalty is the strongest driver of brand equity (Aaker,
1996; Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony, 2013; Saleem, Rahman and Omar, 2015).
However, it seems brand loyalty has not been studied much in the context of the
sports nutrition industry. In support of previous findings, Wesana et al. (2020) argue
that brand loyalty is the strongest driver of brand equity. Gabriels and Lambert
(2013) found that consumers have a higher purchase intention for sports nutrition
brands when the brand name is on the product label, suggesting that brand loyalty
may influence consumer purchase intention. Nevertheless, research in that industry
remains limited, but should be expanded given the potential benefits that brand
loyalty could offer brands. Therefore, this study examined the relationship between
brand loyalty and brand equity and its influence on purchase intention by
hypothesising:
H3: Brand loyalty positively influences brand equity.
Purchase intention
When consumers are loyal to a brand, their purchase intention for that brand is
generally greater when they have to choose between it and an alternative (Yoo and
10

Denise Louvet
Donthu, 2001). Purchase intention refers to “consumers’ disposition towards buying
a brand, or continuing its use” (Aydin and Ulengin, 2015, p. 111). Usually, it is not
necessary to convince loyal consumers to buy that brand. Instead, loyal consumers
tend to recommend that brand to others and persuade them to buy it by spreading
positive word of mouth (WOM) (Wesana et al., 2020). Since consumers freely
promote the brand, brands do not have to pay, but gain organic brand awareness
and potentially attract new customers. In addition, loyal consumers buy the brand
repeatedly, seek out information about the brand themselves and engage with brand
communities (Keller, 2001).
Many scholars argue that purchase intention is positively influenced by brand equity
(Holehonnur et al., 2009; Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony, 2013; Sasirekha and
Sathish, 2017; Azzari and Pelissari, 2020). Due to brand knowledge and familiarity,
consumers perceive less risks during their decision-making process. For example, if
a consumer is familiar with the quality of a brand, these perceptions can be
transferred to other products of the same brand, reducing the potential risk of a
purchase (Azzari and Pelissari, 2020). Moreover, the time needed to make a
purchase is reduced. Therefore, the hypothesis was made:
H4: Brand equity positively influences purchases intention.
Theory of planned behaviour
The theory of planned behaviour model assumes that behavioural intentions are
antecedents of consumers' actual behaviour, which depend on the information
available and the consumer's evaluation of that information (Madden, Ellen and
Ajzen, 1992; El Khoury et al., 2021). Behavioural beliefs (attitude towards behaviour)
and normative beliefs (subjective norms) influence intention. Moreover, perceived
behavioural control, a control belief, either indirectly influences intentions of directly
influences behaviour (Madden, Ellen and Ajzen, 1992).
One forms attitudes by believing that one’s behaviour will lead to a certain outcome,
which can be evaluated as desirable or undesirable (i.e., favourably vs.
unfavourably) (Ajzen, 1991; Ahmed et al., 2020). For example, a consumer might
believe that using whey protein for exercise will help build more muscle and
therefore consider purchasing it. The more positively the feelings associated with
performing the behaviour are valued, the greater the attitude towards performing the
behaviour. Thus, the behavioural intention is greater.
Subjective norms reflect how consumers perceive the opinion of significant others,
such as close friends, family, or colleagues, about a behaviour (Ajzen, 1991; Chen,
11

Denise Louvet
Chao and Chu, 2022). Therefore, one’s own behaviour can be influenced by the
social influence of others. For example, if a close friend regularly uses sports
nutrition products to enhance their performance, the consumer may view the
purchase behaviour positively and be more willing to perform the behaviour
themselves (i.e., purchase intention).
Perceived behavioural control refers to a consumer's perceived difficulty in
performing a particular behaviour. Perceived behavioural control can either directly
predict behaviour or indirectly influence behaviour through intentions (El Khoury et
al., 2021). The greater the perceived behavioural control, the more likely the
consumer is to perform a particular behaviour (Ajzen, 1991). For example, when
consumers feel that the decision to purchase products from a particular sports
nutrition brand rests solely with them, they have a stronger sense of perceived
behavioural control.
El Khoury et al. (2021) discovered that users of dietary supplements have more
positive attitudes, stronger intentions, and higher perceived behavioural control
towards using such products. Furthermore, subjective norms play a critical role in the
use of supplements. Nagar (2020) found that gym supplement users’ attitude is
strongly influenced by the benefits associated with consumption, that subjective
norms influence attitude and purchase intentions, and that attitude significantly
influences behavioural intentions. However, research on what drives consumer
purchase intention for sports nutrition products, especially among Irish millennials, is
still limited. Furthermore, it seems that no scholars have yet attempted to integrate
the TPB with the CBBE model to better understand millennials purchase intent for
sports nutrition products.
Attitudes and brand equity
Attitude has a big impact on a consumer’s behavioural intention, especially when the
behavioural outcome is desired (Abdullah et al., 2018). Suppose a consumer has
had a positive experience with a familiar sports nutrition brand. Previous brand
experiences may influence whether a consumer includes that brand in their evoked
set and intends to purchase it again (Keller, 1993). Therefore, it can be argued that
the consumer has developed a positive attitude towards the brand, meaning that
purchase intention is potentially greater, vice versa. Nonetheless, attitude was
excluded from parametric testing in this study as the researcher used a rating scale
to learn more about millennials’ attitudes towards sports nutrition products and the
main reasons for their purchase decision.

12

Denise Louvet
Subjective norms and brand equity
The views of important people about consumers' behavioural intentions are reflected
by subjective norms (Abdullah et al., 2018). How a significant other feels about the
consumer's intention to purchase products from a particular sports nutrition brand
could influence the consumer. For example, if a close friend only uses and endorses
products from a particular sports nutrition brand, the consumer is more likely to try
that brand as well and vice versa. So, the way someone else perceives the value of
a brand could influence the consumer positively (in cases of positive brand equity) or
negatively (in cases of negative brand equity). This study hypothesised:
H5: The attitude of significant others towards the brand influences the consumer’s
purchase intention.
Perceived behavioural control and brand equity
Whether consumers believe they have enough resources and opportunities to
perform a particular behaviour is reflected by their perceived behavioural control. If a
consumer feels confident to perform a certain behaviour, their belief is stronger
(Abdullah et al., 2018). In terms of purchase intention, a consumer might perceive a
high level of brand equity. However, if a consumer does not have enough money to
afford a premium sports nutrition brand, they would be willing to spend the money
but have a low ability to make the purchase. Consequently, their purchase intention
might be low. Nevertheless, Yoo, Donthu and Lee (2000) argue that consumers are
willing to pay higher prices for brands with high brand equity. Thus, if the consumer
had enough money to afford the brand, they would feel a higher level of perceived
behavioural control, which would imply a greater willingness to purchase the desired
brand. A hypothesis was made:
H6: Perceived behavioural control towards the brand influences the consumer’s
purchase intention.

Methods and procedures
Participants
The target population for the survey included individuals from the Millennial
generation, i.e., individuals born between 1981 and 1996 (Beresford Research,
2022). Therefore, individuals between the ages of 26 and 41 were targeted.
Millennials had to use sports nutrition products and live in Ireland, as the study
focused on the Irish market.
13

Denise Louvet
There are currently approximately 1,056 million millennials living in Ireland
(Euromonitor International, 2022). However, not every millennial is a user of sports
nutrition products, so there was no exact number of the target population. Given the
short 12-week period for this study, a total sample size of 100 respondents was
considered acceptable. A response rate for surveys is between 50% to 60% (Story
and Tait, 2019). Thus, the survey was shared with at least 200 millennials to achieve
the desired sample size.
As no sampling frame could be created or accessed, non-probability sampling was
used, meaning that individuals were selected based on the researcher’s judgement
or for convenience purposes. The probability of being selected was hence unknown.
A mix of purposive and snowball sampling was used. Therefore, the researcher used
her own judgment to first identify some individuals she knew from her network who
met the sampling criteria. These individuals were encouraged to share the
questionnaire with other members of the target population.
Materials
The outcome of this study was based on objective facts and not on the subjective
reality perceived by one individual. Therefore, a positivist paradigm was adopted as
that the relationship between variables was empirically tested (Kivunja and Kuyini,
2017). A survey explored the relationship between brand equity, purchase intention
and their influencing factors. An online questionnaire (Appendix 4) was created in
Google Forms to collect categorical and continuous data.
Section A contained three control checks to enhance the validity of the survey by
ensuring that participants were millennials, lived in Ireland, and used sports nutrition
products. Data were collected on a nominal and ordinal scales. Those who did not
meet the sampling criteria were automatically excluded from the survey.
Section B measured the variables investigated in this study. Participants had to rate
various statements on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from ‘Strongly disagree’ to
‘Strongly agree’. Scale items for all constructs were adapted from different sources
(Appendix 1). The scale collected interval data. Three to four items measured each
construct to allow for a better assessment of reliability and construct validity
(Kyriazos and Stalikas, 2018). The only exception were scale items A1 – A3 for
attitude, as consumers had to rank the importance of three statements at the end of
this section to determine which of the three statements was most important to them
and to learn more about their attitudes towards sports nutrition brands.

14

Denise Louvet
Section C included two further demographic questions to identify participants' gender
and their current employment status. Both items collected nominal data as
participants had to select a category they identified with. The questions allowed the
researcher to identify possible patterns. Both questions are considered rather
sensitive questions and were consequently asked at the end of the survey to ensure
that participants did not hesitate and possibly drop out of the survey at the beginning.
The survey ended after this section.

Results
A total sample size of 110 respondents was obtained, Eight respondents did not
meet the sampling criteria and were consequently excluded. Their responses were
deleted. This left a total sample size of 102 respondents, all of whom lived in Ireland
and used sports nutrition products.

Figure 2: Gender distribution

Figure 2 illustrates that 63.73% of the sample were male, while 36.27% were female.
This outcome was expected, as sports nutrition products still appear to be more
popular among men (Wesana et al., 2020). Table 1 shows that 57.84% (59 in total)
of the respondents were between 25 and 31 years old, while 42.15% (43 in total)
were between 32 and 41 years old. Therefore, more respondents belonged to the
younger generation of millennials.

15

Denise Louvet
Table 1: Gender and age distribution
Age

Gender

Total

25 – 31

32 – 41

Female

23

14

37

Male

36

29

65

Total

59

43

102

Furthermore, 94 respondents indicated they are employed full-time, while eight said
they are students. The survey was given to personal trainers who sent it to their
clients, which explains why most respondents worked full time, as students may not
be able to afford personal training.
Attitude towards using sports nutrition products
Attitude was one variable included in the TPB model. In this study, however, attitude
was excluded from parametric testing. Instead, to learn more about respondents’
attitudes towards sports nutrition brands, they had to rank three statements from
most important (1) to least important (3). Table 2 summarises the mean ranks from
the Friedman test.
Table 2: Attitude Ranks
Variable

Mean

Rank

A1: … improve my performance.

1.88

2

A2: … improve my physical appearance.

1.75

1

A3: … help me maintain/achieve a balanced diet for a
better general health.

2.36

3

I believe that using dietary supplements from my brand will…

A2 appeared to be the most important statement for many respondents as it
achieved a mean score (mean = 1.75) closest to 1, followed by A2 (mean = 1.88)
and A3 (mean = 2.36). Thus, most millennials primarily use sports nutrition products
16

Denise Louvet
to improve their physical appearance. Secondly, to improve their performance and
lastly, to help them maintain and/or achieve a balanced diet for a better general
health.
Normality of distribution
To determine whether the data of the dependent variable purchase intent were
suitable for parametric tests, the normality of distribution was assessed. A normal
probability plot was created in SPSS as shown in Figure 3. A normal distribution was
assumed if the line on the graph was straight and diagonal (Pallant, 2007).

Figure 3: Normal Probability Plot Purchase Intent

The diagonal line in Figure 3 indicated that the data were normally distributed.
Although there were a few residuals, the line was still diagonal and mostly straight.
Therefore, purchase intent was used for parametric testing.
Assessing reliability and validity
A Cronbach’s alpha score was measured for each construct to determine the internal
consistency of items and assess the reliability of the measurement instrument. The
score indicated how well items captured the construct, ranging from 0 to 1
(Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill, 2019). Since less than 10 items were used to
17

Denise Louvet
measure a construct, a score of 0.500 was considered acceptable, although a score
of 0.700 would have been desirable (Pallant, 2007).
Table 3: Cronbach’s alpha
Variable

Number of items

Cronbach’s alpha

Overall Brand Equity

4

0.792

Brand Awareness/Associations

4

0.680

Perceived Quality

4

0.801

Brand Loyalty

3

0.794

Attitude

4

-

Subjective Norms

3

0.844

Perceived Behavioural Control

4

0.740

Purchase Intent

3

0.842

Table 3 illustrates that all constructs were considered reliable, as they achieved a
score of at least 0.500. However, brand awareness/associations obtained a score
below the desired 0.700. As mentioned previously, attitude items A1 – A3 were
measured on a ranking scale ranging from 1 to 3. Only item A4 was measured on a
5-point Likert scale, which was not enough to assess Cronbach’s alpha. Therefore,
no Cronbach’s alpha score could be reported for attitude and the construct was
excluded for inferential analysis.
Inferential results
The following sections present the results of parametric tests done to investigate the
hypotheses. A standardised multiple regression was performed to assess the
relationship between several independent variables (BA, PQ, BL, OBE, SN, PBC) on
one dependent variable (PI). A confidence interval of 95% was chosen, meaning that
a probability value (hereafter referred to as p-value and reported as ‘Sig.’ in tables
displayed in this study) was compared with a significance level of 0.05. Findings
were considered significant if the p-value < 0.05.

18

Denise Louvet
Brand equity and purchase intent
The first research question that this study aimed to investigate was whether
millennials’ purchase intention for sports nutrition products was influenced by brand
equity. A standardised multiple regression analysis was used to assess the ability of
brand equity (OBE) and its subdimensions (brand awareness/associations [BA],
perceived quality [PQ], and brand loyalty [BL]) to predict consumers purchase intent
(PI). In addition, to see if any of the variables correlate. No problems with
multicollinearity were identified as the tolerance score of all variables was greater
than 0.10 and VIF scores below 10. The reported R Square value was 0.637. In
other words, 63.70% of variance in purchase intent was explained by the
independent variables.
Table 4: ANOVA a Brand Equity and Purchase Intent
Model

Sum of
Squares

df

Mean
Square

F

Sig.

Regression

14.210

4

3.553

42.536

0.000b

Residual

8.096

97

0.083

Total

22.306

101

a.

Dependent Variable: Purchase Intent

b.
Predictors: (Constant), Brand Equity, Brand Awareness/Associations,
Perceived Quality, Brand Loyalty
The ANOVA table (see Table 4) showed that the finding was statistically significant
as the p-value < 0.001 < 0.05. Therefore, the overall regression model was
considered significant, as F(4, 97) = 42.56, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.637. Moreover, the
predictors were able to account for a unique amount of variance in the dependent
variable as each had a significant finding with a p-value < 0.05 (p-value BA = 0.037,
p-value PQ < 0.001, p-value BL = 0.012, p-value OBE = 0.001). Nevertheless, BA
had a negative standardised coefficients beta value of -0.165, meaning that as the
variable increased by 1 SD, PI decreased by 0.165 SD. At the same time, BA had
the greatest influence on PI, as the reported p-value was highest for this variable.
PQ (beta = 0.389), BL (beta = 0.261), and OBE (beta = 0.364) reported a positive
beta value, meaning that as any of the variables SD increased, so did the SD of PI.
19

Denise Louvet
Furthermore, the findings suggested a significant relationship between the different
variables as each had a p-value < 0.05 for Pearson correlation. The correlation
matrix in Table 5 shows the correlations between the different variables and reports
the r value, which reflects the strength of the relationship and its direction.
Table 5: Correlation Matrix Brand Equity and Purchase Intent
Variables

PI

BA

PQ

BL

OBE

PI

1.000

0.383

0.670

0.695

0.711

BA

0.383

1.000

0.573

0.514

0.526

PQ

0.670

0.573

1.000

0.609

0.596

BL

0.695

0.514

0.609

1.000

0.778

OBE

0.711

0.526

0.596

0.778

1.000

All variables had a positive relationship as all reported r values were positive.
Therefore, variables changed in the same direction, meaning that, for example, as
PQ increased, so did BL. Apart from the relationship between PI and BA, which had
a moderate relationship, all other variables had a strong relationship as a r value >
0.50 was reported. The following table summarises the conclusions drawn about H1
to H4.
Table 6: Hypotheses Brand Equity and Purchase Intent
Hypothesis

Accepted

H1: Brand awareness/associations does not influence
brand equity.

Rejected
x

H2: Perceived quality positively influences brand equity.

x

H3: Brand loyalty positively influences brand equity.

x

H4: Brand equity positively influences purchases intention. x
As can be seen in Table 6, apart from H1, H2 – H4 were supported. A more thorough
discussion follows later in the discussion section.
20

Denise Louvet
Theory of planned behaviour and purchase intent
The second research question of this study was to discover what is driving
millennials' purchase intention for sports nutrition products. Another standardised
multiple regression analysis was used to assess the ability of subjective norms (SN)
and perceived behavioural control (PBC) to predict consumers purchase intent (PI).
As mentioned before, attitude was measured on a ranking scale and therefore
excluded for parametric tests.
The tolerance and VIF score of the variables indicated again that no problems with
multicollinearity existed, as respective values were greater than 0.10 and below 10.
The R Square value was 0.210, meaning that 21% of variance in purchase intent
was explained by subjective norms and perceived behavioural control.
Table 7: ANOVA a TBP and Purchase Intent
Model

Sum of
Squares

df

Mean
Square

F

Sig.

Regression

4.681

2

2.340

13.145

0.000b

Residual

17.625

99

0.178

Total

22.306

101

a.

Dependent Variable: Purchase Intent

b.

Predictors: (Constant), Subjective Norm, Perceived Behavioural Control

The ANOVA table (Table 7) demonstrated that the p-value < 0.001 < 0.05. The
finding was therefore significant as well as the overall regression analysis, as F(2,
99) = 13.15, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.210. However, only SN (p-value = 0.001 < 0.05) had a
significant finding as a predictor of PI and was able to account for a unique amount
of variance in the dependent variable. As the SD of SN (beta = 0.383) increased by
1, so did PI by 0.383. On the contrary, PBC did not account for a unique amount of
variance in PI, as the coefficient had a p-value = 0.280 > 0.05. Nevertheless, the
correlation matrix suggested a positive relationship between PBC and PI, as the
p-value < 0.001 < 0.05.
The correlation matrix below illustrates the strength of the correlation between the
different variables, reflected by the reported r value. The finding for all variables was
significant, as a p-value < 0.05 was reported for Pearson correlation.
21

Denise Louvet
Table 8: Correlation Matrix TPB and Purchase Intent
Variables

SN

PBC

PI

SN

1.000

0.552

0.448

PBC

0.552

1.000

0.328

PI

0.448

0.328

1.000

Table 8 shows that there was a strong relationship between PBC and SN (r = 0.552
> 0.5) while the relationship between PI and SN (r = 0.448 < 0.5) as well as PI and
PBC (r = 0.328 < 0.5) was moderate. For that reason, H5 and H6 were supported, as
can be seen in Table 9. In the next section, a more detailed discussion on the
findings and its implications follows.
Table 9: Hypotheses TPB and Purchase Intent
Hypothesis

Accepted

H5: The attitude of significant others towards the brand
influences the consumer’s purchase intention.

x

H6: Perceived behavioural control towards the brand
influences the consumer’s purchase intention.

x

Rejected

Discussion and implications
The aim of this study was to investigate whether brand equity influences the
purchase intention for sports nutrition products among millennials in Ireland and what
factors affect their purchase decisions. The results and implications thereof are
summarised in Table 10.

22

Denise Louvet
Table 10: Summary of results
Hypothesis

Sig.

Result

Main finding

H1: Brand
awareness/

<0.001

Rejected

Brand awareness/ associations
influenced brand equity.

H2: Perceived quality <0.001

Accepted

Perceived quality influenced
brand equity.

H3: Brand loyalty

<0.001

Accepted

Brand loyalty influenced brand
equity.

H4: Brand equity

<0.001

Accepted

Brand equity influenced
purchase intent.

H5: The attitude of
significant others

<0.001

Accepted

The attitude of significant others
influenced millennials' purchase
intent.

H6: Perceived
behavioural control

<0.001

Accepted

Perceived behavioural control
influenced millennials purchase
intent.

associations

Apart from H1, all other hypotheses examined in this study had a significant finding
and were therefore accepted. More details are discussed next.
First research question: brand equity and purchase intent
The first research question investigated whether millennials' purchase decision for
sports nutrition products is influenced by brand equity. This study also explored the
effect of brand awareness/associations, perceived quality, and brand loyalty as
subdimensions of brand equity. The results for H2 – H4 were significant, suggesting
that brand equity influenced millennials’ purchase decision for sports nutrition
products. Moreover, brand equity was influenced by perceived quality and brand
loyalty. H1 was rejected as the result was insignificant. However, it was hypothesised
that brand awareness/associations does not influence brand equity, which this study
controverted. Nonetheless, an inverse relationship between brand
23

Denise Louvet
awareness/associations and purchase intention existed. Thus, purchase intention
decreased as brand awareness increased. The introductory text of the survey
indicated that respondents were asked to answer the following statements while
thinking of the last sports nutrition brand they purchased. Therefore, if the last brand
purchased was one that the respondent did not like, their intention to purchase it
again could be lower, which could explain this result.
Moreover, purchase intention positively correlated with all variables. Therefore,
sports nutrition brand managers should consider brand awareness/associations,
perceived quality, brand loyalty, and overall brand equity as they can influence Irish
millennials purchase intention. Brand loyalty was the strongest driver of brand equity.
Thus, sports nutrition brand managers should focus on building loyal relationships
with customer as this will have a positive effect on brand equity and consumer
purchase intention.
Brand awareness/associations
The first hypothesis addressed was:
H1: Brand awareness/associations does not influence brand equity.
Given the insignificant finding, H1 was rejected. Thus, brand equity in this study was
influenced by brand awareness/associations and the results of Wesana et al. (2020),
who found an insignificant relationship, were refuted. Instead, the findings of Keller
(2001) and Sasmita and Suki (2015) were supported, who discovered a positive
influence of brand awareness/associations on brand equity.
For brand equity to emerge, one can argue that consumers must first be aware of a
brand and have some knowledge of it by linking brand associations in their memory.
Brand awareness is a crucial first step before consumers can form an image of
quality or build a relationship with that brand. Otherwise, neither a brand image nor
brand knowledge can emerge, as no associations are made. This assumption is
supported by Keller's (2001) CBBE model and the four steps he suggests for building
a strong brand. He considers each step of the pyramid as a precursor to the next
and argues that brand loyalty at the top cannot be achieved without the other steps.
Brand awareness is at the bottom of the pyramid and refers to the brand identity that
a consumer has created through a high level of awareness. Therefore, creating a
strong brand would not be possible without brand awareness/associations, which
explains why this variable positively influences brand equity.

24

Denise Louvet
There was a moderate relationship between brand awareness/associations and
purchase intent, which contradicted the findings of Azzari and Pelissari (2020).
However, an invert relationship existed, suggesting that as consumers’ knowledge of
a brand increases, their purchase intention decreases. Nevertheless, this could only
be the case if consumers do not like a brand and thus do not intend to repurchase it.
Furthermore, in support of Saleem, Rahman and Omar's (2015) findings, brand
awareness/associations influenced brand loyalty. When consumers buy a brand
regularly, they may have positive feelings towards it, identify it when they want to
satisfy a need, and may even have it as a preferred choice, meaning that loyalty has
been created through awareness. This assumption is supported by Aaker (1996),
who argues that there are different levels at which brand awareness can occur,
ranging from mere brand recognition (having heard of a brand name), to top-of-mind
(recalling a brand first when wanting to fulfill a need), to brand knowledge (knowing
what the brand represents), and having an opinion about a brand. The importance of
different levels of brand awareness varies, depending on how long a brand has been
on the market and how established it is.
Consequently, sports nutrition managers should consider brand
awareness/associations as an important driver of brand equity and ultimately
purchase decision of Irish millennials. It is recommended that niche or new brands
focus on brand recognition to ensure awareness among millennials, while
well-known brands should aim to be at the top of mind. In this way, brand knowledge
is strengthened, and consumers ideally form a positive opinion of a brand.
Perceived quality
The second hypothesis addressed was:
H2: Perceived quality positively influences brand equity.
As expected, the result was significant. Thus, brand equity was positively influenced
by perceived quality as the finding of various researchers confirmed (Buil, Martínez
and de Chernatony, 2013; Aydin and Ulengin, 2015; Wesana et al., 2020). Moreover,
there was a strong correlation between perceived quality and purchase intent,
confirming the findings of Sasirekha and Sathis (2017). Thus, perceived quality was
found to be a strong driver of purchase intention and an antecedent of brand loyalty.
Aaker (1996) claims that perceived quality is a key dimension of brand equity,
allowing brands to charge higher prices. Furthermore, Keller (2001) argues that
consumers need brand experience to judge its performance, i.e., the quality of its
25

Denise Louvet
products. When brands meet or exceed customers' expectations, they can build loyal
relationships. If the opposite is the case, consumer dissatisfaction arises and the
likelihood of future purchases decreases. It is therefore logical that perceived quality
has a positive impact on brand loyalty and ultimately on brand equity and purchase
intent.
Focusing on intrinsic and extrinsic product attributes could help brand managers of
sports nutrition brands to influence consumers’ perception of the quality of their
products and brands. For example, the packaging and design of the product can
signal quality. Simply creating a strong brand can signal quality to consumers, and
consumers are more likely to transfer their perception of quality to other products of
the same brand. Higher prices can also signal higher quality, and enhancing the
brand image through appropriate marketing efforts can improve quality.
Brand loyalty
The third hypothesis addressed was:
H3: Brand loyalty positively influences brand equity.
The significant result confirmed that brand loyalty positively influenced brand equity.
In fact, supporting the findings of various scholars (Aaker, 1996; Saleem, Rahman
and Omar, 2015; Wesana et al., 2020), brand loyalty had the strongest effect on
brand equity. Furthermore, a strong correlation between brand loyalty and purchase
intent existed and the variable was influenced by brand awareness/associations and
perceived quality. Buil, Martínez and de Chernatony (2013) claim that brand loyalty is
influenced by brand awareness, brand associations, and perceived quality, which
this study confirmed. Moreover, the findings of Yoo, Donthu and Lee (2000) were
supported, who argue that brand loyalty is one of the three components of the CBEE
model, all of which influence brand equity.
Considering that brand loyalty is the desired outcome of CBBE, it makes sense that
this variable had the strongest effect on brand equity. Loyal consumers have a
positive attitude towards this brand because strong, positive brand associations have
been created. It can also be assumed that customers' expectations tend to be met or
exceeded, which strengthens the relationship between brand and consumer.
Consequently, the consumers’ purchase intention increases.
To support this assumption, Keller (2001) and Aaker (1996) argue that the core of
the CBBE model is brand loyalty. Keller (2001) considers loyalty as the psychological
attachment a consumer has with a brand that reinforces activities such as repeat
26

Denise Louvet
purchases, positive WOM or seeking brand information. Aaker (1996) argues that
customer satisfaction and loyalty go hand in hand, as satisfied consumers are more
likely to become loyal. In either case, consumers have a positive attitude towards the
brand, which results in desirable responses, activities, and a relationship, i.e., a
strong brand was created.
It is recommended that sports nutrition brand managers invest in building loyal
relationships with millennials to positively influence their purchase decision.
Bharadwaj and Bezborah (2021) already suggested that giving free samples could
increase brand loyalty for sports nutrition products, but only if placed effectively.
Overall brand equity
The fourth hypothesis addressed was:
H4: Brand equity positively influences purchases intention.
The significant result suggested that purchase intention was positively influenced by
brand equity, which supported the finding of various scholars (Holehonnur et al.,
2009; Sasirekha and Sathish, 2017; Azzari and Pelissari, 2020). Moreover, the
results indicated that brand loyalty was the strongest driver of brand equity, followed
by perceived quality and brand awareness/associations.
Brand equity means that a brand has created a strong position in the market. Its
brand name signals value and consumers tend to be loyal. Therefore, it was
expected that brand equity positively influences millennials’ purchase intention.
Moreover, risks associated with making a purchase are reduced, as consumers are
familiar with the brand (Azzari and Pelissari, 2020).
It is recommended that sports nutrition brand managers reconsider how the CBBE
model can be applied to their brand, as this study confirms that it can drive purchase
intent among millennials and increase sales. In addition, brand equity allows brands
to differentiate themselves, which means consumers are less likely to switch to
competitors, allowing them to charge higher prices and achieve a higher financial
return.
Second research question: TPB and purchase intent
The second research question addressed in this study was to determine what is
driving millennials’ purchase intention for sports nutrition products and the theory of
planned behaviour was applied. The results indicated that subjective norms and
27

Denise Louvet
perceived behavioural control correlated with purchase intention. In other words,
significant others and the sense of control millennials perceive when using sports
nutrition products influenced their purchase decision.
Attitude
The results indicated that consumers consider improving their physical appearance
to be most important for using sports nutrition products. This was followed by
enhancing performance and maintaining/achieving a balanced diet for a better
overall health. This findings supports that of Keogh, Li and Gao (2019), who found
that the most important reason for recreational users of whey protein products in
Ireland was to improve their body and health function. Moreover, El Khoury et al.
(2021) discovered that the main goal for supplement users in Canada was to
improve their physical appearance, performance and general health. For that reason,
one can assume that users of supplements across different countries use them for
similar reasons. It seems that enhancing one’s physical appearance is the strongest
driver influencing consumers’ purchase intention for sports nutrition products.
Subjective norms
The fifth hypothesis addressed was:
H5: The attitude of significant others towards the brand influences the consumer’s
purchase intention.
The significant result suggested that subjective norms and purchase intent
moderately correlated, which confirmed El Khoury et al. (2021) and Chen, Chao and
Chu's (2022) findings, who argue that consumers’ purchase intention is affected by
the opinion of significant others. In the context of this study, the significant finding
suggested that important others such as friends can influence millennials’ purchase
intention for sports nutrition products.
Therefore, sports nutrition brand managers should aim to influence the perceptions
of a wider audience of supplement users, for example through social media.
However, this study did not clarify who consumers consider to be significant others
and whether influencers are part of this group. Influencer marketing is widely used in
this industry and as a source that consumers trust (Euromonitor International,
2021b). Therefore, further investigation is recommended.

28

Denise Louvet
Perceived behavioural control
The last hypothesis addressed was:
H6: Perceived behavioural control towards the brand influences the consumer’s
purchase intention.
There was a moderate relationship between perceived behavioural control and
purchase intent. However, the relationship was not as strong as that between
subjective norms and purchase intention. Nonetheless, the results suggested that
the greater the sense of control, the greater millennials’ purchase intention,
confirming the findings of El Khoury et al. (2021) and Chen, Chao and Chu (2022).
When a consumer feels they have control over a particular behaviour, their intention
may be greater. Respondents in this study had a strong sense of control when using
sports nutrition products, as indicated by the composite mean (mean PBC = 4.52). In
addition, their intention to purchase a brand of their choice was high (composite
mean PI = 4.24). Although this study did not examine price premiums or specific
brands, given the above results, it can be argued that price premiums did not
influence millennials' perceptions of control and resources (i.e., money), regardless
of their employment status. This result is supported by Ajzen (1991) who claims that
the fewer barriers consumers expect to face, the greater their perceived behavioural
control and intention to perform a behaviour.
It is suggested that communication from sports nutrition brands gives consumers a
sense of control, i.e., they feel free to use the products, which could positively
influence their purchase intention.

Limitations and future research
Although the present study was the first to integrate the theory of planned behaviour
and CBBE model to examine the impact on millennials’ purchase decision for sports
nutrition products, it had some limitations, such as being limited to Ireland and Irish
millennials. Therefore, the results are limited to this study and cannot be generalised
to the entire population.
Although the items of the scale for the survey were taken from other sources that
had been tested for reliability and validity by previous researchers, the results
indicated that some of the items were not very useful. As the items were taken from
studies in other countries, it is possible that consumer attitudes have changed over
time. Consequently, the items in the scale should be reconsidered and new items
29

Denise Louvet
developed specifically for Ireland. It is also recommended that the brand
awareness/associations be split for future research, as the Cronbach's alpha was
below the desired value of 0.700, and that attitudes be measured on a rank scale to
account for parametric testing.
The study took a general approach and did not examine the impact on specific
sports nutrition brands, which should be done in the future to identify patterns in
consumer responses. In this way, strong brands could be identified and used as a
benchmark. In addition, researchers should find out what drives consumer loyalty to
sports nutrition brands, as this was the strongest driver of brand equity, but previous
research in this industry is limited.

Conclusion
This study was conducted in Ireland and aimed to investigate whether brand equity
influences millennials’ purchase intention for sports nutrition products in Ireland and
what factors influence their purchase decision. In conclusion, brand equity influenced
millennials’ purchase intention for sports nutrition products and was influenced by all
its three subdimensions. Moreover, millennials’ purchase intention was influenced by
the attitudes of significant others and their own perceived behavioural control.
Therefore, sports nutrition brands in Ireland should invest in brand equity as it can
have a positive influence on millennials’ purchase intention and therefore drive brand
success.

30

Denise Louvet

References
Aaker, D.A. (1991) Managing brand equity : capitalizing on the value of a brand
name. Free Press. Available at:
https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat01049a&AN=dbs.5736&
site=eds-live (Accessed: 28 February 2023).
Aaker, D.A. (1996) ‘Measuring Brand Equity Across Products and Markets’,
California Management Review, 38(3), pp. 102–120. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.2307/41165845
Abdullah, M.I., Arif A., Azam A., and Sarfraz M. (2018) ‘An extension of the theory of
planned behavior towards brand equity and premium price’, Polish Journal of
Management Studies, 18(1), pp. 20–32. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.17512/pjms.2018.18.1.02
Ahmed, N., Khan, A., Li, C., Naz, S., Qalati, S.A., and Rana, F. (2020) ‘Purchase
intention toward organic food among young consumers using theory of planned
behavior: role of environmental concerns and environmental awareness’, Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management, 64(5), pp. 796–822. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2020.1785404
Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The Theory of Planned Behavior’, Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 50, pp. 179–211. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
Aydin, G. and Ulengin, B. (2015) ‘Effect of Consumer Brand Equity on Purchase
Intention: Considering Socioeconomic Status and Gender as Moderating Effects’,
Journal of Euromarketing, 24(2–3), pp. 107–119. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.9768/0024.02.107
Azzari, V. and Pelissari, A. (2020) ‘Does Brand Awareness Influences Purchase
Intention? The Mediation Role of Brand Equity Dimensions’, Brazilian Business
Review, 17(6), pp. 669–685. Available at: https://doi.org/10.15728/bbr.2020.17.6.4
Beresford Research (2022) ‘Age Range by Generation’, Beresford Research.
Available at: https://www.beresfordresearch.com/age-range-by-generation/
(Accessed: 25 June 2022).

31

Denise Louvet
Bharadwaj, S. and Bezborah, Dr.P. (2021) ‘Decoding Consumer Psychology toward
Dietary Supplements: A Mediation analysis between Freebies and Brand Loyalty’,
Journal of Food Products Marketing, 27(4), pp. 173–187. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10454446.2021.1944418
Billitz, J. (2022) ‘Are Millennials Fitness Freaks? (Statistics, Facts, & Trends)’, Noob
Gains, 26 January. Available at: https://noobgains.com/millennials-fitness-statistics/
(Accessed: 5 March 2022).
Brunetti, F., Confente, I. and Kaufmann, H.R. (2019) ‘The human dimension of a
brand influences brand equity: an empirical examination in the context of a luxury
and a convenience brand’, Journal of Brand Management, 26(6), pp. 634–645.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41262-019-00162-w
Buil, I., Martínez, E. and de Chernatony, L. (2013) ‘The influence of brand equity on
consumer responses’, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 30(1), pp. 62–74. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.1108/07363761311290849
Chen, Y.-H., Chao, S.-L. and Chu, Y.-W. (2022) ‘Effects of Perceived Benefit on
Vitamin D Supplementation Intention: A Theory of Planned Behaviour Perspective’,
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(4), pp. 1–18.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19041952
Çifci, S. Ekinci, Y., Japutra, A., Molinillo, S., Siala, H., and Whyatt, G. (2016) ‘A cross
validation of Consumer-Based Brand Equity models: Driving customer equity in retail
brands’, Journal of Business Research, 69(9), pp. 3740–3747. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.12.066
Deloitte (2021) A call for accountability and action - The Deloitte Global 2021
Millennial and Gen Z Survey. Deloitte, pp. 1–39. Available at:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/2021-deloitte-glob
al-millennial-survey-report.pdf (Accessed: 4 March 2022).
Deloitte (2022) The Deloitte Global 2022 Gen Z & Millennial Survey, pp. 1–40.
El Khoury, D., Mountjoy, M., Dwyer, J.M.J., and Tabakos, M. (2021) ‘Determinants of
supplementation among Canadian university students: a theory of planned behavior
perspective’, Journal of American College Health, pp. 1–9. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.2021.1951276
Euromonitor International (2021a) Consumer Health in Ireland. Passport, pp. 1–107.
32

Denise Louvet
Euromonitor International (2021b) Sports Nutrition in Ireland. Pas, pp. 1–7.
Euromonitor International (2021c) Where Consumers Shop for Consumer Health.
Passport, pp. 1–44.
Euromonitor International (2022) Economies and Consumer Annual Data, Passport.
Available at: https://www.portal.euromonitor.com/portal/StatisticsEvolution/index
(Accessed: 5 July 2022).
Gabriels, G. and Lambert, M. (2013) ‘Nutritional supplement products: does the label
information influence purchasing decisions for the physically active?’, Nutrition
Journal, 12(1), pp. 1–8. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-12-133
Glanbia (2021) Which Factors Are Driving Consumer Purchases in Sports Nutrition
Products? Available at:
https://www.glanbianutritionals.com/en/nutri-knowledge-center/insights/which-factors
-are-driving-consumer-purchases-sports-nutrition (Accessed: 4 March 2022).
Holehonnur, A., Fine, A.C., Hopkins, C.D., and Raymond, M.A. (2009) ‘Examining
the customer equity framework from a consumer perspective’, Journal of Brand
Management, 17(3), pp. 165–180. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2009.21
Innova Market Insights (2021) Greater focus on flavors as sports nutrition
mainstreams, Innova Market Insights. Available at:
https://www.innovamarketinsights.com/press-release/greater-focus-on-flavors-as-spo
rts-nutrition-mainstreams/ (Accessed: 23 June 2022).
Kades, A. (2022) Heightened performance via nutraceuticals: Shifting trends in
sports nutrition, NutritionInsight. Available at:
https://ni.cnsmedia.com/a/gbdQ03f9clY= (Accessed: 23 June 2022).
Keller, K.L. (1993) ‘Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer-Based
Brand Equity’, Journal of Marketing, 57, pp. 1–22. Available at:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1252054
Keller, K.L. (2001) ‘Building Customer-Based Brand Equity: A Blueprint for Creating
Strong Brands’, Marketing Science Institute, pp. 1–31.
Keogh, C., Li, C. and Gao, Z. (2019) ‘Evolving consumer trends for whey protein
sports supplements: the Heckman ordered probit estimation’, Agricultural and Food
Economics, 7(1), p. 6. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40100-019-0125-9
33

Denise Louvet
Kivunja, C. and Kuyini, A.B. (2017) ‘Understanding and Applying Research
Paradigms in Educational Contexts’, International Journal of Higher Education, 6(5),
p. 26. Available at: https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v6n5p26
Kyriazos, T.A. and Stalikas, A. (2018) ‘Applied Psychometrics: The Steps of Scale
Development and Standardization Process’, Psychology, 09(11), pp. 2531–2560.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.4236/psych.2018.911145
Legendre, S. and Coderre, F. (2018) ‘The impact of altruistic attribution and brand
equity in food label campaigns’, Journal of Product & Brand Management, 27(6), pp.
634–646. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-12-2016-1381
Madden, T.J., Ellen, P.S. and Ajzen, I. (1992) ‘A Comparison of the Theory of
Planned Behavior and the Theory of Reasoned Action’, Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 18(1), pp. 3–9. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167292181001
Magill, N. (2022) Exercise and Fitness - Ireland - 2022. Mintel. Available at:
https://reports.mintel.com/display/1100249/?fromSearch=%3Ffreetext%3Dexercise&r
esultPosition=1 (Accessed: 6 July 2022).
Mordor Intelligence (2021) Sports Nutrition Market | 2022 - 27 | Industry Share, Size,
Growth, Mordor Intelligence. Available at:
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/sports-nutrition-market
(Accessed: 4 March 2022).
Nagar, K. (2020) ‘An Examination of Gym Supplement Choice: Using the Modified
Theory of Planned Behaviour’, Journal of Food Products Marketing, 26(7), pp.
499–520. Available at: http://doi.org/10.1080/10454446.2020.1817827
Pallant, J. (2007) SPSS survival manual: a step by step guide to data analysis using
SPSS for Windows. 3. ed., [fully rev.]. Maidenhead: Open Univ. Press.
Panner, M. (2019) Five Ways Millennials Do Health Care Their Own Way, Forbes.
Available at:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/04/09/five-ways-millennials-dohealth-care-their-own-way/ (Accessed: 23 June 2022).
Pawlak, R., Connell, C., Blackwell, A., Brown, D., Johnson, J.T., Meyer, M.K., and
Yadrick, K. (2008) ‘Theory of Planned Behavior and Multivitamin Supplement Use in
Caucasian College Females’, The Journal of Primary Prevention, 29(1), pp. 57–71.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10935-008-0127-y
34

Denise Louvet

Rossi, P., Borges, A. and Bakpayev, M. (2015) ‘Private labels versus national brands:
The effects of branding on sensory perceptions and purchase intentions’, Journal of
Retailing and Consumer Services, 27, pp. 74–79. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2015.07.006
Saleem, S., Rahman, S.U. and Omar, R.M. (2015) ‘Conceptualizing and Measuring
Perceived Quality, Brand Awareness, and Brand Image Composition of Brand
Loyalty’, International Journal of Marketing Studies, 7(1), p. p66. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.5539/ijms.v7n1p66
Samoggia, A. and Rezzaghi, T. (2021) ‘The Consumption of Caffeine-Containing
Products to Enhance Sports Performance: An Application of an Extended Model of
the Theory of Planned Behavior’, Nutrients, 13(2), p. 344. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020344
Sasirekha, K. and Sathish, A.S. (2017) ‘The Effect of Consumer-Based Brand Equity
(CBBE) on Purchase Intention of Private Label Brands and National Label Brands’,
International Business Management, 11(5), pp. 1048–1057. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.36478/ibm.2017.1048.1057
Sasmita, J. and Suki, N.M. (2015) ‘Young consumers’ insights on brand equity:
Effects of brand association, brand loyalty, brand awareness, and brand image’,
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 43(3), pp. 276–292.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-02-2014-0024
Saunders, M., Lewis, P. and Thornhill, A. (2019) Research Methods for Business
Students Ebook. Harlow, United Kingdom: Pearson Education, Limited. Available at:
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/dbsie/detail.action?docID=5774742
Story, D.A. and Tait, A.R. (2019) ‘Readers’ toolbox.pdf’,130, pp. 192–202. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000002436
The Market Research Society (2021) Holland and Barrett: Redefining UK wellness
through innovative research | WARC, WARC. Available at:
http://origin.warc.com/content/article/holland-and-barrett-redefining-uk-wellness-thro
ugh-innovative-research/141257 (Accessed: 29 June 2022).
Tricarico, V. (2021) Sports nutrition grows up: Behaviors, trends, ingredients, and
advancements driving today’s sports nutrition products, Nutritional Outlook. Available
at:
35

Denise Louvet
https://www.nutritionaloutlook.com/view/sports-nutrition-grows-up-behaviors-trends-i
ngredients-and-advancements-driving-today-s-sports-nutrition-products (Accessed: 2
February 2022).
Wang, X., Kajungiro, R., Liu, J., and Pacho, F. (2019) ‘Factors Influencing Organic
Food Purchase Intention in Developing Countries and the Moderating Role of
Knowledge’, Sustainability, 11(1), p. 209. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11010209
Wesana, J., De Steur, H., Gellynck, X., Schouteten, J.J., and Van Acker, E.(2020)
‘On consumers’ use, brand preference and equity of sports nutrition products’, British
Food Journal, 122(2), pp. 635–654. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-08-2019-0589
Yoo, B. and Donthu, N. (2001) ‘Developing and validating a multidimensional
consumer-based brand equity scale’, Journal of Business Research, 52(1), pp. 1–14.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(99)00098-3
Yoo, B., Donthu, N. and Lee, S. (2000) ‘An Examination of Selected Marketing Mix
Elements and Brand Equity’, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(2),
pp. 195–211. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/0092070300282002
ZeithamI, V.A. (1988) ‘Consumer Perceptions of Price, Quality, and Value: A
Means-End Model and Synthesis of Evidence’, Journal of Marketing, 52, pp. 2–22.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.2307/1251446

36

Denise Louvet

Appendices
Appendix 1: Variable item table
Variable

Item
code

Original item

Source

Adapted item

Hypothesis

Overall
Brand
Equity

OBE1

It makes sense
to buy X instead
of any other
brand, even if
they are the
same.

Yoo,
Donthu
and Lee
(2000)

It makes sense
to
buy
the
brand I use
instead of any
other
brand,
even if they are
the same.

4

OBE2

Even if another
brand has the
same features
as X, I would
prefer to buy X.

Even if another
brand has the
same features
the brand I use,
I would prefer
my brand.

OBE3

If
there
is
another brand
as good as X, I
prefer to buy X.

If
there
is
another brand
as good as the
brand I use, I
prefer to buy
my brand.

OBE4

If another brand
is not different
from X in any
way, it seems
smarter
to
purchase X.

If another brand
is not different
from the brand I
use in any way,
it
seems
smarter to buy
my brand.

I know what X Yoo,
looks like.
Donthu

I know what the
brand I use
looks like.

Brand
BA1
Awareness/
Associations

37

1

Denise Louvet

Perceived
Quality

BA2

I can recognise and Lee
X among other (2000)
competing
brands.

I can recognise
the brand I use
among
other
competing
brands.

BA3

Some
characteristics
of X come to
mind quickly.

Some
characteristics
of the brand I
use come to
mind quickly.

BA4

I can quickly
recall
the
symbol or logo
of X.

I can quickly
recall
the
symbol or logo
of the brand I
use.

PQ1

X is of
quality.

high Yoo,
Donthu
and Lee
(2000)
X appears to be
of very poor
quality. (r)

The brand I use
is
of
high
quality.

PQ3

The likelihood
that X is reliable
is very high.

The likelihood
that the brand I
use is reliable
is very high.

PQ4

X must be of
very
good
quality.

The brand I use
must be of very
good quality.

BL1

I
consider Yoo,
myself to be Donthu
loyal to X.
and Lee
(2000)

I
consider
myself to be
loyal to the
brand I use.

PQ2

Brand
Loyalty

38

2

The brand I use
appears to be
of very poor
quality. (r)

3

Denise Louvet

Purchase
Intent

Attitude

BL2

X would be my
first choice.

The brand I use
would be my
first choice.

BL3

I will not buy
other brands if
X is available at
the store.

I will not buy
other brands if
the brand I use
is available at
the store.

PI1

I am willing to (Wang et
purchase
al., 2019)
organic foods if
they
are
available.

I am willing to
purchase
the
brand I use if it
is available.

PI2

I Intend to buy
organic foods if
they
are
available.

I Intend to buy
the brand I use
if it is available.

PI3

My willingness
to
buy
the
product is very
high.

Legendre
and
Coderre
(2018)

My willingness
to
buy
the
brand I use is
very high.

A1

I believe that Khoury et
using
dietary al. (2021)
supplements
will improve my
performance.

I believe that
using
dietary
supplements
from my brand
will improve my
performance.

A2

I believe that
using
dietary
supplements
will improve my
physical
appearance.

I believe that
using
dietary
supplements
from my brand
will improve my
physical
appearance.
39

4, 5, 6, 7

5

Denise Louvet

Perceived
Behavioural
Control

A3

I believe that
using
dietary
supplements
will help me
maintain/achiev
e a balanced
diet for a better
general health.

I believe that
using
dietary
supplements
from my brand
will help me
maintain/achiev
e a balanced
diet for a better
general health.

A4

I believe that
dietary
supplements
are safe.

I believe that
dietary
supplements
from the brand I
use are safe.

PBC1

Whether I take Khoury et
or do not take al. (2021)
dietary
supplements
from now on is
entirely up to
me.

Whether
I
purchase or do
not
purchase
dietary
supplements
from the brand I
use from now
on is entirely up
to me.

PBC2

It is easy for me
to take dietary
supplements
from now on.

It is easy for me
to
purchase
dietary
supplements
from this brand
from now on.

PBC3

I have complete
control
over
whether to take
or not to take
dietary
supplements
from now on.

I have complete
control
over
whether to take
or not to take
dietary
supplements
from the brand I
40

7

Denise Louvet
use from now
on.

Subjective
Norms

PBC4

Whether I take
or do not take
dietary
supplements
from now on is
beyond
my
control.

SN1

My
personal
trainer
would
support the use
of
caffeine-containi
ng products to
enhance sports
performance.

SN2

Many
people
who
are
important to me
would support
the
use
of
caffeine-containi
ng products to
enhance sports
performance.

Whether
I
purchase or do
not
purchase
dietary
supplements
from the brand I
use from now
on is beyond
my control.
Samoggi
a
&
Rezzaghi
, 2021

My
personal
trainer
would
support the use
of
dietary
supplements
from my brand
to
enhance
sports
performance.
Many
people
who
are
important to me
would support
the
use
of
dietary
supplements
from my brand
to
enhance
sports
performance.

41

6

Denise Louvet

Demographi
c

SN3

My teammates
would support
the
use
of
caffeine-containi
ng products to
enhance sports
performance

D1

N/A

My
friends
would support
the
use
of
dietary
supplements
from my brand
to
enhance
sports
performance.
N/A

Please indicate
your age group.

D2

Are
you
currently living
in Ireland?

D3

Do you use
sports nutrition
products?

D4

To
which
gender do you
most identify?

D5

Please indicate
your
employment
status.

42

Denise Louvet

Appendix 2: Information Sheet
Information Sheet for Participants: Online survey
Research project title: The effects of brand equity on millennials' purchase decision
for sports nutrition products in Ireland
Student Researcher: Denise Louvet (10581276@mydbs.ie)
Research Supervisor: Eva Perez (eva.perez@dbs.ie)
About the Project
Dear Participant,
My name is Denise Louvet, and I am a master’s student at Dublin Business School. I
am carrying out my thesis project under the direct supervision of Eva Perez about
brand management.
The aim of the project is to learn more about the importance of branding in the sports
nutrition industry.
I would like to invite you to take part in an online survey. If you agree to take part in
the online survey, you will be asked several questions about your purchase decisions
of your preferred sports nutrition products. The survey should take no longer than 10
minutes.
Data Protection
The data you provide as part of this questionnaire will be fully anonymous. I will not
gather any direct personally identifying information about you or anyone close to you.
You will be asked to provide optional demographic information of a broad nature
about yourself. Your data will be collated into a larger dataset and analysed at the
group rather than the individual level. Your data will only be used for academic
purposes and will not be shared with anyone for commercial purposes.
What are the risks and benefits of taking part in this study?
In addition to providing much appreciated assistance to the student researcher, the
main benefit of taking part in this study will be your contribution to academic
research, which aims to expand knowledge and generate new insights. There will be
43

Denise Louvet
no risks posed to you as a participant in this study, either physical or psychological,
beyond that which is normally expected of day-to-day activities.
If you are interested in taking part…
If you are interested in taking part, please review the information provided in the
consent form and if you are happy to proceed with the study then please indicate
your willingness to take part by ticking the appropriate box / signing your name
where appropriate.
You are under no obligation to take part in this study or to provide a reason if you
decide not to take part. You may choose not to take part without fear of penalty. If
you agree to take part, you have the right to cease participation and withdraw your
data at any time for any reason without fear of penalty. The data will not be used by
any member of the project team for commercial purposes.

44

Denise Louvet
Appendix 3: Consent Form
Consent Form
I voluntarily agree to take part in this research study.
I understand that I am not obliged to take part in this study and that my participation
in the study is entirely voluntary.
I understand that I am free to withdraw from the study at any time or refuse to
answer any question without the need to provide reason and without fear of negative
consequences.
I understand that my responses will be anonymous.
I understand that in the case of completing an anonymous questionnaire, it will not
be possible to subsequently withdraw my data due to the fact that there will be no
personally identifying information attached to my responses.
I understand that I will not benefit directly from participating in this research.
I understand that I am free to contact any of the people involved in the research to
seek further clarification and information.
I understand that signed consent forms will be retained for some time until the exam
board confirms the results of their dissertation.
I confirm that I have had the purpose and nature of the study explained to me in
writing and
I have had the opportunity to ask questions about the study with satisfactory answers
provided.
I confirm that I have read and fully understood the information Yes
provided and statements above.
☐

No

I agree to take part in this survey.

Yes

No

☐

☐

45

☐

Denise Louvet

Appendix 4: Questionnaire
Section A:
(D1) Please indicate your age group. (18-24 / 25-31 / 32-41 / 42-52 / 53+)
(D2) Are you currently living in Ireland? (Yes / No)
(D3) Do you use sports nutrition products? (Yes / No)
*The survey will automatically end if:
1. An age group lower than 25 or greater than 41 was selected for D1
2. ‘No’ was selected for D2 and D3
Section B:
Please read the following statements carefully and think of the sports nutrition brand
you last bought. Select the answer that best describes your personal opinion of the
statement provided. If you select 1 it means that you strongly disagree with the given
statement. If you select 5 it means that you strongly agree with the given statement.
If you are unsure what to answer, please select 3 for ‘neutral’.

(BA2) I can recognise the brand I use among other competing brands.
(PQ1) The brand I use is of high quality.
(OBE2) Even if another brand has the same features as the brand I use, I would
prefer my brand.
(SN2) Many people who are important to me would support the use of dietary
supplements from my brand to enhance sports performance.
(BL1) I consider myself to be loyal to the brand I use.
(PQ2) The brand I use appears to be of very poor quality. (r)
(PI3) My willingness to buy the brand I use is very high.
46

Denise Louvet
(PBC2) It is easy for me to purchase dietary supplements from the brand I use from
now on.
(OBE1) It makes sense to buy the brand I use instead of any other brand, even if
they are the same.
(PQ4) The brand I use must be of very good quality.
(BL3) I will not buy other brands if the brand I use is available at the store.
(BA1) I know what the brand I use looks like.
(SN3) My friends would support the use of dietary supplements from my brand to
enhance sports performance.
(OBE3) If there is another brand as good as the brand I use, I prefer to buy my
brand.
(SN1) My personal trainer would support the use of dietary supplements from my
brand to enhance sports performance.
(PI2) I Intend to buy the brand I use if it is available.
(PQ3) The likelihood that the brand I use is reliable is very high.
(BA3) Some characteristics of the brand I use come to mind quickly.
(PBC1) Whether I purchase or do not purchase dietary supplements from the brand I
use from now on is entirely up to me.
(BL2) The brand I use would be my first choice.
(BA4) I can quickly recall the symbol or logo of the brand I use.
(PI1) I am willing to purchase the brand I use if it is available.
(PBC3) I have complete control over whether to take or not to take dietary
supplements from the brand I use from now on.
(A4) I believe that dietary supplements from the brand I use are safe.
(OBE4) If another brand is not different from the brand I use in any way, it seems
smarter to buy my brand.
47

Denise Louvet
(PBC4) Whether I purchase or do not purchase dietary supplements from the brand I
use from now on is beyond my control.

Please rate the following statements from 1 (most important) to 3 (least important): I
believe that using dietary supplements from my brand will...
(A1) improve my performance.
(A2) improve my physical appearance.
(A3) help me maintain/achieve a balanced diet and general health.
Section C:
(D4) To which gender identity do you most identify? (Female / Male / I prefer not to
say)
(D5) Please indicate your employment status. (Employed Full-time / Employed
Part-time / Unemployed / Student / Retired)
The survey ends here. Thank you for your participation.

48

Denise Louvet
Appendix 5: Coding sheet
Question

Answer questionnaire

Code meaning

D1

18-24

1

25-31

2

32-41

3

42-52

4

53+

5

D2

Yes

1

D3

No

2

D4

Female

1

Male

2

I prefer not to say

3

Employed Full-time

1

Employed Part-time

2

Unemployed

3

Student

4

Retired

5

Strongly disagree

1

Disagree

2

Neutral

3

Agree

4

Strongly agree

5

D5

OBE1 – OBE4
BA1 – BA4
PQ1 – PQ4
BL1 – BL3
PI1 – PI3
A4
PBC1 – PB4
SN1 – SN4

49

Denise Louvet
A1-A3

Most important

1

Important

2

Least important

3

50

