704533

arch-article2017

CQXXXX10.1177/1938965517704533Cornell Hospitality QuarterlyGiebelhausen et al.

Lead Article

The Warm Glow of Restaurant
Checkout Charity

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly
2017, Vol. 58(4) 329­–341
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
https://doi.org/10.1177/1938965517704533
DOI: 10.1177/1938965517704533
journals.sagepub.com/home/cqx

Michael Giebelhausen1, Benjamin Lawrence1,
HaeEun Helen Chun1, and Liwu Hsu2

Abstract
Checkout charity is a phenomenon whereby frontline employees (or self-service technologies) solicit charitable donations
from customers during the payment process. Despite its growing ubiquity, little is known about this salient aspect of the
service experience. The present research examines checkout charity in the context of fast-food restaurants and finds
that, when customers donate, they experience a “warm glow” that mediates a relationship between donating and store
repatronage. Study 1 utilizes three scenario-based experiments to explore the phenomenon across different charities and
different participant populations using both self-selection and random assignment designs. Study 2 replicates with a field
study. Study 3 examines national store–level sales data from a fast-food chain and finds that checkout fund-raising, as a
percentage of sales, predicts store revenue—a finding consistent with results of Studies 1 and 2. Managers often infer,
quite correctly, that many consumers do not like being asked to donate. Paradoxically, our results suggest this ostensibly
negative experience can increase service repatronage. For academics, these results add to a growing body of literature
refuting the notion that small prosocial acts affect behavior by altering an individual’s self-concept.
Keywords
frontline service encounters; customer engagement; checkout charity

Would you like to donate to Kidscents by rounding up your
purchase to the nearest dolla
—Rite Aid

I want to help Animal Outreach Humane Society save cats and
dogs. Add a US$1 donation to my order for this non-profit.
—Paypal.com.

Solicitations such as these are increasingly presented to
consumers during the payment process. The practice is
commonly referred to as “checkout charity,” and in 2014,
the top 77 programs collected US$388 million dollars from
consumers (Sullivan, 2015). In addition, popular press
accounts suggest that the prevalence of this controversial
practice is on the rise (Loveland, 2014; Thurston, 2013).
Indeed, a recent survey of American consumers indicated
that 71% had donated to charity at the register (Good Scout,
2016). This same survey, however, indicated that only a
slight majority (55%) of respondents like being asked to
give to charity. Particularly relevant to the present research,
of the 45% who do not like being asked, 35% indicated they
give anyway to avoid feeling guilty.

In this article, we examine the effect of checkout charity
on restaurant performance and explore the mechanisms by
which this effect might operate. In particular, we examine
the potential of checkout charity to increase repeat purchase
by providing the donating guest with a feeling of “warm
glow.” Alternatively, we examine whether checkout charity
might “license” repeat purchase by bolstering the customer’s prosocial identity—another process that has been suggested in the marketing literature. In doing so, we contribute
to several important topics relevant to hospitality practice.
One of these is corporate social responsibility (CSR).
Several recent papers have demonstrated how a company’s
donations to charity have the potential to influence outcomes such as purchase intentions (Koschate-Fischer,
Huber, & Hoyer, 2016) and loyalty (Habel, Schons, Alavi,
& Wieseke, 2016). What makes the present research different from these previous studies, however, is the nature of
1

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
The University of Alabama in Huntsville, AL, USA

2

Corresponding Author:
Michael Giebelhausen, Assistant Professor of Marketing, School of Hotel
Administration, Cornell University, 545 Statler Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853,
USA.
Email: mdg234@cornell.edu

330
the CSR. Checkout charity stands apart from other CSR tactics in that it is actually the company’s customers who are
making the donation.
Second, because it is customers who are donating,
checkout charity qualifies as a customer engagement behavior (CEB)—another topic of increasing relevance to service
organizations (Van Doorn et al., 2010). Third, because of
where it occurs, a better understanding of checkout charity
contributes to the literature on retailing and frontline service encounters (Bitner & Wang, 2014; Grewal, Levy, &
Kumar, 2009; Singh, 2000). Finally, as our findings inform
how checkout charity engenders repeat purchase, this
research contributes to the growing focus on customer value
management strategy (Palmatier, 2015; Verhoef & Lemon,
2013). In summary, checkout charity is an increasingly
prevalent phenomenon that resides at the intersection of
several pressing topics in the services marketing literature.
As such, we believe it warrants empirical investigation.
We undertake this investigation using multiple methods
and sources of data. We first utilize three scenario-based
experiments to explore the phenomenon across different
charities and different participant populations using both
self-selection and random assignment designs. Study 2 then
replicates with a field study at a fast-food restaurant to provide evidence of ecological validly. Study 3 examines
national store–level sales data from the same fast-food
chain and finds that checkout fund-raising, as a percentage
of sales, predicts store revenue—a finding consistent with
results of the other studies.

Theoretical Background and Research
Questions
The key question the present research answers for practitioners is how checkout charity might impact sales. Will it
drive consumers away or might it actually encourage repeat
purchase? Recent research seems to suggest the latter.
Giebelhausen, Chun, Cronin, and Hult (2016) found that
when guests make a small sacrifice for the sake of the environment (by participating in a voluntary green program),
they experience a feeling of “warm glow” that increases
their service encounter satisfaction. It is reasonable to suspect that the positive effect of a small charitable donation on
repeat purchase might operate in the same way. Other
research, however, suggests that engaging in a prosocial
behavior can cause an individual to positively reevaluate
their self-concept (Khan & Dhar, 2006). This process generates “moral credentials” that license consumption of
hedonic or indulgent products (Miller & Effron, 2010). A
key contribution of the present research is to examine
whether warm glow or prosocial identity shifts (or both)
operate in the context of restaurant checkout charity, particularly with respect to its positive effect on repeat purchase (i.e., restaurant repatronage). The remainder of this

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)
literature review is devoted to discussing each of these processes in greater detail.

Prosocial Self-Identity
Licensing is a phenomenon whereby calling to mind previous instances of socially desirable behavior makes individuals feel more comfortable taking actions that could be seen
as socially undesirable. One way this effect can operate is
via “moral credentials.” The moral credentials model states
that a good deed bolsters an individual’s prosocial self-concept, allowing them to construe a potentially undesirable
behavior as appropriate (Miller & Effron, 2010). For example, Monin and Miller (2001) examined moral credentials in
the context of sexism. Participants provided with an opportunity to disagree with sexist statements were more willing
to later choose a man over an equally qualified woman for a
stereotypically male job. The moral credentials model suggests that, after establishing themselves as nonprejudicial,
participants construe their decision to hire the male candidate as nonprejudicial (Merritt et al., 2010).
This moral credentials model has been adopted by several researchers in the domain of marketing. For example,
Khan and Dhar (2006) found that, compared with a control
condition, Yale University students asked to imagine they
had volunteered to spend 3 hr per week doing community
service expressed higher agreement with the following
statements reflecting a prosocial self-concept: “I am compassionate,” “I am warm,” “I am sympathetic,” “I am helpful.” Furthermore, in this study, Khan and Dhar reported
that prosocial self-concept mediated the effect of their
manipulation on the participant’s relative preference for
purchasing designer jeans over a vacuum cleaner. In
another study conducted at Yale University, Gneezy, Imas,
Brown, Nelson, and Norton (2012) found that students
forced to donate part of their study payment to charity (i.e.,
“costly altruism”) reported higher levels of prosocial identity. That is, they rated themselves as more “helpful” and
less “selfish.” Gneezy et al. also reported that their measure of prosocial identity mediated an effect of the donation on truth-telling in a subsequent sender–receiver game.
One might argue that moral credentials resulting from a
checkout charity donation would license an individual to
increase their patronage of a particular restaurant, especially if the food served at that restaurant would be classified as indulgent (e.g., a fast-food restaurant). That is,
individuals who participate in a checkout charity donation
may experience a boost in their prosocial identity and, in
turn, construe fast food as more appropriate or desirable,
increasing restaurant repatronage.
However, other recent research finds that prosocial
behaviors do not universally evoke prosocial identity shifts,
suggesting that specialized circumstances may be required
to evoke prosocial identity shifts. Blanken, van de Ven,

331

Giebelhausen et al.
Zeelenberg, and Meijers (2014), for example, reported three
failed attempts to replicate the prosocial identity effects
reported by Sachdeva, Iliev, and Medin (2009). Winterich
and Barone (2011) also found self-identity effects only
among participants above a median split on independent
self-construal—an individual difference variable that measures how people form their self-identity. These failures to
replicate a prosocial identity shift suggest that there may
exist an alternative mechanism underlying prosocial behaviors. We thus will explore an alternative process in the context of checkout charity—warm glow.

Warm Glow
One alternative process, often examined in the study of prosocial behavior, is warm glow (Andrews, Luo, Fang, &
Aspara, 2014; Habel et al., 2016). Warm glow was first conceptualized in the economics literature examining “impure
altruism” (Andreoni, 1989). Impure altruism posits that
people are motivated to do good deeds (at least in part)
because of the emotional benefits they receive. Recent
research in hospitality contexts has found that small good
deeds (i.e., reusing your towel at a hotel) have the ability to
provide guests with a feeling of warm glow that increases
their satisfaction with a service encounter (Giebelhausen et
al., 2016). However, this same research also finds that individuals who fail to do a good deed report lower levels of
warm glow compared with control conditions. This observation is in line with the checkout charity survey (mentioned in the introduction) where many consumers report
donating to avoid feeling guilty. As such, in the context of
the present research, warm glow is conceptualized as a
bivalent emotional response resulting from one’s decision
of whether or not to donate to a restaurant’s checkout charity campaign.
We suggest that there will be a positive relationship
between warm glow and restaurant repatronage. Indeed,
there are several possible ways in which this relationship
might manifest. First, consumers may be motivated to
return to a restaurant to reexperience the warm glow they
earned with their checkout charity donations. Second, as
per the extant literature, warm glow may heighten service
encounter satisfaction, which in turn increases behavioral
intentions to return to the restaurant. A third alternative
mechanism is through moral credits. The psychology literature has identified a mechanism by which an individual,
through positive behavior, builds up credits that can be
cashed in on what they recognize to be less-than-ideal
behavior (Zhong, Liljenquist, & Cain, 2009). If the restaurant in question represents a “guilty pleasure,” then checkout charity might increase restaurant repatronage by
providing these credits.
Untangling what mechanism (or, more likely, mechanisms) might mediate the path from warm glow to

restaurant repatronage is a viable topic for future research.
The present research, however, focuses on providing evidence of the first step in this causal chain. As discussed
above, the literature offers two possibilities for why checkout charity donations may increase restaurant repatronage:
Consumers experience (a) a self-identity shift or (b) a feeling of warm glow. Our studies are designed to inform if one
(or both) of these processes are evoked when consumers
decide whether or not to donate to a restaurant’s checkout
charity campaign, and which process has the most potential
to influence repatronage intentions. Last, we conduct an
analysis to see whether these repatronage intentions might
actually translate into increased revenue for the restaurant.
Stated more formally, in our three studies, we explore the
following research questions:
Research Question 1: Does checkout charity participation induce a warm glow and/or influence prosocial
self-identity?
Research Question 2: Does warm glow mediate the
relationship between checkout charity and repatronage intentions?
Research Question 3: What is the impact of checkout
charity participation on restaurant sales performance?

Study 1: Warm Glow Versus Prosocial
Identity
A primary goal of Study 1 was to evaluate the ability of a
checkout charity donation to influence a feeling of warm
glow and, potentially, prosocial identity. In addition, Study
1 was designed to test the generalizability of this phenomenon in two ways. To examine whether or not the results
would generalize across different types of charities, Study
1a and 1b manipulated charity type while Study 1c further
introduced a third type of charity. To explore whether the
effect might generalize across different populations, Study
1a and 1c used a sample of 297 and 151 Amazon Mechanical
Turk workers, respectively, while Study 1b used a sample of
302 undergraduate students recruited from an Ivy League
business school. All studies collected a measure of store
repatronage intentions to evaluate the extent to which either
warm glow or prosocial identity might influence repeat
consumption. Last, Study 1c addressed concerns regarding
self-selection by randomly assigning participants to donation conditions.

Study 1a and 1b: Stimuli and Procedure
In the study introduction, participants were told, “This
study asks you to think about some different options and
make a choice while imagining that you actually were in
this situation.” Participants were then randomly assigned
one of three scenarios. One, scenario was designed to act as

332
a control condition where there would be no ethical ramifications of the choice. In particular, participants were asked
to imagine they were shopping and needed to choose
between paper towels that were more absorbent and paper
towels with more sheets per roll. A second condition presented the following scenario:
Imagine that you are eating lunch at Charlie’s Burgers, a local
fast-food restaurant. Your order of a cheeseburger, fries, and a
drink comes to six dollars and 50 cents. The cashier asks if you
would like round up your purchase to seven dollars. The extra
50 cents will be donated to a community service that provides
educational services to children in a homeless shelter.

The third condition presented a scenario identical to the
one above, but tested a different charity type, indicating that
the donation would go to a charity that “works toward
improving the environment.” Following the scenarios
described above, participants were asked to choose an option
and to “state the reasons for the choice you made.” This procedure resulted in five groups of interest: (a) a control group
where participants choose a type of paper towel, (b) a group
where participants choose to not donate 50 cents to a charity
benefiting under privileged children, (c) a group where participants choose to not donate 50 cents to a charity benefiting
under the environment, (d) a group where participants choose
a charity benefiting under privileged children, and (e) a group
where participants choose to donate 50 cents to a charity benefiting the environment.

Study 1c: Stimuli and Procedure
Study 1c is largely identical to Studies 1a and 1b, but does
offer a few important changes. Most importantly, to address
potential concerns that the effects in Studies 1a and 1b
might be due to self-selection, Study 1c randomly assigned
individuals to the “donated,” “did not donate,” and “control” conditions. The nature of Study 1c’s control condition
was the other major change. This time, instead of using an
unrelated “choice” as the control, we used the same restaurant scenario, but just removed the checkout charity solicitation. This change offers a different reference point from
which to examine the effect of choosing to donate (not
donate). Also, it creates a control condition where we can
measure intentions to repatronize Charlie’s Burgers. Last,
to provide additional evidence of generalizability, we utilized a third type of charity—a local animal shelter. This
procedure resulted in three groups of interest: (a) a control
group where participants read the Charlie’s Burger scenario
with the checkout charity solicitation removed, (b) a group
where participants were randomly assigned to not donate 50
cents to a charity benefiting animals, and (c) a group where
participants were randomly assigned to donate 50 cents to a
charity benefiting animals.

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)

Measures
As mentioned above, the primary goal of Study 1 was to
evaluate the ability of a small charitable donation to (a) evoke
a feeling of warm glow and/or (b) shift the participant’s prosocial identity (PSID). Therefore, we collected randomized
measures of both warm glow and PSID immediately following the question where participants indicated the reason for
their choice. Warm glow was evaluated with a seven-item,
9-point semantic differential measure, asking participants to
indicate the extent to which they felt: ashamed/proud, in the
wrong/in the right, irresponsible/responsible, selfish/altruistic, wicked/virtuous, unethical/ethical, immoral/moral (Study
1a: α = .949; Study 1b: α = .917; Study 1c: α = .967). We also
collected a measure of PSID (Khan & Dhar, 2006), asking
participants to indicate, on a 7-point scale, the extent to which
they see themselves as helpful, sympathetic, warm, and compassionate (Study 1a: α = .864; Study 1b: α = .758; Study 1c:
α = .898). After these measures had been collected, those in
the restaurant stimuli condition completed the following
9-point measure of repatronage intentions adapted from
Blodget, Hill, and Tax (1997): (a) How frequently do you
think you would eat at Charlie’s Burgers if there was one near
you (never/very frequently); (b) based on my experience, I
would return to this Charlie’s Burger location (strongly
disagree/strongly agree); and (c) what is the likelihood that
you would become a frequent customer of Charlie’s Burgers
(very unlikely/very likely).

Study 1a Analysis
To evaluate potential differences between Study 1a’s five
experimental conditions, we utilized one-way ANOVA with
planned contrasts and effect-size calculations. Above we
hypothesize that, following a checkout charity solicitation,
nondonors will report lower warm glow versus a control
condition while donors will report higher levels of warm
glow compared with that control condition. As such, for
these comparisons, directional contrasts are appropriate.
We have no a priori expectations regarding differences
between charity types. Thus, for these contrasts, we utilize
two-tailed tests. Please see Figure 1 for a plot of the cell
means with 95% confidence intervals. When visually interpreting 95% confidence intervals, it can be helpful to consider that a 50% margin of error overlap (i.e., approximately
25% of the confidence interval’s total length) approximates
a two-tailed p = .05 (see Cumming & Finch, 2005).
Warm glow. For warm glow, the omnibus ANOVA was statistically significant at the .05 level, F(4, 293) = 16.38, p <
.001, suggesting it was unlikely the observed differences
between the means were due to chance alone. Follow-up
contrasts indicated no significant difference in the warm
glow of donors across the two charities (Menvironment = 7.28,

333

Giebelhausen et al.

Figure 1.

Study 1a: Warm Glow, Prosocial Identity, and Repatronage Intentions.
Note. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 2.

Study 1b: Warm Glow, Prosocial Identity, and Repatronage Intentions.
Note. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

SD = 1.60, Mchildren = 7.22, SD = 1.25, p = .849), but significant differences versus the control conditions (Mcontrol =
6.36, SD = 1.57) for both donor conditions (children, p <
.001; environment, p < .001). Significant differences were
also observed between the control condition and nondonors
(children, p < .001; environment, p = .023). In addition,
compared with the warm glow of environmental nondonors
(M = 5.83, SD = 1.52, n = 46), those who refused to donate
to the children’s charity reported significantly lower warm
glow (M = 4.90, SD = 1.79, n = 26, p = .014). To estimate
the size of the difference between donors and nondonors,
we pooled the donor groups and compared them with one
another. The results indicated a “large” (d = 1.41) effect as
per Cohen’s (1988) guidelines.
Prosocial identity. For prosocial identity, the omnibus
ANOVA was insignificant (p = .928), suggesting that the
mean differences across conditions may likely have been
due to chance alone. Arguably, such a result warrants no

follow-up contrasts. However, relying on the omnibus has
been likened to playing the guitar with mittens on (Abelson,
1995). Thus, we also conducted all pairwise comparisons—
none of which were statistically significant (p values ranging from .218 to .950).
Repatronage intentions. For repatronage intentions, the
omnibus ANOVA (excluding the control condition as we
did not measure repatronage intentions for participants who
were not exposed to the restaurant description) was not statistically significant at the .05 level, F(3, 181) = 1.108, p <
.347. In the environmental charity condition, the difference
between donors and nondonors was marginally significant
(Mnondonors = 4.73, SD = 2.27, Mdonors = 5.47, SD = 2.21, p =
.052). This difference was not statistically significant for
the children’s charity (Mnondonors = 4.96, SD = 2.18, Mdonors =
5.34, SD = 2.12, p = .171). For a meta-analysis combining
the results of all five Study 1 charities, please see Figure 4
in the Study 1 discussion.

334

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)

Figure 3.

Study 1c: Warm Glow, Prosocial Identity, and Repatronage Intentions.
Note. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

the potential for Type II error (i.e., a “false negative”). For
prosocial identity, which we predict will not mediate the
relationship between checkout charity donations and repatronage, a 90% confidence interval represents the more
conservative option for testing this suspected null effect.

Study 1b Analysis

Figure 4.

Forest Plot of Mean Differences in Repatronage
Intentions Across Study 1 Charities.

Regarding our second research question, Zhao, Lynch,
and Chen (2010) pointed out that it is not necessary to
demonstrate a significant relationship between an independent variable and dependent variable, the traditional
first step in the Baron and Kenny (1986) process, before
proceeding with a mediation analysis. Therefore, to evaluate the extent to which warm glow or prosocial self-concept may mediate an effect of donating on repeat
consumption (i.e., repatronage intentions in this case), we
conducted a multiple mediation analysis as per Preacher
and Hayes (2008). The results indicated that the relationship between checkout charity participation and repatronage intentions was indeed mediated by warm glow (90%
confidence interval = [0.3331, 1.4016]) but not by shifts
in prosocial self-concept (90% confidence interval =
[−0.1577, 0.0339]). After controlling for these two variables, the direct effect of donating on repatronage was
insignificant (p = .950). We should point out that, given
our directional hypotheses regarding warm glow, a 90%
confidence interval is an appropriate test that minimizes

Warm glow. Similar to Study 1a, a significant omnibus
ANOVA, F(4, 298) = 5.28, p < .001, was followed by a
pairwise comparison indicating that the difference in the
warm glow of donors across the two charities was not statistically significant at the .05 level (Mdonated_environment = 7.14,
SD = 1.13, n = 73, Mdonated_children = 6.82, SD = 1.43, n = 75,
p = .137). As with Study 1a, compared with the control condition (M = 6.59, SD = 1.22, n = 101), donors to the environmental charity reported significantly higher warm glow
(p = .003). For this student sample, however, the warm
glow of donors to homeless children was not significantly
higher than that of the control group (p = .121). Regarding
nondonors, the warm glow of environmental nondonors (M
= 6.25, SD = 1.28, n = 32) was statistically equivalent to
that of nondonors to the children’s charity (M = 5.93, SD =
1.75, n = 22, p = .368). Compared with the control condition, those who refused to donate to the children reported
significantly lower warm glow compared with the control
condition (p = .016). The warm glow of nondonors to environmental causes was not lower than that of the control condition (p = .105). However, if we pool both charities to gain
additional power, the pairwise comparisons with the control
condition are statistically significant for both donors in general (Mdonated = 6.98, SD = 1.30, n = 148, p = .011) and nondonors in particular (Mdid_not_donate = 6.12, SD = 1.48, n = 54,
p = .018). Perhaps more importantly, effect size of donating
(vs. not donating) for this sample was found to be of
“medium” (d = 0.616) size (Cohen, 1988). We suspect that
this slightly smaller effect among our student sample is
likely due to 50 cents being a less relevant amount of money

335

Giebelhausen et al.
(vs. MTurkers). Indeed, in a comments section, many students indicated they disliked dealing with spare changed—
None of the MTurkers made this comment.
Prosocial identity. For prosocial identity, omnibus ANOVA
was insignificant (p = .892), as were all pairwise comparisons with p values ranging from .161 to .951.
Repatronage intentions. For the student sample, the omnibus
ANOVA was marginally significant, F(3, 197) = 2.061, p =
.054. This time, the difference in repatronage intentions
across the donor groups was significant. In the children’s
charity, the difference was significant (Mnondonors = 4.17, SD
= 1.79, Mdonors = 5.06, SD = 1.70, p = .017), but this difference for the environmental charity was not significant
(Mnondonors = 4.41, SD = 1.92, Mdonors = 4.71, SD = 1.66, p =
.203). See Figure 4 in the Study 1 discussion for a metaanalysis across all five Study 1 charities.
As was done with Study 1a, to evaluate the extent to which
prosocial self-concept or warm glow might mediate an effect
of donating on repatronage, we again conducted a multiple
mediation analysis as per Preacher and Hayes (2008). The
results indicated that the relationship between checkout charity participation and repatronage intentions was mediated by
warm glow (90% confidence interval = [0.0989, 0.4485]) but
not by prosocial self-concept (90% confidence interval =
[−0.0530, 0.0212]). After controlling for these two variables,
the initially significant direct effect of donating on repatronage (p < .001) became insignificant (p = .211)—a result
indicative of indirect-only (i.e., “full”) mediation.

Study 1c: Analysis
Warm glow. For warm glow, the omnibus ANOVA indicated significant differences among the three experimental
conditions, F(1, 148) = 37.22, p < .001. Follow-up pairwise
comparisons indicated that, compared with the control condition (Mcontrol = 5.39, SD = 1.75, n = 51), individuals randomly assigned to donate reported significantly higher
levels of warm glow (Mdonated = 7.14, SD = 1.70, n = 51, p <
.001). Those randomly assigned to not donate reported significantly lower warm glow compared with the control condition Mdid_not_donate = 4.14, SD = 1.81, n = 49, p < .001). The
difference between donors and nondonors represented an
extremely large effect size (d = 1.71). Interestingly, this was
a larger effect size than was observed in the self-selection
studies. A visual inspection suggests that the increased
effect is due to lower warm glow among those randomly
assigned to not donate. While it is outside the scope of
Study 1, future research may wish to explore why random
assignment designs seem to heighten the effect.
Prosocial identity. An omnibus ANOVA indicated no significant difference between the conditions in terms of prosocial

self-concept. Similar to the results for warm glow, the
observed effect of donating (vs. not donating, d = 0.23) was
somewhat larger than was observed in Studies 1a and 1b—
again due to lower scores in the “did not donate” condition.
However, this difference did not achieve statistical significance (Mdid_not_donate = 4.83, SD = 1.73, n = 49, Mdonated =
5.19, SD = 1.52, n = 51, p = .123).
Repatronage intentions. The omnibus ANOVA indicated significant differences between the three experimental conditions, F(1, 148) = 3.51, p < .017. The difference in
repatronage intentions across the donation groups was significant (Mnondonors = 5.60, SD = 1.74, Mdonors = 6.50, SD =
1.63, p = .005). The Study 1c control condition responded
to a measure of Charlie’s Burger repatronage intentions
(Mnondonors = 6.05, SD = 1.63). As per Rosenthal and Rosnow
(1985), we conducted a planned comparison to test a pattern
whereby nondonors had lower repatronage intentions compared with the control condition, but donor repatronage
intentions were higher (using orthogonal contrast codes:
−3, 1, 2). The results, assuming equal variance due to the
equivalent cell sizes, were statistically significant (p =
.014). It is interesting to note that repatronage intentions for
the control condition were located almost exactly between
that of donors and nondonors. Thus, this particular program
would have a net positive impact if the number of donors is
larger than nondonors. In Study 1c, individuals were randomly assigned to conditions—forcing the percentage of
donors to be approximately 50%. In Studies 1a and 1b,
however, the percentage of people who donated was 52%
and 70%, respectively, for the environmental cause, and
70% and 77%, respectively, for the nonprofit benefiting
children. This suggests that the net impact of such programs
is positive.
The results of the multiple mediation analysis indicated
that the relationship between checkout charity participation
and repatronage intentions was mediated by warm glow
(90% confidence interval = [0.3331, 1.4016]) but not by
self-concept (90% confidence interval = [−0.1577, 0.0339]).
After controlling for these two variables, the direct effect of
donating on repatronage was insignificant (p = .950), that
is, indirect-only mediation.

Discussion
As expected, in Study 1, warm glow was more sensitive
than prosocial identity to checkout charity donations. This
result is consistent with recent research from Blanken et al.
(2014) which also reports three failed attempts to significantly shift participants’ self-concept. In other words, Study
1 suggests that the effect from minor prosocial acts is better
explained by warm glow than by self-concept shifts.
Notably, there currently exists only one study in the marketing literature where such an affect is subjected to a direct

336

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)

test of mediation—and that study only uses a measure of
prosocial identity. Our work is the first attempt to include
both measures (warm glow and prosocial identity) and consistently finds warm glow as a more viable mechanism
underlying minor prosocial acts.
Study 1 offers a series of three scenario studies. We recognize that, increasingly, scenario studies are not well
received by marketing academics. However, we would suggest that they do have their merits. For example, having
multiple scenario studies can provide insight into the generalizability of an effect in a way that no single study can.
Also, conducting multiple studies allows one to conduct a
“mini meta-analysis” to determine the size of an effect
under investigation—an analysis now requested by the
American Psychological Association for all new submissions. For example, using the procedure described by
Cumming (2012), as shown in Figure 4, across the five different charities explored in Study 1, an estimated difference
between nondonors and donors is .658.
In terms of generalizability, across several different charities and participant populations, we observed a similar pattern
whereby, compared with a control condition, donors to a
checkout charity experienced higher levels of warm glow
while nondonors experienced lower warm glow. Similarly, all
three studies found that warm glow (and not prosocial identity) mediated the effect of donating on repatronage intentions. We did observe that, compared with the MTurkers, our
sample of Ivy League undergraduates seemed to exhibit a
more muted response—a result that may have been due to this
group’s relative price insensitivity. Future research may wish
to examine how price sensitivity (or donation size) moderates
the effect of donations on warm glow. However, with regard
to the present research, it is the consistency across the three
data collections (rather than their differences) that inspires us
to move forward and examine the phenomenon of checkout
charity in the context of actual donation behavior.

register. Customers who elect not to purchase a medallion
still have the opportunity to contribute to the foundation by
rounding their purchase up to the nearest dollar (the checkout
charity campaign conducted throughout the year).
Cashiers, blind to hypotheses, were instructed to randomly
ask two out of three customers whether they would like to purchase a medallion. The remaining third served as a control
group. After ordering, customers typically sat at a table or
stood near the counter while they waited for their food to be
prepared. At this time, a researcher approached individual customers and asked them whether they would be willing to fill
out a short survey while they waited. As an incentive to participate, customers were told that they could keep the pen as a
token of the researchers’ appreciation. Participants were then
told that they could drop their completed surveys into a bucket
near the door on their way out; 120 surveys were collected.
The outlet operator required a short survey. Thus, the
approved survey was a single page, limiting our ability to
collect multi-item measures. It asked participants how
many times they had eaten at a [restaurant brand], the
amount of their bill, whether the cashier invited them to
donate, whether they donated, whether they paid with cash,
and their zip code The primary dependent variable, repeat
purchase intentions, was measured with a single-item
7-point semantic differential scale, asking participants to
strongly disagree/strongly agree with the statement, “Based
on my experience today, I will return to this [restaurant
brand] location.” Warm glow, the hypothesized mediator,
was then measured with a single item, asking patrons to
strongly disagree/strongly agree with the statement, “I am
proud to be a [restaurant brand] customer.” Another strongly
disagree/strongly agree item asked participants the extent
to which they were satisfied with the service. At the request
of the operator, additional items were included to evaluate
the ordering experience, cleanliness, décor, and how many
times they had eaten at the store previously.

Study 2: Field Study

Analysis

To provide insights regarding the ecological validity of the
scenario studies, a field study was conducted at a fast-food
restaurant that engages in checkout charity. This restaurant
was not located within walking distance of a college campus. In addition, to address potential concerns regarding
demand effects, Study 2 utilizes a more subtle measure of
warm glow and collects that measure after participants
report their repatronage intentions.

Study 1 was primarily concerned with demonstrating that
checkout charity donations would not shift prosocial identity. As such, we had measured warm glow and prosocial
identity immediately following the manipulation and considered them as the primary dependent variable for our
analyses. For Study 2, we have shifted our focus to providing more managerially relevant insights regarding how
checkout charity affects store repatronage. As such, ANOVA
was used to examine differences in repeat purchase intentions among three groups: (a) the control group who were
not asked to purchase a medallion and who did not round up
their purchase, (b) individuals who either purchased a
medallion or rounded up their purchase, and (c) those who
declined to donate. The omnibus test indicated significant
differences among the groups, F(2, 113) = 5.756, p = .004.
Follow-up planned comparisons found that, compared with

Stimuli and Procedure
The study occurred during a fundraising campaign where
cashiers asked customers whether they would be willing to
donate to the company foundation (which supports emergency services). If customers agree, they are asked to sign a
paper medallion that is later taped up on the wall behind the

337

Giebelhausen et al.
Table 1.

Variable Operationalization and Descriptive Statistics.
Variable
Net Sales
Donation Behavior
Size
Age

M

SD

Operationalization

14,043.58
0.008
1,986.57
1,511.24

3,921.29
0.006
383.71
1,496.51

Weekly net sales (US$)
Proportion of total amount of foundation donation to the net sales in a given week
Building size (square feet)
Length since opening date (days)

the control condition, repeat purchase intentions were significantly higher among individuals who donated (Mcontrol =
5.829, Mdonated = 6.560, p < .001). Individuals who donated
also had significantly higher repeat purchase intentions as
compared with those who did not donate (Mno donation =
6.040, p = .023). A post hoc comparison found no significant difference between the individuals who choose not to
donate and the control condition (p = .432). This last result
is of particular interest given the managerial concern that
there is a potential downside to asking for donations.
A mediation analysis was conducted to evaluate the
extent to which the effect of donating on repeat purchase
intentions might be mediated by warm glow. The 90%
bias-corrected confidence interval ([0.0174, 0.4356]) for
the indirect path did not include zero, suggesting warm
glow was a viable mediator. With the inclusion of the warm
glow measure into the regression, the significant relationship between donating and repeat purchase intentions, b =
.6126, t(2, 111) = 3.0787, p = .001, remained significant, b
= .4060, t(2, 111) = 3.0787, p = .005. In other words, our
single-item measure of warm glow only accounted for
some of the variation in purchase intentions caused by
donating. Therefore, we conducted a second mediation
analysis including our measure of service satisfaction. For
this analysis, the 90% bias-corrected confidence interval
did not include zero for either warm glow (90% confidence
interval = [0.0028, 0.2191]) or satisfaction (90% confidence interval = [0.1082, 0.6951]), indicating both mechanisms were operating. In addition, with the inclusion of
satisfaction, the initial relationship between donating and
patronage intentions became statistically insignificant, b =
.1992, t(2, 111) = 1.5324, p = .064.

Discussion
The results of Study 2 provide evidence of ecological validity. The study takes place in the field and examines the outcomes of actual charitable contributions. We again find that
those who donate report greater repatronage intentions. In
addition, we find that this effect is mediated, albeit partially,
by the extent to which customers agreed with the statement,
“I am proud to be a customer of [restaurant brand].” While
these results are encouraging, Study 2 is not without weaknesses. One issue is that the DV in Study 2 was again a

measure of behavioral intentions. Study 3 is designed to
address this particular issue by examining store sales data.

Study 3: National Store–Level Data
Analysis
The purpose of Study 3 is to seek supporting real-world evidence that checkout charity leads to higher repeat purchase
resulting in a positive impact on outlet performance. In line
with this goal, the data for Study 3 are actual sales and checkout charity rates provided by the corporate office of a fastfood restaurant chain with approximately 1,000 U.S. locations.
All restaurants in this chain participate in an ongoing checkout charity program whereby cashiers verbally solicit customers for donations to the corporation’s nonprofit foundation.

Data Source and Measurement
Net sales. The key performance measure we use in our
model is net sales. The panel data are based on weekly
reporting of restaurants with information on their sales performance, the amount of foundation donations, restaurant
size, and age. Our final sample contains 944 restaurants
with 117,793 observations, reporting measurements from
January 2013 to December 2015.
Donation behavior. To create a variable that would capture checkout charity engagement, we divided each store’s total weekly
contribution to the foundation by the store’s weekly sales. A
higher score indicates that a store collects donations either from
a greater percentage of its customers or from the same customers
to a greater extent. We define donation behavior as the proportion of total amount of foundation donation to the net sales by a
given restaurant in a given week. We find that the average percentage of foundation donation of net sales is 0.008%.
Control variables. We include two control variables in our
model that might influence the level of sales at a particular
restaurant outlet. As young/small restaurants may exhibit
different cyclical dynamics than old/large businesses and
thus affect sales performance (Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, &
Miranda, 2013), we control for the building size and age of
the store. The list of the variables, descriptive statistics, and
descriptions of the operationalization are shown in Table 1.

338

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)

Table 2.

Panel Regression With First-order Autoregressive Disturbances and Robustness Check Results.
Dependent Variable = NetSalesit

Variables
Intercept
Donation behavior
Donationit−1
Control variables
NetSalesit−1
Sizeit−1
Ageit−1
National campaign
Model fits
F statistic/Wald statistic
R2

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Coefficient (SE)

Coefficient (SE)

Coefficient (SE)

Coefficient (SE)

5,955.08** (43.52)

6,446.86** (136.76)

6,044.62** (45.30)

5,950.25** (43.53)

8,729.33** (953.66)

15,838.14** (800.91)

8,628.06** (1,872.38)

10,206.73** (986.93)

0.331** (0.003)

0.563** (0.002)

0.331** (0.003)

−0.084** (0.022)

0.448** (0.003)
0.743** (0.063)
−0.171** (0.013)

−0.080** (0.018)

−0.078** (0.022)
−128.09** (22.10)

4,987.44**
.788

32,106.55**
.745

8.05E + 06**
.793

3,756.25**
.788

*p < .05. **p < .01.

Model Estimation
We estimate a panel data model to assess the impact of
donation behavior on a restaurant’s subsequent week’s net
sales. To examine whether donation behavior causes net
sales, we use the amount of net sales in the previous week
and the predictors in the previous week to estimate the
model (Granger, Ghysels, Swanson, & Watson, 2001).
Thus, a time lag between net sales (at time t) and foundation
donation (at time t −1) is applied resulting in Equation 1:
NetSalesit = α + π1 NetSalesit −1
+β1Donation it −1 + β2Sizeit −1 + β3 Ageit −1 ,

test (Wooldridge, 2002) to test for serially correlated errors.
The evidence shows that there is serial autocorrelation, F(1,
935) = 84.33, p < .001; thus, we estimate the panel regression with first-order autoregressive disturbances for random
and fixed-effect models in STATA 13.1 (Baltagi & Wu,
1999). Finally, we use the Hausman test to determine
whether a random or fixed-effect model would be more
appropriate (Hausman, 1978).

Results
(1)

where i denotes a restaurant, t is the week period, Donation
is percent foundation donation of net sales, Size is building
size, and Age is days open.
Panel data structure. The panel data structure of our data
(multiple restaurants across multiple weeks) allows us to
control for variables which are not observed or measured
such as the difference in business practices across restaurants, or variables that change over time but not across entities (i.e., local market, state regulations, etc.). Overall, it
accounts for individual heterogeneity. Nevertheless, we
need to ensure whether our data fit the assumptions of panel
data analysis such as stationarity and no first-order autocorrelation, and whether there is a correlation between individual’s error term and predictor variable. First, we
performed the Fisher-type unit root test of the null hypothesis that all the panels contain a unit root (Choi, 2001). We
found no evidence of nonstationarity (modified inverse χ2 =
269.78, p < .001). Second, we performed an autocorrelation

The Hausman test results suggest that the fixed-effect model
is appropriate to examine the impact of donation behavior
on sales performance (χ2 = 188.56, p < .001). Therefore, we
focus on and report the estimates of the fixed-effect model
as shown in Model 1 (Table 2). The coefficient of donation
behavior is positive and significant (8,729.332, p < .001),
indicating that higher percentage of foundation donation of
net sales in the previous time period increases the net sales
after controlling for the effect of previous period’s net sales
(0.331, p < .001). In other words, donation behavior is
related to subsequent sales performance.
Robustness checks. We perform robustness checks, dealing
with (a) the time-invariant control variable, (b) the endogeneity issue, and (c) the national charity campaign effect.
First, although the fixed-effect model is more appropriate,
we also report the results using a random-effect model to
control the effect of the size of the outlet. As shown in
Model 2 (Table 2), we find robust evidence in support of a
positive impact of donation behavior on net sales. Second,
certain unobserved firm-specific factors such as random

Giebelhausen et al.
marketing campaigns at different restaurants could affect
the donation behavior and, in turn, also impact the restaurants’ sales performance, leading to endogeneity. To address
the endogeneity concern, we apply an instrument variable
approach by using the lagged value of donation behavior
which is commonly used for instruments (Kang, Germann,
& Grewal, 2016). As shown in Model 3 (Table 2), the findings remain robust to this approach, allaying endogeneity
concerns. Finally, in addition to their ongoing checkout
charity campaign, restaurants in our focal company participate in a month-long national donation campaign. Therefore, the pattern of donation behavior during national
donation campaign differs from other months. To control
for this effect, we created a dummy variable to account for
this effect called “National Campaign.” As shown in Model
4 (Table 2), our findings remain robust.

Discussion
The results of the above analyses indicate a significant relationship between customer checkout charity contributions
(as a percentage of sales) and overall sales in the subsequent
week. In other words, the results of Study 3 point to a positive relationship between checkout charity and unit performance consistent with encouraging repeat store patronage.
Although supportive of our arguments, there may exist any
number of alternative explanations for the relationship
between donation behaviors and sales we observed.
However, we are not claiming Study 3 to stand on its own
but rather in concert with the other evidence provided.

General Discussion
The practice of collecting small charitable donations from
consumers is quickly becoming an established aspect of
many retail and service experiences, including restaurants.
However, there is currently little research that directly
examines how these small donations might affect subsequent consumption (e.g., repeat purchase). The present
research offers a variety of contributions to this emerging
literature as well as informing hospitality management
practices. We discuss each in detail below.
Checkout charity is a controversial practice. Many managers believe that it is detrimental to the frontline service experience and, thus, hurts sales. Its growing prevalence, however,
suggests corporate offices feel otherwise—or perhaps many
simply believe the CSR benefits outweigh the costs (KoschateFischer, Stefan, & Hoyer, 2012). Interestingly, checkout charity is different from other CSR tactics in that it is actually the
company’s customers who are being socially responsible. In
other words, it represents an emerging type of consumer
engagement behavior (Van Doorn et al., 2010). However, as
mentioned in the introduction, it is an engagement behavior
that many consumers dislike—with a large percentage only

339
participating to avoid the guilt associated with refusing (Good
Scout, 2015). As such, it is perhaps somewhat surprising that
we consistently observe the potential for a positive relationship between checkout charity and repatronage. However,
while many managers might doubt such an effect, it is perfectly consistent with the academic literature on “licensing”
which examines how good behavior can provide permission
to indulge.
There are a number of reasons to suspect that prosocial
consumer behavior will result in warm glow rather than a
prosocial self-identity shift. One is that prosocial consumer
behavior is often characterized by relatively minor acts
such as donating spare change, reusing your hotel towel, or
bringing your own bags to the grocery store. Intuitively, it
seems that such small acts might not be sufficient to shift
self-concept. As discussed above, emerging research is
beginning to make the case that self-concept is only relevant for difficult (vs. relatively minor) prosocial consumer
behaviors (Blanken et al., 2014; Giebelhausen et al., 2016;
Giroux, Pons, & Maltese, 2014) or with specific types of
consumers (Winterich & Barone, 2011).
The present research examines one outcome of checkout
charity and provides preliminary evidence of an underlying
psychological process. However, more research is necessary to fully understand what happens when a marketer asks
their customers to donate to a charity. In particular, future
research may wish to explore complementary mechanisms
such as service satisfaction, mood, or moral credits.
Exploring moral licensing via a moral credits versus credentials process holds significant promise (Mazar & Zhong,
2010; Miller & Effron, 2010). Future work could also more
closely examine how checkout charity affects perceptions
of the frontline service encounter (from both the customer
and the employee’s perspective). Many frontline service
employees are unmotivated to ask for donations at the
checkout. Thus, a greater understanding of how the characteristics of such appeals (e.g., duration, type, fit) impact
their identification with their employer and willingness to
participate is another potential line of research that would
contribute to existing services literature (Baker, Rapp,
Meyer, & Mullins, 2014; Singh, 2000). Future research
might also examine the size of the charitable donation.
Would it be the case that a larger donation results in more
warm glow—or is a tiny donation all that is necessary? The
present research would seem to suggest the latter.
Research into the increasingly prevalent phenomenon of
checkout charity is only beginning. However, the results
presented above at least suggest that checkout charity campaigns can help raise funds for CSR initiatives while potentially increasing sales at no cost to customer satisfaction.
For the academic community, these results contribute to the
growing literature on prosocial marketing. In particular, the
results suggest that researchers should consider the role of
warm glow in models.

340
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research,
authorship, or publication of this article.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1995). Statistics as principled argument. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with impure altruism: Applications
to charity and Ricardian equivalence. Journal of Political
Economy, 97, 1447-1458.
Andrews, M., Luo, X., Fang, Z., & Aspara, J. (2014). Cause marketing effectiveness and the moderating role of price discounts. Journal of Marketing, 78(6), 120-142.
Baker, T. L., Rapp, A., Meyer, T., & Mullins, R. (2014). The
role of brand communications on front line service employee
beliefs, behaviors, and performance. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 42, 642-657.
Baltagi, B. H., & Wu, P. X. (1999). Unequally spaced panel data
regressions with AR(1) disturbances. Econometric Theory,
15, 814-823.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research:
Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bitner, M. J., & Wang, H. S. (2014). Service encounters in service marketing research. In Handbook of service marketing
research (pp. 221-243). ed. Roland T. Rust and Ming-Hui
Huang. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Blanken, I., van de Ven, N., Zeelenberg, M., & Meijers, M. H.
(2014). Three attempts to replicate the moral licensing effect.
Social Psychology, 45, 232-238.
Blodgett, J. G., Hill, D. J., & Tax, S. S. (1997). The effects of
distributive, procedural, and interactional justice on postcomplaint behavior. Journal of retailing, 73(2), 185-210.
Choi, I. (2001). Unit root tests for panel data. Journal of
International Money and Finance, 20, 249-272.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavior science. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cumming, G. (2012). Meta-analysis on a small scale: Combining
two or three studies. In Understanding the new statistics:
Effect sizes, confidence intervals, and meta-analysis. New
York. NY: Routledge.
Cumming, G., & Finch, S. (2005). Inference by eye: Confidence
intervals and how to read pictures of data. American
Psychologist, 60, 170-180.
Fort, T. C., Haltiwanger, J. C., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2013).
How firms respond to business cycles? The role of firm age
and firm size. IMF Economic Review, 61(3), 520-559.
Giebelhausen, M., Chun, H. H., Cronin, J. J., Jr., & Hult, G. T. M.
(2016). Adjusting the warm-glow thermostat: How incentivizing participation in voluntary green programs moderates their
impact on service satisfaction. Journal of Marketing, 80, 56-71.

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly 58(4)
Giroux, M., Pons, F., & Maltese, L. (2014). Sustainability marketing strategies: How self-efficacy and controllability can
stimulate pro-environmental behaviors for individuals.
In J. Cotte & S. Wood (Eds.), NA—Advances in consumer
research volume 42 (pp. 731-734). Raleigh, NC: Association
for Consumer Research.
Gneezy, A., Imas, A., Brown, A., Nelson, L. D., & Norton, M. I.
(2012). Paying to be nice: Consistency and costly prosocial
behavior. Management Science, 58, 179-187.
Good Scout. (2016). Change at the checkout: The evolution
of charitable donations at the register. Retrieved from
http://engageforgood.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/
ChangeatCheckout_FinalReport.pdf
Granger, C. W., Ghysels, E., Swanson, N. R., & Watson, M. W.
(2001). Essays in econometrics: Collected papers of Clive WJ
Granger (Vol. 32). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Grewal, D., Levy, M., & Kumar, V. (2009). Customer experience
management in retailing: An organizing framework. Journal
of Retailing, 85, 1-14.
Habel, J., Schons, L. M., Alavi, S., & Wieseke, J. (2016). Warm
glow or extra charge? The ambivalent effect of corporate
social responsibility activities on customers’ perceived price
fairness. Journal of Marketing, 80(1), 84-105.
Hausman, J. A. (1978). Specification tests in econometrics.
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 46, 12511271.
Kang, C., Germann, F., & Grewal, R. (2016). Washing away your
sins? Corporate social responsibility, corporate social irresponsibility, and firm performance. Journal of Marketing,
80(2), 59-79.
Khan, U., & Dhar, R. (2006). Licensing effect in consumer choice.
Journal of Marketing Research, 43, 259-266.
Koschate-Fischer, N., Huber, I. V., & Hoyer, W. D. (2016). When
will price increases associated with company donations
to charity be perceived as fair? Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 44(5), 608-626.
Koschate-Fischer, N., Stefan, I. V., & Hoyer, W. D. (2012).
Willingness to pay for cause-related marketing: The impact
of donation amount and moderating effects. Journal of
Marketing Research, 49, 910-927.
Loveland, J. (2014, April 29). Five reasons it’s okay to just say
“no” to checkout charities. MinnPost. Retrieved from https://
www.minnpost.com/minnesota-blog-cabin/2014/04/five-reasons-it-s-okay-just-say-no-checkout-charities
Mazar, N., & Zhong, C. B. (2010). Do green products make us better people? Psychological Science, 21(4), 494-498.
Miller, D. T., & Effron, D. A. (2010). Psychological license:
When it is needed and how it functions. In M. Zanna & J.
Olson (Eds.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology
(Vol. 43, pp. 117-157).
Merritt, A. C., Effron, D. A., & Monin, B. (2010). Moral selflicensing: When being good frees us to be bad. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 4(5), 344-357.
Monin, B., & Miller, D.T. (2001). Moral credentials and the
expression of prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81(1), 33-43.

341

Giebelhausen et al.
Palmatier, R. (2015). Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science: Call for papers for a special issue on service marketing strategy. Retrieved from http://cie.okstate.edu/files/
JAMS-CFP-service-marketing.pdf
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects
in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40,
879-891.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1985). Contrast analysis:
Focused comparisons in the analysis of variance. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sachdeva, S., Iliev, R., & Medin, D. L. (2009). Sinning saints
and saintly sinners the paradox of moral self-regulation.
Psychological science, 20(4), 523-528.
Singh, J. (2000). Performance productivity and quality of frontline
employees in service organizations. Journal of Marketing,
64(2), 15-34.
Sullivan, P. (2015, May 28). Charity Checkout Campaigns
Remained Flat. The NonProfit Times. Retrieved from http://
www.thenonprofittimes.com/news-articles/charity-checkoutcampaigns-remained-flat/
Thurston, S. (2013, September 1). Donate a dollar at the register?
Checkout charity is big business for nonprofits. Tampa Bay
Times. Retrieved from http://www.tampabay.com/news/business/retail/donate-a-dollar-at-the-register-checkout-charityis-big-business-for/2139533
Van Doorn, J., Lemon, K. N., Mittal, V., Nass, S., Pick, D., Pirner,
P., & Verhoef, P. C. (2010). Customer engagement behavior:
Theoretical foundations and research directions. Journal of
Service Research, 13, 253-266.
Verhoef, P. C., & Lemon, K. N. (2013). Successful customer value
management: Key lessons and emerging trends. European
Management Journal, 31, 1-15.

Winterich, K. P., & Barone, M. J. (2011). Warm glow or cold,
hard cash? Social identity effects on consumer choice for
donation versus discount promotions. Journal of Marketing
Research, 48, 855-868.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section
and panel data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zhao, X., Lynch, J. G., & Chen, Q. (2010). Reconsidering Baron
and Kenny: Myths and truths about mediation analysis.
Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 197-206.
Zhong, C. B., Liljenquist, K. A., & Cain, D. M. (2009). Moral
self-regulation. Psychological perspectives on ethical behavior and decision making, 75-89.

Author Biographies
Michael Giebelhausen is an Assistant Professor of Services
Marketing at the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration.
His research focuses on consumer behavior and signaling in service
settings with a particular emphasis on green marketing and frontline service encounters.
Benjamin Lawrence is an Assistant Professor of Food and Beverage
Management at the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration.
His research focuses on topics that intersect service operations and
marketing with a particular interest in franchise relationships.
Helen Chun is an Assistant Professor of Services Marketing at the
Cornell University School of Hotel Administration. Her research
focuses on managing and enhancing the consumer experience in
the service setting, involving the role of emotions, green marketing, and branding.
Liwu Hsu is an Assistant Professor of Marketing at the University
of Alabama in Huntsville. His research interests concentrate on the
interface between marketing strategy and firm value.

