VU Research Portal

A Literature Review of Empirical Studies of Philanthropy: Eight Mechanisms that Drive
Charitable Giving
Bekkers, R.H.F.P.; Wiepking, P.

published in
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly
2011

DOI (link to publisher)
10.1177/0899764010380927

document version
Peer reviewed version

Link to publication in VU Research Portal

citation for published version (APA)
Bekkers, R. H. F. P., & Wiepking, P. (2011). A Literature Review of Empirical Studies of Philanthropy: Eight
Mechanisms that Drive Charitable Giving. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(5), 924-973.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764010380927

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.

E-mail address:
vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl

Download date: 15. Jul. 2026

This is a postprint of

A  Literature  Review  of  Empirical  Studies  of  Philanthropy:  Eight  Mechanisms  that
Drive Charitable Giving

Bekkers, R.H.F.P., Wiepking, P.

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(5), 924-973

Published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0899764010380927

Link VU-DARE: http://hdl.handle.net/1871/33145

(Article begins on next page)

A literature review of empirical studies of philanthropy: 

Eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving 

René Bekkers* 

Pamala Wiepking 

Center for Philanthropic Studies,  

Center for Philanthropic Studies,  

Faculty of Social Sciences,  

Faculty of Social Sciences,  

VU University Amsterdam 

VU University Amsterdam 

De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam 

De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam 

the Netherlands 

the Netherlands 

phone: +31 20 598 6493 

phone:  +31 20 598 6922 

fax: +31 20 598 6810 

fax: +31 20 598 6810 

email: R.Bekkers@fsw.vu.nl 

email: P.Wiepking@fsw.vu.nl  

* Corresponding author. 

Author’s note 

This paper was written with financial support of the John Templeton Foundation and grant #451-

04-110  of  the  Netherlands  Organization  for  Scientific  Research  (NWO)  to  René  Bekkers.  A 

previous version of this paper was presented at the 35th Annual Conference of the Association for 

Research on Nonprofit and Voluntary Action, November 16-18, 2006, Chicago, the Civil Society 

Congress, May 31, 2007, Utrecht, and the WWAV Academy, June 4, 2007, Woerden. We thank 

the audiences for helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks to various colleagues who provided 

articles  we  could  not  find  and  who  clarified  their  findings.  We  thank  the  editor  and  two 

anonymous referees of NVSQ for useful comments. Thanks to Esra Dursun and Barry Hoolwerf 

for research assistance. 

Keywords 

Philanthropy, literature review, mechanisms, charitable giving, altruism, research 

1

 
 
 
A literature review of empirical studies of philanthropy: 

Eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving 

Abstract  

We present an overview of the academic literature on charitable giving, based on a literature 

review of over 500 articles. We structure our review around the central question of why people 

donate money to charitable organizations. We identify eight mechanisms as the most important 

forces that drive charitable giving: (1) awareness of need; (2) solicitation; (3) costs and benefits; 

(4) altruism; (5) reputation; (6) psychological benefits; (7) values; (8) efficacy. These 

mechanisms can provide a basic theoretical framework for future research explaining charitable 

giving. 

2

 
 
A literature review of empirical studies of philanthropy: 

Eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving 

An overwhelming body of knowledge is available on philanthropy in the social sciences. 

Research on philanthropy appears in journals from very different disciplines, including 

marketing, economics, social psychology, biological psychology, neurology and brain sciences, 

sociology, political science, anthropology, biology, and evolutionary psychology. Scholars as 

well as practitioners educated in these disciplines could benefit from a systematic survey of the 

mechanisms studied in the academic literature. We present an overview of research on 

determinants of charitable giving from all disciplines.  

More than thirty years ago, David Horton Smith wrote that “scholars concerned about 

voluntary action research should consciously seek out cross-disciplinary inputs” (D. H. Smith, 

1975), a call that Payton, Tempel and Rosso (Payton, Tempel, & Rosso, 1991) and Clotfelter 

(1997) more recently made as well. Since the 1980s, philanthropic studies have emerged as a 

new, multi-disciplinary field in the social sciences (Katz, 1999). However, a strong tendency in 

the past 30 years towards specialization among scientists in different disciplines has created the 

undesirable situation that scholars usually know little about the insights gathered in other 

disciplines. In addition, few of the insights from the academic literature have found their way in 

handbooks on fundraising. The assessment by Lindahl and Conley (2002) that fundraising is “a 

field in need of a greater base of substantive, objective research rather than a casual acceptance of 

anecdotical evidence” still holds. For instance, Warwick’s (2001) guide to successful fundraising 

letters contains literally zero references to scientific research. This paper aims to guide scholars 

as well as practitioners in the third sector through the available knowledge on determinants of 

charitable giving by individuals and households. We define charitable giving as the donation of 

money to an organization that benefits others beyond one’s own family. 

3

 
 
Previous reviews available to researchers in philanthropy are mostly confined to a specific 

discipline or a limited period of time. Recently, Sargeant and Woodliffe (2007) reviewed the 

literature on charitable giving from a marketing perspective. Reviews in the field of social 

psychology have dealt with helping behaviour in general (Batson, 1998; Piliavin & Charng, 1990; 

Schroeder, Dovidio, Penner, & Piliavin, 1995; S. H. Schwartz, 1975). Helping behaviour is a very 

broad category of actions, ranging from assisting a stranger in an emergency (e.g., saving 

somebody from a fire, (Latané & Darley, 1970) to donating a piece of one’s body to a relative 

(e.g., bone marrow donation; Schwarz and Howard, 1980). Charitable giving is studied as an 

example of helping behaviour in the social psychological literature. The subject gained popularity 

in mainstream social psychology towards the end of the 1970s, and continued to be studied in 

applied social psychology in the 1980s. However, charitable giving is likely to be different from 

many other forms of helping behaviour. One crucial difference is that the recipient of charitable 

donations is usually absent from the context in which a donation is made, while the beneficiary is 

present in the helping situation investigated in most studies conducted in the 1960s and 1970s. 

Presence of a beneficiary strongly affects the social dynamics and motivations for helping 

behaviour, but is atypical for many examples of philanthropy. The present review differs from 

that by Piliavin and Charng (1990) in that we are not concerned primarily with the question to 

what extent prosocial behavior can be considered altruistic.  

Our review also differs from that of the overviews of economic theories of giving by 

Andreoni (2006), Vesterlund (2006) and Meier (2007b). Economists are increasingly trying to 

incorporate basic insights from sociology and social psychology into their models. However, 

many classical studies that provided these insights are unknown or not cited in present day 

economics. Our review may serve as a reference resource for classical intuitions. In addition, we 

present studies in disciplines like marketing, geography and biology that are not well known. 

To our knowledge, no systematic reviews on philanthropy exist in the fields of sociology 

or psychology. Sociologist John Wilson (2000) reviewed the literature on volunteering. Because 

4

 
volunteering like philanthropy is a form of formal prosocial behaviour, there are many striking 

parallels between their respective determinants.  

Our review differs from the reviews by Sargeant (1999), Lindahl and Conley (2002), 

Havens, O’Herlihy and Schervish (2007) and Sargeant and Woodliffe (2007), by covering a 

longer period of time, studies from a larger number of sources, and ordering the material in 

different categories. Many of the categories used in previous reviews are broad groups of 

predictors. We present predictors of philanthropy in terms of eight mechanisms that explain why 

these predictors are related to philanthropy.  

We hope that our review will not only be useful for an academic audience, but also for 

practitioners. Experimental studies often shed light upon why some people are more likely to give 

and some give more generously than others. Fundraisers can take advantage of the insights 

gained in these studies to increase fundraising effectiveness.  

METHODS 

This paper is based on an extensive literature search that we conducted using seven types 

of sources. We searched (1) online full text collections of publishers (Wiley Interscience, 

Emerald Insight, SpringerLink, Sage Journals Online; Elsevier’s Scirius); (2) academic databases 

(PsychInfo, Sociological Abstracts, PubMed, EconLit); (3) Google Scholar; (4) the authors’ own 

literature databases; (5) the references cited in the articles we found; (6) the IUPUI Payton 

Library Philanthropic Studies Index; (7) Arnova Abstracts. We used the following keywords: 

donations, philanthropy, charitable giving, charitable behavio(u)r, altruism, helping, prosocial 

behavior. We concluded our search in August 2007. The results of this search formed the basis 

for this paper. References to articles that have been published since we concluded our search have 

been updated. 

Then we refined our search to include only papers that contained empirical analyses of 

charitable giving by adult individuals or households. Theoretical papers (not reporting empirical 

5

 
 
data), studies using children as participants, and studies on charitable behaviour of organizations 

are not reviewed. Studies on contributions to public goods in experiments are included only when 

such contributions involve real monetary donations to real charitable organizations. Studies 

identifying individuals as beneficiaries (e.g., ‘dictator games’ in experimental economics) are 

included only when beneficiaries are strangers, and when participants consider the outcome of 

their decisions to be charitable donations. Studies in languages other than English are 

disregarded, although they were used to retrieve references to other studies with characteristics 

that fit our restrictions. Our search yielded only a few publications in languages other than 

English, notably Dutch, German, Italian, Spanish, and Polish. Most of the studies were conducted 

in the United States, followed by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Canada. This may be 

a source of bias; although it is unclear to what extent the bias is systematic.  

Unless otherwise noted, ‘giving’ refers to voluntary charitable donations by households or 

individuals to nonprofit organizations as reported in questionnaires or observed in experiments. 

Studies on donations to specific types of charitable organizations (e.g., religion, health, alumni 

donations) are included, but denoted as such. Unless otherwise noted, all studies are published in 

academic (but not necessarily peer-reviewed) journals, books or edited volumes. References to 

unpublished research were included only if the research was publicly available.  

In a literature survey like this, space constraints prohibit us to do justice to all the 

arguments, findings and methods of the studies reviewed. Also the reader should make her own 

judgement on the quality of the papers we reviewed. We have refrained from judgements on the 

quality of individual publications. In order to facilitate the reader’s own judgement on the quality 

of the work cited, we have constructed a database containing valuable information on the 

individual publications. Among others, this database includes the exact citation, the mechanism 

investigated, the discipline of publication (based on the journal and/or first author’s affiliation), 

and the methodology used (survey, experiment). Two criteria we believe increase research quality 

6

 
are (1) when the research aims to explicitly test or measures mechanisms that can explain 

charitable giving, and (2) when more adequate statistical models are used. 

WHY DO PEOPLE GIVE? EIGHT MECHANISMS THAT DRIVE CHARITABLE 

GIVING 

Experiments in economics, sociology, social psychology, biology and marketing have 

shown how situations can be created that encourage giving. The situations in these experiments 

are created by researchers, which allows for causal inferences about determinants of giving. From 

these experiments, conclusions can be drawn about why people give. We reviewed this literature 

and identify eight mechanisms as the key mechanisms that have been studied as determinants of 

philanthropy. They are: (1) awareness of need; (2) solicitation; (3) costs and benefits; (4) 

altruism; (5) reputation; (6) psychological benefits; (7) values; (8) efficacy.  

Our categorization is a refinement and extension of previous categorizations that 

distinguished types of ‘costs and benefits’ associated with participation in voluntary 

organizations (Chinman, Wandersman, & Goodman, 2005; P. B. Clark & Wilson, 1961). In their 

theory of incentive systems in organizations, Clark and Wilson (1961) distinguished material 

benefits, solidary benefits and purposive benefits associated with participation in organizations. 

Charitable giving is a form of participation. Therefore the incentive theory should be applicable. 

Material benefits are tangible rewards that can be assigned a monetary value; solidary benefits are 

intangible social rewards, and purposive benefits are intangible benefits associated with the goals 

of an organization (Chinman, et al., 2005). However, the incentive theory also seems incomplete 

when applied to philanthropy. We have refined this typology to repair two specific drawbacks.  

The first drawback is that previous categorizations assume purposive actors who make 

deliberate choices if and to what extent they will participate, depending on the consequences of 

their participation actions. In this perspective, the actions of charitable organizations and 

beneficiaries are ignored. In many cases donors do not actively seek opportunities to donate, but 

7

 
simply respond to the needs of beneficiaries and solicitations from charitable organizations. We 

distinguish these influences in separate mechanisms.  

The second drawback is that the types of categories are rather broad and 

multidimensional, covering qualitatively different processes that affect charitable giving. 

Purposive benefits, for instance, cover such different mechanisms such as altruism (benefits for 

beneficiaries), values (endorsement of the charity’s goals), personal satisfaction from 

contributing, and efficacy of contributions. We argue that it is more informative to distinguish 

these influences in separate mechanisms. 

Our categorization of mechanisms is based on differences in four dimensions (see table 1), 

that can be captured by the questions ‘What?’, ‘Where?’ and ‘Who?’. The first dimension is the 

‘what’, or the physical form of the mechanism. Is it a tangible object that can be touched? The 

second dimension is the ‘where’, or the location of the mechanism. Is it located within, outside, 

or between individuals? The third and fourth dimension constitute the ‘who’, or the parties 

involved. The third dimension is the actor in the mechanism. We distinguish beneficiaries, 

(charitable, nonprofit) organizations, donors, and alters (people in the social environments of 

donors). The fourth dimension is the target of the cause (who is affected). Targets may be donors 

or beneficiaries. 

[Insert table 1 about here] 

Each of the mechanisms is a different combination of values on the four dimensions. 

Table 1 is not exhaustive because not all combinations occurred in the literature. The order in 

which the eight mechanisms are presented below does not reflect the importance or causal 

strength of the mechanisms. Rather, the order corresponds to the chronological order in which 

they affect giving in the typical act of donation. In doing so, we follow previous reviews of 

related literatures (Schroeder, et al., 1995; S. H. Schwartz, 1975; S. H. Schwartz & Howard, 

8

 
 
 
1984), in which prosocial behavior and helping others are conceptualized as a series of 

consecutive decisions. For each mechanism, we present the main effect. In many cases, these 

main effects can be moderated (or sometimes mediated) by other factors. Moderating factors are 

factors that weaken or strengthen the effect of the mechanism: Conditions or personal 

characteristics that interact with the main effect. More information on factors moderating the 

mechanisms can be found in an appendix to this paper, available online. 

MECHANISM 1: AWARENESS OF NEED 

Awareness of need is a first prerequisite for philanthropy. People have to become aware 

of a need for support. In terms of the four dimensions in table 1, needs may be tangible as well as 

intangible (dimension 1: the ‘what’); needs reside within, between and outside people (dimension 

2: the ‘where’); needs originate from beneficiaries and organizations and target donors 

(dimensions 3 and 4: the ‘who’). People may have material needs for tangible objects outside 

themselves (e.g., food, shelter, security, medication, treatment), social needs (e.g., a need for 

company, which is something intangible that happens between people) or psychological needs 

(intangible phenomena within themselves: e.g., consolation). Awareness of need is a mechanism 

is largely beyond the control of donors, preceding the conscious deliberation of costs and benefits 

of donating. It is the result of actions of beneficiaries (who seek help) and charitable 

organizations (who communicate needs to potential donors).  

The effects of need have been documented mostly in social psychology, beginning with a 

series of field experiments from the mid 1960s onwards (Berkowitz, 1968; Berkowitz & Daniels, 

1964; S. H. Schwartz, 1975). In these experiments a variety of helping behaviors were studied, 

including practical assistance, blood donation, organ donation, as well as donating money. 

Generally speaking, the degree of need for help is positively related to the likelihood that help 

will be given (Levitt & Kornhaber, 1977; S. H. Schwartz, 1974; Staub & Baer, 1974). One study 

specifically tested for effects of need on donations (Wagner & Wheeler, 1969) and revealed that 

9

 
 
not objective need but subjective perceptions of need are crucial. An experimental study tested 

for effects of watching a telethon and found a positive effect on attitudes toward disabled people, 

but not on donations (D. Feldman & Feldman, 1985). Survey studies reveal that more generous 

alumni perceive a higher need for contributions to their alma mater (W. D. Diamond & Kashyap, 

1997; Weerts & Ronca, 2007) and that volunteers perceive a higher need for volunteers in their 

community (Unger, 1991). A survey study on intentions to donate to international relief 

organizations also reveals a positive effect of need (Cheung & Chan, 2000). A survey study on 

donations to panhandlers shows that perceived need is positively related to donations (B. A. Lee 

& Farrell, 2003). 

Experiments usually manipulate need by exposing participants to needy victims. Knowing 

a victim, however, also promotes giving to other victims to whom the individual is not exposed 

directly (Small & Simonsohn, 2006). In focus groups, donors cite knowing a (potential) 

beneficiary as a motive for charitable contributions (Polonsky, Shelley, & Voola, 2002; Radley & 

Kennedy, 1995). Survey studies also suggest that awareness of need is increased when people 

know potential beneficiaries of a charitable organization. People who have relatives suffering 

from a specific illness are more likely to give to charities fighting those illnesses (Bekkers, 2008; 

Burgoyne, Young, & Walker, 2005), though they may not give more on average (V. H. Smith, 

Kehoe, & Cremer, 1995). A study in Norway showed that health charities fighting more common 

illnesses had higher numbers of members, and therefore received higher private contributions 

(Olsen & Eidem, 2003). People knowing a beneficiary of United Way funds are more likely to 

donate to United Way (Pitts & Skelly, 1984). People who have (had) ‘a deeply loved pet animal’ 

are more likely to prefer giving to animal welfare rather than other charitable causes (Bennett, 

2003).  

Awareness of need may also be increased by solicitors for charitable contributions 

informing potential donors about the needs of victims. One experimental study found that this 

10

 
technique increases the likelihood of making donations, but yields lower contributions among 

those making a donation (Dolinski, Grzyb, Olejnik, Prusakowski, & Urban, 2005). 

Awareness of need is facilitated by the (mass) media. Simon (1997) shows that more 

extended media coverage of an earthquake has a strong positive relationship with private 

contributions supporting those affected. In turn, the amount of attention the media pays attention 

to beneficiaries’ needs depends on, among others, the number of beneficiaries (or those affected 

in the case of disasters), and the demographic and psychological distance between potential 

donors and beneficiaries (Adams, 1986; Simon, 1997). A survey study of donations to relief 

appeals – often advertised on television – reveals that the amount of time spent watching 

television is positively related to relief donations (Bennett & Kottasz, 2000).  

Early analyses of charitable donations reported on tax returns reveals that donations are 

higher in time periods (R. A. Schwartz, 1970) and states with more poverty (Abrams & Schmitz, 

1984; Amos, 1982), which suggests that donors respond to need with increased contributions. 

Recent studies (Bielefeld, Rooney, & Steinberg, 2005; Gittell & Tebaldi, 2006) do not uniformly 

support this conclusion. Schiff (1990) found that individuals in states with higher proportions of 

poor households give less to higher education and combined appeals, but more to lower 

education. Bielefeld, Rooney, & Steinberg (2005) found that donations to causes other than 

religion were higher in areas with higher levels of income inequality, allegedly because of a 

higher need for charitable contributions in these areas. 

It is likely that the awareness of need for support for a specific cause among the general 

public increases over time as charities working for the cause continue to exist. In a study of 

Spanish development aid organizations, it was found that older charities in the sector attracted 

more donations, because these organizations have a larger pool of volunteers available to them 

(Marcuello & Salas, 2000, 2001). A study from the U.K., however, found no effect of 

organizational age on private contributions to overseas charities (Khanna, Posnett, & Sandler, 

1995) though an effect of age on contributions to health, religion and social welfare organizations 

11

 
was found. A later study, found no effect of organizational age (Khanna & Sandler, 2000). A first 

study in the U.S. found significant age effects on contributions received by organizations in the 

arts and culture sector, hospitals, and nonprofit organizations sponsoring scientific research 

(Weisbrod & Dominguez, 1986). A later study, however, found negative effects of organizational 

age for higher education institutions and scientific research (Okten & Weisbrod, 2000). While a 

study from Canada found no effect of organizational age on contributions received by 

organizations (Callen, 1994), both a study from Singapore (Wong, Chua, & Vasoo, 1998), as well 

as a study from Norway found positive organizational age effects (Olsen & Eidem, 2003).  

MECHANISM 2: SOLICITATION 

A second mechanism that precedes the conscious deliberation of various types of costs 

and benefits of donating is solicitation. Solicitation refers to the mere act of being solicited to 

donate. The way potential donors are solicited determines the effectiveness of solicitations. The 

effects of different methods are captured by the other mechanisms. In terms of the four 

dimensions in table 1, solicitations (1) may be tangible (e.g., a fundraising letter) or intangible (a 

personal request); (2) are interactions between people; (3) originate from beneficiaries or 

charitable organizations; (4) target potential donors. Studies on solicitation have appeared in 

journals from a variety of disciplines, including marketing, psychology and economics.  

A large majority of all donation acts occurs in response to a solicitation. Bryant, 

Slaughter, Kang and Tax (2003) find that 85% of donation acts among respondents in the 1996 

Independent Sector survey on Giving and Volunteering in the preceding year are following a 

solicitation for a contribution. Bekkers (2005a) finds that 86% of the donation acts in two weeks 

preceding the 2002 Giving in the Netherlands Panel Survey are following a solicitation. The 

evidence from these cross-sectional studies that solicitations greatly enhance the likelihood of 

donations is complemented by the earlier experimental finding showing that actively soliciting 

contributions rather than passively presenting an opportunity to give increases the likelihood that 

12

 
 
people donate (Lindskold, Forte, Haake, & Schmidt, 1977). The implication is that the more 

opportunities to give people encounter, the more likely they are to give. Survey studies in 

marketing and sociology usually find that receiving a higher number of solicitations for charitable 

contributions is associated with increased philanthropic activity (Bekkers, 2005a; B. A. Lee & 

Farrell, 2003; Schlegelmilch, Love, & Diamantopoulos, 1997; Simmons & Emanuele, 2004; 

Tiehen, 2001; Wiepking & Maas, 2009), although two studies did not find such an association 

(Marx, 2000; Sokolowski, 1996).  

This does not imply that fundraising organizations should mindlessly increase the number 

of individuals receiving their appeals. A survey study of alumni donations revealed that higher 

education institutions soliciting contributions from a larger proportion of their alumni receive 

lower average contributions (Leslie & Ramey, 1988). This finding may reflect strongly 

decreasing marginal utility of the number of persons solicited. In addition, charitable 

organizations should take care not to overburden their donors with solicitations. Increasing the 

number of solicitations may produce ‘donor fatigue’ and may lower the average contribution 

(Van Diepen, Donkers, & Franses, 2009; Wiepking, 2008b). Taking a life time value perspective, 

the number of solicitations may even be reduced by optimizing the search for more responsive 

targets (Piersma & Jonker, 2004). 

It is not surprising that larger donors receive more solicitations per year for charitable 

contributions (Bekkers, 2005a; Van Diepen, et al., 2009). This is not only because solicitations 

yield contributions, but also because responding to solicitations for contributions attracts new 

solicitations: ‘Once on the list of usual suspects, I’m likely to stay there’ (Putnam, 2000; Van 

Diepen, et al., 2009). Due to increasing numbers of solicitations for charitable contributions, the 

standard response is to reject an appeal, except for older people who tend to take appeal letters 

more serious and hence more often respond to them (W. D. Diamond & Noble, 2001). As a 

result, it is not surprising that small modifications of direct mail appeals do not easily affect 

giving (Katzev, 1995). Even in single encounters that are unlikely to result in a long term 

13

 
involvement with a charity, people try to avoid being solicited for contributions (Pancer, 

McMullen, Kabatoff, Johnson, & Pond, 1979). 

MECHANISM 3: COSTS AND BENEFITS 

The third mechanism covers the material costs and benefits associated with donating. 

Adapting a definition from Clark & Wilson (1961) and Chinman, Wandersman & Goodman 

(2005), we define material costs and benefits as ‘tangible consequences that are associated with a 

monetary value’. In terms of the four dimensions in table 1, costs and benefits (1) are tangible 

objects; (2) reside outside donors; (3) originate from organizations; and (4) affect donors. Effects 

of costs and benefits are most often documented in studies in economics. 

COSTS 

It is clear that giving money costs money. When the costs of a donation are lowered, 

giving increases (Bekkers, 2005c; C. C. Eckel & Grossman, 2004; C. C. Eckel & Grossman, 

2003; Karlan & List, 2006). This is not only true for the absolute costs, but also for the perception 

of the costs of a donation (Wiepking & Breeze, 2009). This is not to say that philanthropy is 

motivated by material self-gain: because “donors will always be better off not making a 

donation” (Sargeant & Jay, 2004: 100). Studies of hypothetical giving also show that requests for 

larger donations are less likely to be honoured (Andreoni & Miller, 2002; Bekkers, 2004).  

Economists have studied the empirical effects of the price of giving on philanthropy using 

survey data and tax files in many papers since the 1970s. A large number of studies have 

estimated the effects of tax price on philanthropy.1 Reviews of these studies are given in 

Steinberg (1990), Simmons & Emanuele (2004), and Peloza and Steel (2005). The latter paper 

provides a meta-analysis, showing that estimates of the price effect are generally negative, but 

vary widely between studies, depending on the scope of the sample and the statistical methods 

used. More recent estimates of price effects, based on econometric models developed for the 

14

 
 
 
analysis of panel data, tend to be lower than estimates from earlier studies (McClelland, 2002). 

The most recent study reached the conclusion that changes in the tax deduction for charitable 

contributions have a large, persistent price effect between -0.79 and -1.26 and a smaller transitory 

price effect between -0.40 and -0.61 (Auten, Sieg, & Clotfelter, 2002). The price effects appear to 

be larger for religious donations (Wiepking, 2007). Tax benefits seem the most important motive 

for payroll giving in the UK (Romney-Alexander, 2002). When employers match charitable 

contributions of their employees, they give more (Okunade & Berl, 1997). 

However, when the costs of donating are increased by increasing the amount requested, 

the amount donated may actually increase if the amount requested is not perceived as excessive 

(Doob & McLaughlin, 1989). However, one study found that a request for a ‘generous 

contribution’ rather than a specific amount decreases the likelihood that a gift will be made in 

door-to-door solicitations (Weyant & Smith, 1987). Desmet (1999) found a positive effect of 

asking for more on average donations in a direct mail campaign among irregular donors, but not 

among regular donors. In addition, higher donations were offset by a lower response rate. Similar 

findings are reported by Fraser, Hite and Sauer (1988). In another study, a higher reference point 

contribution increased the amount donated, but did not decrease the likelihood of making a 

contribution (Alpizar, Carlsson, & Johansson-Stenman, 2007). 

The costs of a donation sometimes involve more than just money. A survey study found 

that people who perceive fewer obstacles to give are more likely to give (J. R. Smith & 

McSweeney, 2007). Physical discomfort also discourages philanthropy. People are more likely to 

donate money to a charity when weather conditions are better. One study found a sizeable 

positive effect of temperature on giving to the Salvation Army in the period between 

Thanksgiving and Christmas (Jiobu & Knowles, 1974). However, an experimental study of 

donations in church found no effect of sunshine (Soetevent, 2005). Survey studies of the timing 

of donations in the United Kingdom (Banks & Tanner, 1999; Pharoah & Tanner, 1997) and 

Ireland (Carroll, McCarthy, & Newman, 2006) reveal that December is by far the most generous 

15

 
month of the year. In the second quarter of the year U.K. households are more likely to give but 

do not give higher amounts (Pharoah & Tanner, 1997). 

BENEFITS 

Occasionally, donations to charitable organizations buy services or other ‘selective 

incentives’ (Olson, 1965). For instance, when donors to universities, museums or symphony 

orchestras get access to exclusive dinners, meetings or special concerts. These donations may be 

characterized as exchange, when they are rooted in part in consumption motives. Offering access 

to exclusive services in exchange for contributions brings giving closer to buying. The benefits 

mechanism is mostly studied by economists and marketing scientists. Studies on alumni giving 

show that alumni are more generous after graduation if their university spent more on them 

(Baade & Sundberg, 1996a, 1996b; Harrison, Mitchell, & Peterson, 1995). A study of donations 

to the opera found that fringe benefits increase contributions (Buraschi & Cornelli, 2002). When 

these fringe benefits are matched to selected categories of gifts, giving is pushed up even more 

(Andreoni & Petrie, 2004). Lotteries constitute another type of material benefits for donations, 

which increase the number of donors (but not the amount donated per donor) in fundraising 

campaigns (Landry, Lange, List, Price, & Rupp, 2006). Offering material benefits may also 

provide donors with an excuse for a donation in cases where they are otherwise withheld by a 

norm of self-interest (Miller, 1999). A survey study of charitable gifts and lotteries in Canada 

reveals that the two behaviors are complements, not substitutes (Apinunmahakul & Devlin, 

2004). Analysis of donations as reported on tax forms suggests that on the whole, philanthropic 

contributions seem to depend less strongly on direct benefits than on indirect benefits and value 

orientations (Amos, 1982). 

A popular belief among fundraisers is that including a gift in a direct-mail package 

increases donations. However, there is no strong foundation for this belief in the empirical studies 

we reviewed. We found four papers testing whether a gift increases donations (Alpizar, et al., 

16

 
 
2007; Chen, Li, & MacKie-Mason, 2006; Edlund, Sagarin, & Johnson, 2007; Harris, Liguori, & 

Stack, 1973), with different results. Alpizar et al. (2007) find that gifts increase the likelihood of 

contributions to a natural park in Costa Rica. However, the gift reduced the amount contributed 

among donors. Edlund, Sagarin and Johnson (2007) found that participants who were offered a 

bottle of water purchased more raffle tickets for an alumni association, especially those who had 

a stonger ‘belief in a just world’. Harris et al. (1973) conducted a series of three experiments 

offering a cookie to prospective donors, and found a positive effect of a gift in only one 

experiment. Chen et al. (2006) conducted an online fundraising campaign offering premiums 

(mouse pads, book lights and CD cases) but found no effect. 

Having profited personally from services from a nonprofit organization seems to enhance 

the probability of subsequent donations, although the evidence is rather thin (Marr, Mullin, & 

Siegfried, 2005; Schervish & Havens, 2002).  

The effect of benefits may partly explain why congregational giving declines when 

congregation size increases. In larger congregations the likelihood of having direct personal 

access to clergy is much lower (Davidson & Pyle, 1994; D. V. A. Olson & Caddell, 1994; 

Stonebraker, 2003; Sullivan, 1985; Zaleski & Zech, 1992, 1994; Zaleski, Zech, & Hoge, 1994). 

However, giving may also be lower in larger groups because of free rider-effects (Kropf & 

Knack, 2003; D. V. A. Olson & Caddell, 1994; M. Olson, 1965), because of a lower level of 

commitment to the group (Finke, Bahr, & Scheitle, 2006; Knoke, 1981), or because of a lower 

level of social pressure (see below). In Presbyterian churches, however, giving increases with 

congregation size (Lunn, Klay, & Douglass, 2001). Interestingly, the authors explained this 

finding as the result of ‘increased ministerial services’. 

There is a danger in offering material benefits for charitable contributions. When people 

receive material benefits for helpfulness, they tend to undermine self-attributions of helpfulness 

(Zuckerman, Lazzaro, & Waldgeir, 1979), which reduces the effect of prosocial self-attributions 

on future helpfulness. Fringe benefits change the decision into an exchange (do I get value for 

17

 
money?). Gruber (2004) finds that subsidies for religious contributions reduce church attendance. 

Eckel and Grossman (2000) find that participants in a dictator game experiment who are recruited 

through flyers telling they could earn money are less generous and less strongly motivated by 

non-monetary factors than participants recruited in class. Meier (2007a) found that removing a 

subsidy for private contributions to a Swiss university fund reduced such contributions in 

consecutive years. This may be taken as evidence of a ‘crowding out’ effect of subsidies on 

intrinsic motivation. Not only the donor’s self-image may be affected by entering the domain of 

exchange, also the nonprofit organization’s image. Charities offering products for sale in 

catalogues face lower contributions (Desmet, 1998). 

In many cases, charitable donations do not provide immediate material benefits to oneself, 

but do provide benefits to individuals known to the donor or a group of which the donor is a 

member (Sargeant & Woodliffe, 2005; Schervish & Havens, 2002; Tam Cho, 2002). Examples 

are donations to the local hospital and one’s church. Such contributions can be explained as a 

form of generalized exchange. In addition, if the contributions are made (in) public, they will be 

recognized by fellow community members, and may be explained by reference to the mechanism 

of reputation discussed below. Finally, individuals may perceive their donations as fair 

contributions that will maintain services that they may use at some later point in time. For 

instance, donors may perceive donations to medical research as a means of relieving their own 

future health needs (Burgoyne, et al., 2005). 

MECHANISM 4: ALTRUISM 

An obvious reason why individuals may contribute money to charities is because they 

care about the organization’s output, or the consequences of donations for beneficiaries. 

Economists, who dominate the study of this mechanism, have labelled this motive ‘altruism’ 

(Andreoni, 2006). In terms of the four dimensions in table 1, (1) altruism yields consequences 

18

 
 
that are tangible; (2) that reside outside individuals; (3) that originate from donors, are often 

channelled through charitable organizations; and (4) accrue solely to beneficiaries. 

Purely altruistic motivation (in the economic sense) would lead individuals who learn 

about an increase in contributions by others with $1 to reduce their own contribution with $1. 

This is called a ‘crowding out’ effect. Numerous studies in economics have sought to estimate the 

magnitude of crowding out; a landmark study is that of Kingma (1989). Results of empirical 

studies testing for crowding out effects show that crowding out may exist, but is often less than 

perfect: a $1 dollar increase in governmental spending decreases private giving with less than $1. 

Some studies find no crowding out effect at all (Brooks, 1999; Kropf & Knack, 2003; Marcuello 

& Salas, 2001; Reece, 1979) and some studies even find crowding in-effects (Brooks, 2003b; A. 

M. Diamond, 1999; Hughes & Luksetich, 1999; Khanna, et al., 1995; Khanna & Sandler, 2000; 

Okten & Weisbrod, 2000; Schiff, 1985, 1990). One study found that increased government 

support was correlated with a higher number of donors but with lower average private 

contributions (Brooks, 2003a).  

Theoretically, the often less than perfect crowding out implies that other and perhaps more 

powerful things besides altruism motivate donations. From the behaviour of donors we can infer 

that they do not care so much about the public benefits generated by that their contributions. The 

private benefits, or selective incentives (M. Olson, 1965) for contributions dominate altruistic 

motives. Hence, donors may be called ‘impure altruists’ (Andreoni, 1989, 1990; Kingma, 1989). 

In practice, the findings imply that “a severe cut in government funding to non-profit 

organizations is not likely, on average, to be made up by donations from private donors” (Payne, 

1998: 338). 

MECHANISM 5: REPUTATION 

The mechanism of reputation refers to the social consequences of donations for the donor. 

In terms of table 1, these consequences are intangible phenomena that happen between 

19

 
 
individuals: people in the social environment of donors verbally or non-verbally reward donors 

for giving, or punish them for not giving. Reputation is studied most often in psychology and 

economics, together accounting for about two thirds of the studies on this mechanism. 

Giving is usually viewed as a positive thing to do (CAF, 2005; Horne, 2003; Muehleman, 

Bruker, & Ingram, 1976), especially when giving reduces inequality (Brickman & Bryan, 1975), 

and when giving is less costly, beneficiaries are not to blame, and is more effective (Horne, 

2003). Thus, people who give to charitable causes are held in high regard by their peers 

(Muehleman, et al., 1976; Wiepking, 2008a). They receive recognition and approval from others. 

Laboratory experiments with abstract public goods games by economists and social-psychologists 

reveal that individuals are willing to incur costs to recognize generous contributions (J. Clark, 

2002). Conversely, not giving damages ones reputation. This is especially true when donations 

are announced in public or when they are directly observable (Alpizar, et al., 2007; Barclay, 

2004; Bateson, Nettle, & Roberts, 2006; Bereczkei, Birkas, & Kerekes, 2007; Harris, Benson, & 

Hall, 1975; Hoffman, McCabe, & Smith, 1996; S. H. Long, 1976; Satow, 1975; Soetevent, 2005). 

When given the choice, people generally prefer their donations to be known by others (Andreoni 

& Petrie, 2004). Thus, face-to-face solicitations are more effective than solicitations made over 

the telephone (Brockner, Guzzi, Kane, Levine, & Shaplen, 1984), and giving people the option of 

donating money in an envelope rather than having them hand over the money reduces donations 

(Hoffman, et al., 1996; Thornton, Kirchner, & Jacobs, 1991). Gaining reputation for donations 

has been facilitated recently with the advent of ribbons (e.g., pink) and wristbands (e.g., yellow); 

a practice conceptualised as ‘conspicious compassion’ (Grace & Griffin, 2006; West, 2004) with 

an eye to the classic study of Veblen (1899).  

To some extent, the effect of being watched may be physical in nature. One study found 

that solicitors in a door-to-door fundraising campaign who looked potential donors in the eye 

raised more money than solicitors who looked at the collecting tin (Bull & Gibson-Robinson, 

20

 
1981). Cues of being watched need not even be consciously perceived: stylized eyes spots also 

have a positive effect on donations (Haley & Fessler, 2005). 

Recognition may be given by persons who are not physically present. Merely knowing 

that one’s contribution is perceived by others may be enough to motivate people to give. In a 

study determining factors that influence giving during a telethon, Silverman et al. (1984) found 

that viewers were most likely to give at the times when the names of pledging donors were shown 

on the screen. Because larger groups are often more anonymous, it may be that incidence and 

level of donations decrease when group sizes increases in bars and school classes (Wiesenthal, 

Austrom, & Silverman, 1983). Survey studies by sociologists and scholars studying religion have 

consistently found a negative relation between the size of congregations and religious 

contributions (Davidson & Pyle, 1994; Hungerman, 2005; D. V. A. Olson & Caddell, 1994; 

Stonebraker, 2003; Zaleski & Zech, 1994; Zaleski, et al., 1994). While donors often deny the 

importance of social pressure (Polonsky, et al., 2002), survey studies have found that donations 

are rather strongly related to measures of social pressure (Bekkers & Schuyt, 2008; Mathur, 1996; 

Pitts & Skelly, 1984; J. R. Smith & McSweeney, 2007). Also the finding by Clotfelter (2003) that 

those who are still related to former alumni tend to give more to private colleges and universities 

may be explained by the mechanism of reputation. 

MECHANISM 6: PSYCHOLOGICAL BENEFITS 

Giving not only yields social benefits, but also psychological benefits for the donor. In 

terms of table 1, the mechanism of psychological benefits refers to the intangible benefits that 

donors bestow upon themselves as a result of donating, and to the intangible costs that donors 

avoid by donating. A large majority of all studies on this mechanism is conducted by (social) 

psychologists, who have shown that giving may contribute to one’s self-image as an altruistic, 

empathic, socially responsible, agreeable, or influential person. In addition, giving is in many 

cases an almost automatic emotional response, producing a positive mood, alleviating feelings of 

21

 
 
guilt, reducing aversive arousal, satisfying a desire to show gratitude, or to be a morally just 

person. 

THE ‘JOY OF GIVING’ 

There is ample evidence from studies on helping behaviour that helping others produces 

positive psychological consequences for the helper, sometimes labelled ‘empathic joy’ (Batson & 

Shaw, 1991). In economic models of philanthropy, this category of motives is labelled ‘warm 

glow’ or ‘joy of giving’ (Andreoni, 1989). Recent evidence from neuropsychological studies 

suggests that donations to charity “elicit neural activity in areas linked to reward processing” 

(Harbaugh, Mayr, & Burghart, 2007) and “anterior sectors of the prefrontal cortex are 

distinctively recruited when altruistic choices prevail over selfish material interests” (Moll et al., 

2006). There are several reasons why humans may have pleasurable psychological experiences 

upon giving: people may alleviate feelings of guilt (avoid punishment), feel good for acting in 

line with a social norm, or feel good for acting in line with a specific (prosocial, altruistic) self-

image. Behavioral brain studies suggest these experiences require a relatively low level of 

perceptual processing (Tankersley, Stowe, & Huettel, 2007). 

The joy of giving (relative to keeping money for oneself) can be manipulated by benign 

thoughts. People are more generous after they have spent some time thinking about their own 

death (Jonas, Schimel, Greenberg, & Pyszczynski, 2002), about an act of forgiveness 

(Karremans, Lange, & Holland, 2005), or about things in life for which they are grateful 

(Soetevent, 2005). 

Positive moods in general may motivate giving. Strahilevitz and Myers (1998) found that 

people are more likely to choose a charity donation over a discount when buying frivolous 

products (e.g., Sundae, frozen yoghurt) rather than functional products (e.g. backpack, 

toothpaste). A positive mood may also be induced by the question ‘how do you feel today?’. 

Most people answer positively to this question (‘I’m fine, thank you’) and are subsequently more 

22

 
 
likely to comply with a request for a donation. This is called the ‘foot-in-the-mouth effect’  (Aune 

& Basil, 1994; Dolinski, et al., 2005; Howard, 1990). It may also be that the ‘foot-in-the-mouth 

effect’ works not so much because it brings about a positive mood but because it creates 

relational obligations (Dolinski, et al., 2005). 

The advice to fundraisers is to test fundraising materials for their mood effects, and to 

avoid the use of materials that bring about a negative mood. Simply telling prospective donors 

that donating will bring them in a good mood increases giving, especially when victims are 

depicted as innocent (Benson & Catt, 1978). Donors also self-report ‘feeling good’ as a motive 

for donating to charitable causes (57% of a sample of Dutch citizens in Wunderink, 2000). 

In specific circumstances, negative moods can also encourage giving. Cunningham et al. 

(1980) show that people in a good mood respond better to rewards associated with giving (a 

warm-glow feeling, or a present), and that people in a bad mood are more responsive towards 

avoiding punishments that come with not giving (for example the phrase: “Image how you would 

feel not helping”).   

SELF-IMAGE 

When giving entails positive psychological benefits, people are said to have positive 

personal norms (R. A. Schwartz, 1970). Personal norms strengthen the effect of social norms. 

When the social norm is to give, those who feel bad about themselves for violating the norm are 

more likely to give. Not giving would entail feelings of guilt, shame, or dissonance with one’s 

self-image. Experiments on helping behavior show that assisting others may be an effective way 

of repairing one’s self-image after one has harmed another (Carlsmith & Gross, 1969; Freedman, 

Wallington, & Bless, 1967; Konečki, 1972; Regan, Williams, & Sparling, 1972).  

One study tested the guilt hypothesis by comparing donations among people entering a 

church during confession hours and people leaving church after confession, when their guilt had 

been reduced (Harris, Benson, and Hall, 1975). Consistent with the guilt hypothesis, the former 

23

 
 
group donated more often than the latter. While the higher likelihood of obtaining social approval 

among coreligionists for donations may also explain this difference, another more recent study 

confirms that feelings of guilt promote donations (Basil, Ridgway, & Basil, 2006). The study also 

showed that feelings of guilt lead to giving by enhancing feelings of responsibility. 

Survey studies have also provided evidence of a link between an altruistic self-image and 

philanthropy. Many studies find that dispositional empathy (measured with items like “I am a 

soft-hearted person”) is positively related to charitable giving (Bekkers, 2006b; Bennett, 2003; 

Davis, 1983; Piferi, Jobe, & Jones, 2006; Wilhelm & Bekkers, 2010). One study that asked 

individuals whether they would be more or less generous than average found that donors 

considered themselves more generous than non-donors (Schlegelmilch, Diamantopoulos, & Love, 

1997). However, giving is not only the result of an altruistic self-image, but also reinforces such 

an image. Piliavin and Callero (1991) found that blood donors develop an altruistic self-identity 

as a result of continued blood donation. A similar process is likely to exist for the donation of 

money to charitable causes (L. Lee, Piliavin, & Call, 1999). It is likely that such a reciprocal 

relationship between giving and altruistic self-image also exists for traditional philanthropy, 

although Sokolowski (1996) did not find evidence for this assumption using cross-sectional data. 

Twenge, Baumeister, DeWall, Ciarocco, and Bartels (2007) find that empathy mediates a 

negative effect of social exclusion on charitable giving. People feeling socially excluded 

temporally lack the ability to experience empathic concern, decreasing the incidence and level of 

charitable giving. 

The self-image mechanism can be used by charities in fundraising campaigns. 

Experimental field studies with adults have found that labelling potential helpers as ‘helpers’ 

promotes helping behaviour. Kraut (1973) found that if a canvasser labelled donors to one charity 

as “charitable” but did not make such a comment to other donors, a consecutive fundraising 

campaign was more successful among those who had been labelled charitable. Swinyard and Ray 

(1979) also found a positive labelling effect. A self-image of being helpful can also be created by 

24

 
the ‘foot-in-the-door technique’. The technique includes making a small request before a larger 

request is made. Compliance with the first request makes people feel helpful, which creates a 

pressure to comply with the second, larger request (Freedman & Fraser, 1996; Rittle, 1981). 

The promise elicitation technique (Cialdini, 2001, p. 62) is another method to take 

advantage of the desire of people to behave in a manner consistent with their self-image. People 

tend to regard themselves as more generous than their peers (Muehleman, et al., 1976; Pronin, 

Lin, & Ross, 2002) and tend to overestimate their generosity in hypothetical (Bekkers, 2006a) 

and real life situations (Komter, 1996). When they are first asked their intentions to give, they are 

more likely to give in real life because people want to live up to their self-image. 

Kerr et al. (1997) found that commitment to a promise made to unknown others motivated 

contributions in an experimental game situation. Not contributing would create cognitive 

dissonance, feelings of guilt. Donors anticipate feelings of guilt upon reducing their current level 

of giving. Sargeant and Woodliffe (2005) found that committed donors perceived that ‘there 

would be a consequence for the beneficiary group of their withdrawing their support’. Another 

survey study found that respondents who anticipated feeling guilty for not giving were more 

likely to give (J. R. Smith & McSweeney, 2007). 

While the majority of studies on self-image have focused on altruism or helpfulness, other 

types of self-images may promote giving as well. For instance, giving enhances one’s self esteem 

(Ickes, Kidd, & Berkowitz, 1976). People may be motivated to give to enhance their self esteem. 

A survey study in the U.K. found that individuals who report a stronger sense of accomplishment 

are more likely to donate (Sargeant, Ford, & West, 2000). A survey study in New Zealand found 

that individuals with a more active orientation to life are more likely to donate (Todd & Lawson, 

1999). A similar finding emerges from a survey study in the Netherlands, in which more 

extraverted individuals – commonly described as more active and outgoing – are more likely to 

give and give higher amounts (Bekkers, 2006b). One study did not find an association between 

‘empowerment’ and giving to human services (Marx, 2000). Another survey study found that 

25

 
esteem-enhancing motivations among older adults were negatively correlated with giving 

(Mathur, 1996).  

MECHANISM 7: VALUES 

In the eyes of donors, the works of nonprofit organizations may make the world a better 

place. Attitudes and values endorsed by donors make charitable giving more or less attractive to 

donors. Donations can also be instrumental to exemplifying one’s endorsement of specific values 

to others, but this is captured by the mechanism of reputation. In terms of table 1, values are 

intangible phenomena located within individuals, originating from donors, and targeted at 

themselves as well as beneficiaries. Studies on the effects of values are most often published by 

journals in sociology, psychology and philanthropic studies.  

Endorsement of prosocial values generally has a positive association with charitable 

giving. Because values are difficult if not impossible to manipulate, experimental studies on the 

effects of social values on philanthropy are non-existent. Some experimental studies link survey 

measures of attitudes and values to donations: humanitarianism and egalitarianism (Fong, 2007); 

and prosocial value orientations (Van Lange, Van Vugt, Bekkers, & Schuyt, 2007). Survey 

studies, mostly conducted by sociologists and marketing scientists, show that people who have 

altruistic values (Bekkers & Schuyt, 2008; Farmer & Fedor, 2001), who have prosocial values 

(Bekkers, 2006b, 2007; Van Lange, et al., 2007), who are less materialistic in general (Sargeant, 

et al., 2000), who endorse postmaterialistic goals in politics (Bekkers & Wiepking, 2006), who 

value being devout and spiritual (Todd & Lawson, 1999), who endorse a moral principle of care 

(Schervish & Havens, 2002; Wilhelm & Bekkers, 2010), who care about social order, consensus, 

and social justice in society (Todd & Lawson, 1999), who feel socially responsible for the 

recipient organization (Weerts & Ronca, 2007) and society as a whole (Amato, 1985; Reed & 

Selbee, 2002; Schuyt, Smit, & Bekkers, 2010) are more likely to give because they are motivated 

to make the world a better place.  

26

 
 
Not only do some social values promote donations in general, but also do specific social 

values promote donations to particular charities (Wiepking, 2009). Philanthropy is a means to 

reach a desired state of affairs that is closer to one’s view of the ‘ideal’ world. What that ideal 

world looks like depends on one’s value system. Through giving, donors may wish to make the 

distribution of wealth and health more equal; they may wish to reduce poverty, empower women, 

safeguard human rights, to protect animals, wildlife, or the ozone layer. Donors may also have 

objectives that are partisan or even terrorist. Supporting a cause that changes the world in a 

desired direction is a key motive for giving that has received very little attention in the literature. 

The desire for social justice is most often studied in relation to philanthropy (Furnham, 1995; 

Todd & Lawson, 1999). Bennett (2003) studied the relationship between personal values and the 

choice of charitable organizations and found that a similarity between personal values and 

organizational values increases the probability that a donation to that particular organization is 

made. Keyt, Yavas and Riecken (2002) found that donors to the American Lung Association are 

more concerned about health issues than non-donors. In addition, donors to political parties 

endorse values central to the ideology of those parties (Francia, Green, Herrnson, Powell, & 

Wilcox, 2005). 

MECHANISM 8: EFFICACY 

Efficacy refers to the perception of donors that their contribution makes a difference to the 

cause they are supporting. In terms of the four dimensions in table 1, efficacy perceptions are 

intangible (psychological) consequences of donations for donors, generated by charitable 

organizations. Efficacy is most often studied in philanthropic studies, economics, and 

psychology, respectively. 

Survey studies reveal that when people perceive that their contribution will not make a 

difference, they are less likely to give (Arumi et al., 2005; W. D. Diamond & Kashyap, 1997; 

Duncan, 2004; Mathur, 1996; Radley & Kennedy, 1992; J. R. Smith & McSweeney, 2007) or 

27

 
 
leave a charitable bequest (Wiepking, Madden, & McDonald, 2010). These findings may be the 

result of reverse causality and/or justification. 

While efficacy has been studied extensively in the helping behaviour literature, we have 

been unable to locate any experimental studies on philanthropy that manipulated efficacy. 

Experiments with public goods games have found that contributions to public goods increase 

with the perceived efficacy of contributions (Sweeney, 1973). Three experimental studies tested 

the effect of providing donors with information about the effectiveness of contributions and 

found positive effects on philanthropy (N. C. Jackson & Mathews, 1995; Parsons, 2003, 2007). It 

appears that financial information is especially influential among committed donors (Parsons, 

2007). Studies of aggregate donations at the state level, however, do not find a consistently 

positive effect of the level of accountability of charitable organizations required in a state 

(Berman & Davidson, 2003; Irvin, 2005). Studies of private contributions received by nonprofit 

organizations in Canada and the U.S. find that organizational efficiency are positively related to 

private donations (Callen, 1994; Trussell & Parsons, 2007). 

People generally overestimate the effectiveness of their own contributions (Kerr, 1989). In 

their study of opera donations, Buraschi and Cornelli (2002) found that this holds especially for 

low-income donors. There appear to be individual differences in the tendency to view 

contributing to public goods in a rational manner. People who do so follow the free rider-

reasoning (Olson, 1965): an additional dollar does not solve the problem; not giving does not 

make things worse. Survey studies reveal that a more coldly rational approach to life reduces 

giving (Bekkers, 2006b; Todd & Lawson, 1999) and is related to a lower level of volunteering 

(Bekkers, 2005b; Unger, 1991). 

Perceived efficacy is a likely explanation for the effects of leadership donations and seed 

money that have been studied extensively by economists (Andreoni & Petrie, 2004; Bac & Bag, 

2003; Chen, et al., 2006; Landry, et al., 2006; List & Lucking-Reiley, 2002; List & Rondeau, 

2003; Potters, Sefton, & Vesterlund, 2005). When people see that others give to a charity, they 

28

 
can take this as a signal that others have confidence in the organization. The leadership effect was 

described earlier by social psychologists as a ‘modeling effect’ (Bryan & Test, 1967; Lincoln, 

1977; Reingen, 1982). Lincoln (1977) found that observing another person make a donation 

increased subsequent donations, especially if the model was a male. Jiobu and Knowles (1974) 

however, found no modelling effect. A matching offer by a third party (e.g., one’s employer) can 

also have a legitimizing effect: people will think that the third party had enough confidence in the 

organization to offer the matching contribution. Endorsement of a charity by a high status person 

is also likely to generate higher donations through a legitimisation effect. One field experiment 

with a health charity (Vriens, Scheer, Hoekstra, & Bult, 1998) found that a signature by a 

professor in health care research raised donations with 2.4%. A lab experiment found that 

observing high status individuals making donations lead others to increase their donations, while 

the leadership effect was not found when low status individuals were observed making 

contributions (Kumru & Vesterlund, 2005).  

Surveys reveal that donors have an aversion against expensive fundraising methods 

(Arumi, et al., 2005; Sargeant & Woodliffe, 2005; Schervish & Havens, 2002). Evidence from 

the U.K. (Sargeant, et al., 2000) and the Netherlands (Bekkers, 2003) suggests that donors 

overestimate fundraising costs of charitable organizations. An experiment revealed that donors 

react less positively to ‘flashy’ fundraising materials (Bekkers & Crutzen, 2007). Low perceived 

efficacy decreases giving more strongly among altruistically motivated donors (Bekkers, 2006a). 

Perceptions of efficacy are related to charitable confidence and perceptions of overhead 

and fundraising costs. Donors who have more confidence in charitable organizations think their 

contributions are less likely to be spent on fundraising costs and overhead (Bekkers, 2006a; 

Sargeant, Ford, & West, 2006). Such beliefs about the efficacy of charitable organizations are 

likely to promote giving (Bekkers, 2006a; Bennett, 2003; Bennett & Gabriel, 2003; Bowman, 

2006; Keyt, et al., 2002; Parsons, 2003; Sargeant, et al., 2006; Schervish & Havens, 2002; 

Schlegelmilch, Diamantopoulos, et al., 1997; Yavas, Riecken, & Parameswaran, 1981). Wiepking 

29

 
(2009) finds that confidence in charitable organizations specifically increases the likelihood of 

giving to organizations with an international focus, she finds no relationship between confidence 

and making donations to other types of organizations. Survey studies by Sargeant and colleagues 

reveal that the relationship of confidence with giving is mediated by relationship commitment 

(Sargeant, et al., 2006; Sargeant & Lee, 2004).  

While attractive design of fundraising materials is often believed to attract the attention of 

donors (W. D. Diamond & Gooding-Williams, 2002), field experiments tell a different story. 

Warwick (2001) reports 23 tests of design elements on outer envelopes used in donor acquisition 

mailings, and found no effect in 19 cases, a negative effect in three cases, and a positive effect in 

only one case. In a field experiment with direct-mail letters for a health charity, the optimal 

fundraising letter was found to contain no ‘amplifiers’ (like bold printing), and no illustration 

(Vriens, et al., 1998). In a field experiment with donations in a campaign for refugees in Ruanda, 

Bekkers and Crutzen (2007) found that a plain envelope raised more money than an envelope 

including a picture of the beneficiaries.  

HOW DO THE MECHANISMS RELATE TO EACH OTHER? 

The relative influence of each of the eight mechanisms – whether donations are primarily 

made in response to awareness of need, solicitation, costs and benefits, altruism, reputation 

concerns, psychological rewards, or efficacy – is unclear. Multiple motives are likely to operate 

simultaneously (Batson & Shaw, 1991; Clotfelter, 1997) and the mix of these motives differs 

over time, place, organizations, and donors. It is also likely that the eight mechanisms have 

interactive effects (e.g., that awareness of need may promote giving more strongly when efficacy 

is high). We think that identifying systematic patterns in the mix of the mechanisms and 

interactions among them are important tasks for future research.  

Throughout our review, we have distinguished experimental from survey studies. Each of 

these methods has its own advantages and disadvantages. Experiments typically test for short-

30

 
 
term effects of manipulations, create artificial conditions, and rely on small groups of participants 

(university students). Strictly speaking, results cannot be generalized to the general population. 

The advantage of experimental control is the potential to draw causal inferences. Survey studies 

typically investigate donations over a longer period to real organizations among population 

samples, but cannot be used to infer causation.  

Much would be gained by combining the strengths of the two methods. However, due to 

specialization of scholars in disciplines with different methodological preferences, there are 

virtually no studies combining survey and experimental methods (an exception  is Bekkers, 

2007). We hope that with this review researchers using either method will become more aware of 

the insights gained in studies using the other method. In particular, insights from experimental 

studies illuminate results from survey studies. We illustrate this with a discussion of the influence 

of religion on philanthropy. What mechanisms may explain this relation? Scholars often 

distinguish ‘conviction’ and ‘community’ or ‘norms’ and ‘networks’ as two broad explanations 

(Bekkers & Schuyt, 2008; E. F. Jackson, Bachmeier, Wood, & Craft, 1995; Wuthnow, 1991). 

‘Conviction’ refers to (religious) beliefs, values and attitudes that encourage altruism; 

‘community’ refers to identification with the religious community, social pressure, and 

solicitations for contributions. The ‘conviction’ explanation pulls together three mechanisms: 

altruism (a real concern for others), psychological benefits (earning one’s place in heaven), and 

values (the importance of helping others). ‘Community’ pulls together solicitation (receiving 

requests for contributions), reputation (recognition from others) and psychological benefits 

(feeling part of a community). 

A CASE FOR PROGRESS? 

If the studies discussed above are viewed in a chronological order, do we then see any 

evidence for theoretical progress in the study of philanthropy? Taken together, theoretical 

progress in the literature on philanthropy is limited. The majority of papers we reviewed are not 

31

 
 
based on solid theoretical foundations. This is not to say that there is no progress at all; 

subsequent studies may build on theoretical arguments without making them explicit. If the 

implicit hypotheses are reconstructed, we may detect progress. We do not make this exercise here 

because it is not the purpose of the present paper. Instead, we will indicate groups of studies in 

which we discern theoretical progress. 

A set of papers published in social psychology from the 1970s to mid 1980s, may be 

characterized as applied research testing for boundary conditions of fundamental mechanisms. 

While the insights from these studies may be reconstructed as refinements of general hypotheses, 

the studies themselves often do not state these hypotheses explicitly.  

Another set of papers, published in economics, does have more solid theoretical 

foundations. Model building in economics started with the public good model, but when no or 

little crowding out was observed in empirical studies, the model was found too crude. 

Subsequently, impure altruism models were proposed (Andreoni, 1989, 1990), collapsing all non-

altruistic motives in one parameter. The revision of the model in subsequent studies as a result of 

empirical disconfirmation is a clear example of theoretical progress. 

Other formal models of philanthropy deal with only one mechanism. Glazer and Konrad 

(1986) have modelled the reputation mechanism in a mathematical form. They call their model a 

signalling explanation for charity. By giving, people signal to others that they are concerned 

about others and/or that they have wealth (Frank, Gilovich, & Regan, 1996). Both signals buy 

prestige (Harbaugh, 1998). Duncan’s model of impact philanthropy focuses on the desire of 

donors to have impact on beneficiaries (Duncan, 2004). The model accurately describes one 

specific ingredient of the ‘warm glow’. As far as we know, there are no theoretical models 

describing the mechanisms of solicitation, psychological rewards, values, and efficacy.  

Philanthropic acts are commonly the result of multiple mechanisms working at once. 

However, formal models of philanthropy (e.g., Ribar & Wilhelm, 2002) have focussed on only 

one or sometimes two motives. More than ten years ago, Brown (1997, 183) described the state 

32

 
of affairs with regard to theory as follows: “No single model captures all the motivations that 

underlie charitable action”. While it is probably impossible to capture all mechanisms in one 

elegant formal model, Brown’s assessment still holds and provides a challenge for model 

builders. 

There is a large potential for theoretical progress in the literature on philanthropy. The 

challenge for all scholars, model builders and other scientists alike, is to test competing 

alternative explanations – potentially from different disciplines – against each other. Scholars 

trying to prove their pet theories do not add much to our understanding of philanthropy. Progress 

is hindered by the lack of awareness of research in distant times and disciplines. Hopefully this 

review reduces some of the barriers to progress. 

33

 
 
NOTE 

1 See (Abrams & Schmitz, 1978, 1984; Andreoni, 1993; Andreoni & Payne, 2003; Auten, Cilke, 

& Randolph, 1992; Auten, et al., 2002; Barrett, 1991; Barrett, McGuirk, & Steinberg, 1997; 

Boskin & Feldstein, 1977; Brooks, 2003b; Brown, 1997; Brown & Lankford, 1992; Choe & 

Jeong, 1993; Chua & Wong, 1999; Daneshvary & Luksetich, 1997; Duncan, 2004; Eaton, 2001; 

Feenberg, 1987; N. E. Feldman, 2007; Feldstein, 1975a, 1975b; Feldstein & Taylor, 1976; 

Glenday, Gupta, & Pawlak, 1986; Greenwood, 1993; Hood, Martin, & Osberg, 1977; Jones & 

Posnett, 1991a, 1991b; Khanna, et al., 1995; Khanna & Sandler, 2000; Kingma, 1989; Lankford 

& Wyckoff, 1991; J. E. Long, 2000; McClelland & Kokoski, 1994; O'Neill, Steinberg, & 

Thompson, 1996; Park & Park, 2004; Randoph, 1995; Reece, 1979; Reece & Zieschang, 1985, 

1989; Ricketts & Westfall, 1993; Robinson, 1990; Schiff, 1985, 1990; Simmons & Emanuele, 

2004; Slemrod, 1989; Richard S. Steinberg, 1985, 1991; Taussig, 1967). 

34

 
REFERENCES 

Abrams, B. A., & Schmitz, M. D. (1978). The 'crowding-out' effect of governmental transfers on 

private charitable contributions. Public Choice, 33(1), 29-39.  

Abrams, B. A., & Schmitz, M. D. (1984). The 'crowding-out' effect of governmental transfers on 

private charitable contributions: cross-section evidence. National Tax Journal, 37(4), 563-

568.  

Adams, W. C. (1986). Testing Geographical Bias in International News Whose Lives Count?: TV 

Coverage of Natural Disasters. Journal of Communication (1986-1998); Spring 1986; 36, 

2, 36(2), 113-123.  

Alpizar, F., Carlsson, F., & Johansson-Stenman, O. (2007). Anonymity, Reciprocity and 

Conformity: Evidence from Voluntary Contributions to a Natural Park in Costa Rica. 

Department of Economics Working Papers in Economics, Göteborg University,  (245). 

Göteborg. 

Amato, P. R. (1985). An Investigation of Planned Helping Behavior. Journal of Research in 

Personality, 19, 232-252.  

Amos, O. M. (1982). Empirical Analysis of Motives Underlying Individual Contributions to 

Charity. Atlantic Economic Journal, 10(4), 45-52.  

Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian 

Equivalence. The Journal of Political Economy, 97(6), 1447-1458.  

Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow 

Giving. Economic Journal, 100, 464-477.  

Andreoni, J. (1993). An Experimental Test of the Public-Goods Crowding-Out Hypothesis. 

American Economic Review, 83, 1317-1327.  

Andreoni, J. (2006). Philanthropy. In L.-A. Gerard-Varet, S.-C. Kolm & J. M. Ythier (Eds.), 

Handbook of Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism (pp. 1201-1269). North-Holland: Elsevier. 

35

 
Andreoni, J., & Miller, J. (2002). Giving According to GARP: An Experimental Test of the 

Consistency of Preferences for Altruism. Econometrica, 70(2), 737-753.  

Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2003). Do Government Grants to Private Charities Crowd Out 

Giving or Fundraising? The American Economic Review, 93(3), 792-812.  

Andreoni, J., & Petrie, R. (2004). Public goods experiments without confidentiality: a glimpse 

into fund-raising. Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1605-1623.  

Apinunmahakul, A., & Devlin, R. A. (2004). Charitable Giving and Charitable Gambling: An 

Emperical Investigation. National Tax Journal, LVII(1), 67-88.  

Arumi, A. M., Wooden, R., Johnson, J., Farkas, S., Duffett, A., & Ott, A. (2005). The Charitable 

Impulse. New York: Public Agenda. 

Aune, R. K., & Basil, M. D. (1994). A Relational Obligations Approach to the Foot-In-The-

Mouth Effect. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24(6), 546-556.  

Auten, G. E., Cilke, J., & Randolph, W. (1992). The Effects of Tax Reform on Charitable 

Contributions. National Tax Journal, 45(3), 267-290.  

Auten, G. E., Sieg, H., & Clotfelter, C. T. (2002). Charitable Giving, Income and Taxes: An 

Analysis of Panel Data. The American Economic Review, 92(1), 371-382.  

Baade, R. A., & Sundberg, J. O. (1996a). Fourth down and gold to go? Assessing the link 

between athletics and alumni giving. Social Science Quarterly, 77(4), 789-803.  

Baade, R. A., & Sundberg, J. O. (1996b). What determines alumni generosity? Economics of 

Education Review, 15(1), 75-81.  

Bac, M., & Bag, P. K. (2003). Strategic information revelation in fund-raising. Journal of Public 

Economics, 87, 659-679.  

Banks, J., & Tanner, S. (1999). Patterns in Household Giving: Evidence from UK Data. 

International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 10(2), 167-178.  

Barclay, P. (2004). Trustworthiness and competitive altruism can also solve the tragedy of the 

commons. Evolution and Human Behavior 25, 209-220.  

36

 
Barrett, K. S. (1991). Panel-Data Estimates of Charitable Giving: A Synthesis of Techniques. 

National Tax Journal, 44(3), 365-381.  

Barrett, K. S., McGuirk, A. M., & Steinberg, R. S. (1997). Further Evidence on the Dynamic 

Impact of Taxes on Charitable Giving. National Tax Journal, 50(2), 321-334.  

Basil, D. Z., Ridgway, N. M., & Basil, M. D. (2006). Guilt Appeals: The Mediating Effect of 

Responsibility. Psychology & Marketing, 23(12), 1035-1054.  

Bateson, M., Nettle, D., & Roberts, G. (2006). Cues of being watched enhance cooperation in a 

real world setting. Biology Letters, 2, 412-414.  

Batson, C. D. (1998). Altruism and Prosocial Behavior. In D. T. Gilbert (Ed.), Handbook of 

Social Psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 282-316). New York: Random House. 

Batson, C. D., & Shaw, L. L. (1991). Evidence for Altruism: Toward a Pluralism of Prosocial 

Motives. Psychological Inquiry, 2(2), 107-122.  

Bekkers, R. (2003). Trust, Accreditation, and Philanthropy in the Netherlands. Nonprofit & 

Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 32, 596-615.  

Bekkers, R. (2004). Giving and Volunteering in the Netherlands: Sociological and Psychological 

Perspectives. Ph.D.-dissertation, Department of Sociology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, 

the Netherlands.    

Bekkers, R. (2005a). It’s Not All in the Ask. Effects and Effectiveness of Recruitment Strategies 

Used by Nonprofits in The Netherlands. Paper presented at the 34rd Annual ARNOVA-

Conference, Washington, DC, USA. 

Bekkers, R. (2005b). Participation in Voluntary Associations: Relations with Resources, 

Personality, and Political Values. Political Psychology, 26(3), 439-454.  

Bekkers, R. (2005c, November 19, 2005). When and Why Matches are More Effective Subsidies 

Than Rebates. Paper presented at the 34th Arnova Annual Conference, Washington, DC, 

USA. 

37

 
Bekkers, R. (2006a, September 13-14, 2006). Keeping the Faith: Origins of Confidence in 

Charitable Organizations and its Consequences for Philanthropy. Paper presented at the 

the NCVO/VSSN Researching the Voluntary Sector Conference 2006, Warwick 

University, UK. 

Bekkers, R. (2006b). Traditional and Health Related Philanthropy: The Role of Resources and 

Personality. Social Psychology Quarterly, 68(4), 349-366.  

Bekkers, R. (2007). Measuring Altruistic Behavior in Surveys: The All-or-Nothing Dictator 

Game. Survey Research Methods, 1(3).  

Bekkers, R. (2008). Straight From the Heart. In S. Chambré & M. Goldner (Eds.), Advances in 

Medical Sociology, Volume 10: Patients, Consumers and Civil Society: US and 

International Perspectives (pp. 197-221): Emerald Group Publishing. 

Bekkers, R., & Crutzen, O. (2007). Just keep it simple: A field experiment on fundraising letters. 

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 12(4), 371–378.  

Bekkers, R., & Schuyt, T. (2008). And who is your neighbor? Explaining denominational 

differences in charitable giving and volunteering in the Netherlands. Review Of Religious 

Research, 50(1), 74-96.  

Bekkers, R., & Wiepking, P. (2006). To Give or not to Give, that's the Question. How 

Methodology is Destiny in Dutch Data. Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 35(3), 

533-540.  

Bennett, R. (2003). Factors Underlying the Inclination to Donate to Particular Types of Charity. 

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 8(1), 12-29.  

Bennett, R., & Gabriel, H. (2003). Image and reputational characteristics of UK charitable 

organizations: An empirical study. Corporate Reputation Review, 6(3), 276-289.  

Bennett, R., & Kottasz, R. (2000). Emergency fund-raising for disaster relief. Disaster 

Prevention and Management, 9(5), 352-359.  

38

 
Benson, P. L., & Catt, V. L. (1978). Soliciting charity contribution: The parlance of asking for 

money. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 8, 84-95.  

Bereczkei, T., Birkas, B., & Kerekes, Z. (2007). Public charity offer as a proximate factor of 

evolved rep utation-building strategy: an experimental analysis of a real-life situation. 

Evolution and Human Behavior, 28, 277–284.  

Berkowitz, L. (1968). Responsibility, Reciprocity, and Social Distance in Help-Giving: An 

Experimental Investigation of English Social Class Differences. Journal of Experimental 

Social Psychology, 4, 46-63.  

Berkowitz, L., & Daniels, L. R. (1964). Affecting the Salience of the Social Responsibility Norm: 

Effects of Past Help on the Response to Dependency Relationships. Journal of Abnormal 

and Social Psychology, 68, 275-281.  

Berman, G., & Davidson, S. (2003). Do Donors Care? Some Australian Evidence. Voluntas, 14, 

421-429.  

Bielefeld, W., Rooney, P., & Steinberg, K. (2005). How Do Need, Capacity, Geography, and 

Politics Influence Giving? In A. C. Brooks (Ed.), Gifts of Money in Americas 

Communities (pp. 127-158). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc. 

Boskin, M. J., & Feldstein, M. (1977). Effects of the Charitable Deduction of Contribution by 

low and Middle Income Households: New Evidence of the National Survey of 

Philanthropy. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 59, 351-354.  

Bowman, W. (2006). Should Donors Care About Overhead Costs? Do They Care? Nonprofit and 

Voluntary Sector Quarterly, June(35), 288 - 310.  

Brickman, P., & Bryan, J. H. (1975). Moral Judgment of Theft, Charity, and Third-Party 

Transfers That Increase or Decrease Equality. Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology, 31(1), 156-161.  

39

 
Brockner, J., Guzzi, B., Kane, J., Levine, E., & Shaplen, K. (1984). Organizational Fundraising: 

Further Evidence on the Effect of Legitimizing Small Donations. Journal of Consumer 

Research, 11, 611-614.  

Brooks, A. C. (1999). Do public subsidies leverage private philanthropy for the arts? Empirical 

evidence on symphony orchestras. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 28(1), 32-

45.  

Brooks, A. C. (2003a). Do Government Subsidies to Nonprofits Crowd Out Donations Or 

Donors? Public Finance Review, 31(2), 166-179.  

Brooks, A. C. (2003b). Taxes, Subsidies, and Listeners Like You: Public Policy and 

Contributions to Public Radio. Public Administration Review, 63(5), 554-561.  

Brown, E. (1997). Altruism Toward Groups: The Charitable Provision of Private Goods. 

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 26(2), 175-184.  

Brown, E., & Lankford, H. (1992). Gifts of Money and Gifts of TIme: Estimating the Effects of 

Tax Prices and Available Time. Journal of Public Economics, 47, 321-341.  

Bryan, J. H., & Test, M. A. (1967). Models and Helping: Naturalistic Studies in Aiding Behavior. 

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6(4), 400-407.  

Bryant, W. K., Slaughter, H. J., Kang, H., & Tax, A. (2003). Participating in Philanthropic 

Activities: Donating Money and Time. Journal of Consumer Policy, 26(1), 43-73.  

Bull, R., & Gibson-Robinson, E. (1981). The Influences of Eye-Gaze, Style of Dress, and 

Locality on the Amounts of Money Donated to a Charity. Human Relations, 34(10), 895-

905.  

Buraschi, A., & Cornelli, F. (2002). Donations. CEPR Discussion Paper.  (3488). 

Burgoyne, C. B., Young, B., & Walker, C. M. (2005). Deciding to give to charity: A focus group 

study in the context of the household economy. Journal of Community & Applied Social 

Psychology, 15(5), 383-405.  

CAF. (2005). UK Giving 2004/05. Kent, UK: Charities Aid Foundation. 

40

 
Callen, J. L. (1994). Money Donations, Volunteering and Organizational Efficiency. Journal of 

Productivity Analysis, 5, 215-228.  

Carlsmith, J. M., & Gross, A. E. (1969). Some Effects of Guilt on Compliance. Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 11(3), 232-239.  

Carroll, J., McCarthy, S., & Newman, C. (2006). An Econometric Analysis of Charitable 

Donations in the Republic of Ireland. The Economic and Social Review, 36(3), 229-249.  

Chen, Y., Li, X., & MacKie-Mason, J. K. (2006). Online Fund-Raising Mechanisms: A Field 

Experiment. Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(2).  

Cheung, C. K., & Chan, C. M. (2000). Social-cognitive Factors of Donating Money to Charity, 

with Special Attention to an International Relief Organisation. Evaluation and Program 

Planning, 23, 241-253.  

Chinman, M. J., Wandersman, A., & Goodman, R. M. (2005). A Benefit-and-Cost Approach to 

Understanding Social Participation and Volunteerism in Multilevel Organizations. In A. 

M. Omoto (Ed.), Processes of Community Change and Social Action (pp. 99-118). 

Mahwah: Erlbaum. 

Choe, Y. S., & Jeong, J. (1993). Charitable contributions by low- and middle income taxpayers: 

further evidence with a new method. National Tax Journal, 46(1), 33-39.  

Chua, V. C. H., & Wong, C. M. (1999). Tax incentives, individual characteristics and charitable 

giving in Singapore. International Journal of Social Economics, 26(12), 1492-1504.  

Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Influence. New York: Allyn and Bacon. 

Clark, J. (2002). Recognizing Large Donations to Public Goods: An Experimental Test. 

Managerial and Decision Economics, 23, 33-44.  

Clark, P. B., & Wilson, J. Q. (1961). Incentive system: A theory of organization. Administrative 

Science Quarterly, 6(2), 129-166.  

Clotfelter, C. T. (1997). The Economics of Giving. In J. W. Barry & B. V. Manno (Eds.), Giving 

Better, Giving Smarter: Working Papers of the National Commission on Philanthropy 

41

 
and Civic Renewal (pp. 31-55). Washington, DC: National Commission on Philanthropy 

and Civic Renewal. 

Clotfelter, C. T. (2003). Alumni giving to elite private colleges and universities. Economics of 

Education Review, 22, 109-120.  

Cunningham, M. R., Steinberg, J., & Greu, R. (1980). Wanting to and Having to Help: Separate 

Motivations for Positive Mood and Guilt-Induced Helpng. Journal of Personality and 

Social Psychology, 38(2), 181-192.  

Daneshvary, N., & Luksetich, W. A. (1997). Income sources and declared charitable tax 

deductions. Applied Economics Letters, 4, 271-274.  

Davidson, J. D., & Pyle, R. E. (1994). Passing the Plate in Affluent Churches: Why Some 

Members Give More Than Others. Review of Religious Research, 36(2), 181-196.  

Davis, M. H. (1983). Empathic Concern and the Muscular Dystrophy Telethon. Empathy as a 

Multidimensional Construct. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9(2), 223-229.  

Desmet, P. (1998). The Impact of Mail Order on Subsequent Donations: An Experiment. 

Financial Accountability and Management, 14(3), 203-214.  

Desmet, P. (1999). Asking for less to obtain more. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 13(3), 55-

65.  

Diamond, A. M. (1999). Does Federal Funding "Crowd In" Private Funding of Science? 

Contemporary Economic Policy, 17(4), 423-431.  

Diamond, W. D., & Gooding-Williams, S. (2002). Using advertising constructs and methods to 

understand direct mail fundraising appeals. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 

12(3), 225-242.  

Diamond, W. D., & Kashyap, R. K. (1997). Extending Models of Prosocial Behavior to Explain 

University Alumni Contributions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27(10), 915-928.  

Diamond, W. D., & Noble, S. M. (2001). Defensive Responses to Charitable Direct Mail 

Solicitations. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 15(3), 2-12.  

42

 
Dolinski, D., Grzyb, T., Olejnik, J., Prusakowski, S., & Urban, K. (2005). Let’s Dialogue About 

Penny: Effectiveness of Dialogue Involvement and Legitimizing Paltry Contribution 

Techniques. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35(6), 1150-1170.  

Doob, A. N., & McLaughlin, D. S. (1989). Ask and You Shall be Given: Request Size and 

Donations to a Good Cause. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 19(12), 1049-1056.  

Duncan, B. (2004). A Theory of Impact Philanthropy. Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2159-

2180.  

Eaton, D. H. (2001). Charitable Contributions and Tax Price Elasticities for Nonitemizing 

Taxpayers. International Advances in Economic Research, 7(4), 432-442.  

Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. (2004). Giving to Secular Causes by the Religious and 

Nonreligious: An Experimental Test of the Responsiveness of Giving to Subsidies. 

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 33, 271-289.  

Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2000). Volunteers and Pseudo-Volunteers: The Effect of 

Recruitment Method in Dictator Experiments. Experimental Economics, 3, 107-120.  

Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2003). Rebate versus matching: does how we subsidize 

charitable contributions matter? Journal of Public Economics, 87, 681-701.  

Edlund, J. E., Sagarin, B. J., & Johnson, B. S. (2007). Reciprocity and the belief in a just world. 

Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 589-596.  

Farmer, S. M., & Fedor, D. B. (2001). Changing the focus on volunteering: an investigation of 

volunteers’ multiple contributions to a charitable organization. Journal of Management, 

27, 191–211.  

Feenberg, D. (1987). Are Tax Price Models Really Identified: The Case of Charitable Giving. 

National Tax Journal, 40(4), 629-633.  

Feldman, D., & Feldman, B. (1985). The effect of a telethon on attitudes toward disabled people 

and financial contributions. Journal of Rehabilitation, 51, 42-45.  

43

 
Feldman, N. E. (2007). Time is Money: Choosing between Charitable Activities. Working paper, 

Ben-Gurion University, Israel. 

Feldstein, M. (1975a). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part I - Aggregate and 

Distributional Effects. National Tax Journal, 28, 81-99.  

Feldstein, M. (1975b). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part II - The Impact on 

Religious, Educational, and Other Organizations. National Tax Journal, 28, 209-226.  

Feldstein, M., & Taylor, A. (1976). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions. Econometrica, 

44(6), 1201-1222.  

Finke, R., Bahr, M., & Scheitle, C. P. (2006). Toward explaining congregational giving. Social 

Science Research, 35, 620-641.  

Fong, C. M. (2007). Evidence from an experiment on charity to welfare recipients: reciprocity, 

altruism, and the empathic responsiveness hypothesis. Economic Journal, 117, 1008-

1024.  

Francia, P. L., Green, J. C., Herrnson, P. S., Powell, L. W., & Wilcox, C. (2005). Limousine 

Liberals and Corporate Conservatives: The Financial Constituencies of the Democratic 

and Republican Parties. Social Science Quarterly, 86(4), 761-778.  

Frank, R. H., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D. (1996). Do Economists Make Bad Citizens? Journal of 

Economic Perspectives, 10(1), 187-192.  

Fraser, C., Hite, R. E., & Sauer, P. L. (1988). Increasing contributions in solicitation campaigns: 

the use of large and small anchorpoints. Journal of Consumer Research, 15(2), 284-287.  

Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1996). Compliance without pressure: the foot-in-the-door 

technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 195-202.  

Freedman, J. L., Wallington, S. A., & Bless, E. (1967). Compliance Without Pressure: The Effect 

of Guilt. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7(2), 117-124.  

Furnham, A. (1995). The Just World, Charitable Giving and Attitudes to Disability. Personal and 

Individual Differences, 19, 577-583.  

44

 
Gittell, R., & Tebaldi, E. (2006). Charitable Giving: Factors Influencing Giving in the U.S. 

States. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 35(4), 721-736.  

Glazer, A., & Konrad, K. A. (1986). A Signaling Explanation for Charity. American Economic 

Review, 86(4), 1019-1028.  

Glenday, G., Gupta, A. K., & Pawlak, H. (1986). Tax Incentives for Personal Charitable 

Contributions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 68(4), 688-693.  

Grace, D., & Griffin, D. (2006). Exploring conspicuousness in the context of donation behavior. 

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 11, 147-154.  

Greenwood, D. T. (1993). Price and income elasticities of charitable giving: how should income 

be measured? Public Finance Quarterly, 21(2), 186-209.  

Gruber, J. (2004). Pay or Pray? The Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious Attendance. 

Journal of Public Economics, 88(12), 2635-2655.  

Haley, K. J., & Fessler, D. M. T. (2005). Nobody’s watching? Subtle cues affect generosity in an 

anonymous economic game. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26, 245-256.  

Harbaugh, W. T. (1998). What Do Donations Buy? A Model of Philanthropy Based on Prestige 

and Warm Glow. Journal of Public Economics, 67, 269-284.  

Harbaugh, W. T., Mayr, U., & Burghart, D. R. (2007). Neural Responses to Taxation and 

Voluntary Giving Reveal Motives for Charitable Donations. Science, 316, 1622-1624.  

Harris, M. B., Benson, S. M., & Hall, C. L. (1975). The Effects of Confession on Altruism. 

Journal of Social Psychology, 96, 187-192.  

Harris, M. B., Liguori, R. A., & Stack, C. (1973). Favors, Bribes, and Altruism. Journal of Social 

Psychology, 89, 47-54.  

Harrison, W. B., Mitchell, S. K., & Peterson, S. P. (1995). Alumni donations and college's 

development expenditures: does spending matter? American Journal of Economics and 

Sociology, 54(4), 397-412.  

45

 
Havens, J. J., O'Herlihy, M. A., & Schervish, P. G. (2007). Charitable Giving: How Much, by 

Whom, to What, and How? In W. W. Powell & R. S. Steinberg (Eds.), The Non-Profit 

Sector: A Research Handbook (2 ed., pp. 542-567). New Haven/London: Yale University 

Press. 

Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., & Smith, V. L. (1996). Social Distance and Other-Regarding Behavior 

in Dictator Games. American Economic Review, 86, 653-660.  

Hood, R. D., Martin, S. A., & Osberg, L. S. (1977). Economic Determinants of Individual 

Charitable Donations in Canada. The Canadian Journal of Economics, 10(4), 653-669.  

Horne, C. (2003). The Internal Enforcement of Norms. European Sociological Review, 19(4), 

335-343.  

Howard, D. J. (1990). The influence of verbal responses to common greetings on compliance 

behaviour: the foot-in-the-mouth effect. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 1185-

1196.  

Hughes, P. N., & Luksetich, W. A. (1999). The Relationship Among Funding Sources for Art and 

History Museums. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 10(1), 21-37.  

Hungerman, D. M. (2005). Are church and state substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 welfare 

reform. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2245-2267.  

Ickes, W. J., Kidd, R. F., & Berkowitz, L. (1976). Attributional Determinants of Monetary Help-

Giving. Journal of Personality, 44, 163-178.  

Irvin, R. (2005). State Regulation of Nonprofit Organizations: Accountability Regardless of 

Outcome. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 34(2), 161-178.  

Jackson, E. F., Bachmeier, M. D., Wood, J. R., & Craft, E. A. (1995). Volunteering and 

charitable giving: Do religious and associational ties promote helping behavior? Nonprofit 

and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 24, 59-78.  

Jackson, N. C., & Mathews, R. M. (1995). Using Public Feedback to Increase Contributions to a 

Multipurpose Senior Center. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 28, 449-455.  

46

 
Jiobu, R. M., & Knowles, E. S. (1974). Norm Strength and Alms Giving: An Observational 

Study. Journal of Social Psychology, 94, 205-211.  

Jonas, E., Schimel, J., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2002). The Scrooge Effect: Evidence 

That Mortality Salience Increases Prosocial Attitudes and Behavior. Personality and 

Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(10), 1342-1353.  

Jones, A. M., & Posnett, J. W. (1991a). Charitable Donations by UK Households: Evidence from 

the Family Expenditure Survey. Applied Economics, 23(2), 343-351.  

Jones, A. M., & Posnett, J. W. (1991b). The Impact of Tax Deductibility on Charitable Giving by 

Covenant in the UK. Economic Journal, 101(408), 1117-1129.  

Karlan, D., & List, J. A. (2006). Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving? Evidence from a 

Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment. Working paper, Yale University. Working Paper. 

Karremans, J., Lange, P. A. M. v., & Holland, R. W. (2005). Forgiveness and Its Associations 

With Prosocial Thinking, Feeling, and Doing Beyond the Relationship With the Offender. 

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(10), 1315-1326.  

Katz, S. N. (1999). Where did the Serious Study of Philanthropy Come From, Anyway? 

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 8(1), 74-82.  

Katzev, R. D. (1995, December 15, 1995). Applying Social Psychology to Charitable Donations: 

Three Experiments on Nonprofit Fundraising  Retrieved January 18, 2010, from Aspen 

Institute Nonprofit Sector Research Fund, Washington, DC. 

www.nonprofitresearch.org/usr_doc/16167.pdf 

Kerr, N. L. (1989). Illusions of Efficacy: The Effects of Group Size on Perceived Efficacy in 

Social Dilemmas. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 287-313.  

Kerr, N. L., Garst, J., A., D., & Harris, S. E. (1997). That Still, Small Voice: Commitment to 

Cooperation as an Internalized Versus a Social Norm. Personality and Social Psychology 

Bulletin, 23(12), 1300-1311.  

47

 
Keyt, J. C., Yavas, U., & Riecken, G. (2002). Comparing Donor Segments to a Cause-Based 

Charity: The Case of the American Lung Association. Journal of Nonprofit & Public 

Sector Marketing, 10(2), 117-134.  

Khanna, J., Posnett, J., & Sandler, T. (1995). Charity Donations in the UK: New Evidence Based 

on Panel Data. Journal of Public Economics, 56(2), 257-272.  

Khanna, J., & Sandler, T. (2000). Partners in giving: The crowding-in effects of UK government 

grants. European Economic Review 44, 1543-1556.  

Kingma, B. (1989). An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-Out Effect, Income Effect and Price 

Effect for Charitable Contributions. Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1197-1207.  

Knoke, D. (1981). Commitment and Detachment in Voluntary Associations. American 

Sociological Review, 46, 141-158.  

Komter, A. (1996). The Social and Psychological Significance of Gift Giving in The Netherlands. 

In A. Komter (Ed.), The Gift: An Interdisciplinary Perspective (pp. 107-117). Amsterdam: 

Amsterdam University Press. 

Konečki, V. J. (1972). Some Effects of Guilt on Compliance. Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology, 23(1), 30-32.  

Kraut, R. E. (1973). Effects of Social Labeling on Giving to Charity. Journal of Experimental 

Social Psychology, 9, 551-562.  

Kropf, M., & Knack, S. (2003). Viewers like You: Community Norms and Contributions to 

Public Broadcasting. Political Research Quarterly, 56(2), 187-197.  

Kumru, C., & Vesterlund, L. (2005). The Effect of Status on Voluntary Contribution. Working 

paper, Department of Economics, University of Pittsburgh. 

Landry, C., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., & Rupp, N. G. (2006). Toward an Understanding 

of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field Experiment. The Quarterly Journal 

of Economics, 121(2), 747-782.  

48

 
Lankford, R. H., & Wyckoff, J. H. (1991). Modeling Charitable Giving Using a Box-Cox 

Standard Tobit Model. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 73(3), 460-470.  

Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: why doesnt he help? New York: 

Meredith. 

Lee, B. A., & Farrell, C. R. (2003). Buddy, can you spare a dime? Homelesness, panhandling, 

and the public. Urban Affairs Review, 38(3), 299-324.  

Lee, L., Piliavin, J. A., & Call, V. R. A. (1999). Giving Time, Money, and Blood: Similarities 

and Differences. Social Psychology Quarterly, 62, 276-290.  

Leslie, L. L., & Ramey, G. (1988). Donor Behavior and Voluntary Support for Higher Education 

Institutions. Journal of Higher Education, 59(2), 115-132.  

Levitt, L., & Kornhaber, R. C. (1977). Stigma and Compliance. A Re-Examination. Journal of 

Social Psychology, 103(1), 13-18.  

Lincoln, A. J. (1977). Effects of the Sex of the Model and Donor on Donating to Amsterdam 

Organ Grinders. Journal of Social Psychology, 103(1), 33-37.  

Lindahl, W. E., & Conley, A. T. (2002). Literature Review: Philanthropic Fundraising. Nonprofit 

Management and Leadership, 13(1), 91-112.  

Lindskold, S., Forte, R. A., Haake, C. S., & Schmidt, E. K. (1977). The Effects of Directness of 

Face-to-Face Requests and Sex of Solicitor on Streetcorner Donations. Journal of Social 

Psychology, 101, 45-51.  

List, J. A., & Lucking-Reiley, D. (2002). The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on Charitable 

Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign. Journal of Political 

Economy, 110(1), 215-234.  

List, J. A., & Rondeau, D. (2003). The impact of challenge gifts on charitable giving: an 

experimental investigation. Economics Letters, 79, 153-159.  

Long, J. E. (2000). Omitted-variable bias when using state tax rates to estimate the tax price 

effect on itemized deductions. Public Finance Review, 28(2), 120-133.  

49

 
Long, S. H. (1976). Social pressure and contributions to health charities. Public Choice, 28, 55-

66.  

Lunn, J., Klay, R., & Douglass, A. (2001). Relationships among giving, church attendance, and 

religious beliefs: the case of the Presbyterian Church (USA). Journal for the Scientific 

Study of Religion, 40(4), 765-775.  

Marcuello, C., & Salas, V. (2000). Money and Time Donations to Spanish Non Governmental 

Organizations for Development Aid. Investigaciones Económicas, 24(1), 51-73.  

Marcuello, C., & Salas, V. (2001). Nonprofit organizations, monopolistic competition, and 

private donations: Evidence from Spain. Public Finance Review, 29(3), 183-207.  

Marr, K. A., Mullin, C. H., & Siegfried, J. J. (2005). Undergraduate financial aid and subsequent 

alumni giving behavior. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 45, 123-143.  

Marx, J. D. (2000). Women and Human Services Giving. Social Work, 45(1), 27-38.  

Mathur, A. (1996). Older Adults' Motivations for Gift Giving to Charitable Organizations: An 

Exchange Theory Perspective. Psychology & Marketing, 13(1), 107.  

McClelland, R. (2002). Effects of allowing nonitemizers to deduct charitable contributions: 

Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office. 

McClelland, R., & Kokoski, M. F. (1994). Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Charitable 

Giving. Public Finance Quarterly, 22(4), 498-517.  

Meier, S. (2007a). Do Subsidies Increase Charitable Giving in the Long Run? Matching 

Donations in a Field Experiment. Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(6), 

1203-1222.  

Meier, S. (2007b). A Survey of Economic Theories and Field Evidence on Pro-Social Behavior. 

In B. S. Frey & A. Stutzer (Eds.), Economics and Psychology: A Promising New Cross-

Disciplinary Field. Boston: MIT Press. 

Miller, D. T. (1999). The Norm of Self-Interest. American Psychologist, 54, 1053-1060.  

50

 
Moll, J., Krueger, F., Zahn, R., Pardini, M., De Oliveira-Souza, R., & Grafman, J. (2006). Human 

fronto-mesolimbic networks guide decisions about charitable donation. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences, 103(42), 15623-15628.  

Muehleman, J., Bruker, C., & Ingram, C. (1976). The Generosity Shift. Journal of Personality 

and Social Psychology, 34(3), 344-351.  

O'Neill, C. J., Steinberg, R. S., & Thompson, G. R. (1996). Reassessing the tax-favored status of 

the charitable deduction for gifts of appreciated assets. National Tax Journal, 49(2), 215-

233.  

Okten, C., & Weisbrod, B. A. (2000). Determinants of donations in private nonprofit markets. 

Journal of Public Economics, 75, 255-272.  

Okunade, A. A., & Berl, R. L. (1997). Determinants of charitable giving of business school 

alumni. Research in Higher Education, 38(2), 201-214.  

Olsen, J. A., & Eidem, J. I. (2003). An inquiry into the size of health charities: the case of 

Norwegian patient organizations. Journal of Socio-Economics, 32, 457-466.  

Olson, D. V. A., & Caddell, D. (1994). Generous Congregations, Generous Givers: 

Congregational Contexts that Stimulate Individual Giving. Review of Religious Research, 

36(2), 168-180.  

Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. 

Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Pancer, S. M., McMullen, L. M., Kabatoff, R. A., Johnson, K. G., & Pond, C. A. (1979). Conflict 

and Avoidance in the Helping Situation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 

37(8), 1406-1411.  

Park, T. K., & Park, S. B. (2004). An Economic Study on Charitable Giving of Individuals in 

Korea: Some New Findings from 2002 Survey Data  Retrieved January 18, 2010, from 

Paper presented at the 6th International Conference of the International Society for Third-

51

 
sector Research, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada. 

http://www.istr.org/conferences/toronto/workingpapers/park.tae-kyu.pdf 

Parsons, L. M. (2003). Is Accounting Information From Nonprofit Organizations Useful to 

Donors? A Review of Charitable Giving and Value-Relevance. Journal of Accounting 

Literature, 22, 104-129.  

Parsons, L. M. (2007). The Impact of Financial Information and Voluntary Disclosures on 

Contributions to Not-For-Profit Organizations. Behavioral Research in Accounting, 19, 

179-196.  

Payne, A. A. (1998). Does the government crowd-out private donations? New evidence from a 

sample of non-profit firms. Journal of Public Economics, 69, 323– 345.  

Payton, R. L., Tempel, E. R., & Rosso, H. A. (1991). Taking Fund Raising Seriously: An 

Agenda. In D. F. Burlingame & L. J. Hulse (Eds.), Taking Fund Raising Seriously. San 

Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Peloza, J., & Steel, P. (2005). The Price Elasticities of Charitable Contributions: A Meta-

Analysis. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 24(2), 260-272.  

Pharoah, C., & Tanner, S. (1997). Trends in Charitable Giving. Fiscal Studies, 18(4), 427-433.  

Piersma, N., & Jonker, J.-J. (2004). Determining the optimal direct mailing frequency. European 

Journal of Operational Research, 158, 173-182.  

Piferi, R. L., Jobe, R. L., & Jones, W. H. (2006). Giving to others during national tragedy: the 

effects of altruistic and egoistic motivations on long-term giving. Journal of Social and 

Personal Relationships, 23(1), 171-184.  

Piliavin, J. A., & Callero, P. L. (Eds.). (1991). Giving Blood: The Development of an Altruistic 

Identity. Baltimore, Md.: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Piliavin, J. A., & Charng, H.-W. (1990). Altruism: A Review of Recent Theory and Research. 

Annual Review of Sociology, 16, 27-65.  

52

 
Pitts, R. E., & Skelly, G. U. (1984). Economic Self-Interest and Other Motivational Factors 

Underlying Charitable Giving. Journal of Behavioral Economics, 13(2), 93-109.  

Polonsky, M. J., Shelley, L., & Voola, R. (2002). An Examination of Helping Behavior - Some 

Evidence from Australia. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 10(2), 67-82.  

Potters, J., Sefton, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2005). After you – endogenous sequencing in voluntary 

contribution games. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 1399-1419.  

Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y., & Ross, L. (2002). The Bias Blind Spot: Perceptions of Bias in Self 

Versus Others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(3), 369-381.  

Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling Alone. The collapse and revival of American Community. New 

York: Simon & Schuster. 

Radley, A., & Kennedy, M. (1992). Reflections upon Charitable Giving: A Comparison of 

Individuals from Business, 'Manual' and Professional Backgrounds. Journal of 

Community & Applied Social Psychology, 2, 113-129.  

Radley, A., & Kennedy, M. (1995). Charitable Giving by Individuals: A Study of Attitudes and 

Practice. Human Relations, 48(6), 685-709.  

Randoph, W. C. (1995). Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of Charitable 

Contributions. Journal of Public Economy, 103(4), 709-738.  

Reece, W. S. (1979). Charitable Contributions: New Evidence on Household Behavior. The 

American Economic Review, 69(1), 142-151.  

Reece, W. S., & Zieschang, K. D. (1985). Consistent Estimation of the Impact of Tax 

Deductibility on the Level of Charitable Contributions. Econometrica, 53(2), 271-293.  

Reece, W. S., & Zieschang, K. D. (1989). Evidence on taxation and charitable giving from the 

1983 U.S. treasury tax model file. Economics Letters, 3(1), 49-53.  

Reed, P. B., & Selbee, L. K. (2002). Is There a Distinctive Pattern of Values Associated with 

Giving and Volunteering? The Canadian Case  Retrieved January 18, 2010, from Paper 

53

 
presented at the 32nd ARNOVA conference, Montreal, Canada. 

http://www.canadawhocares.ca/pdfs/ARNOVA%20Ethos%20Paper%20Nov.pdf 

Regan, D. T., Williams, M., & Sparling, S. (1972). Voluntary Expiation of Guilt: A Field 

Experiment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24(1), 42-45.  

Reingen, P. H. (1982). Test of a list procedure for inducing compliance with a request to donate 

money. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 110-118.  

Ribar, D. C., & Wilhelm, M. O. (2002). Altruistic and Joy-of-Giving Motivations in Charitable 

Behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 425-457.  

Ricketts, R. C., & Westfall, P. H. (1993). New Evidence on the Price Elasticity of Charitable 

Contributions. Journal of the American Taxation Association, 15(2), 1-25.  

Rittle, R. H. (1981). Changes in Helping Behavior: Self- versus Situational Perceptions as 

Mediators of the Foot-in-the-Door Effect. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 

7(3), 431-437.  

Robinson, J. (1990). Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Charitable Giving: A Reappraisal Using 

1985 Itemizer and Norutemizer Charitable Deduction Data. Journal of the American 

Taxation Association, 12, 39-50.  

Romney-Alexander, D. (2002). Payroll Giving in the UK: Donor Incentives and Influences on 

Giving Behaviour. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 

7(1), 84-92.  

Sargeant, A. (1999). Charitable Giving: Towards a Model of Donor Behavior. Journal of 

Marketing Management, 15, 215-238.  

Sargeant, A., Ford, J., & West, D. C. (2000). Widening the appeal of charity. International 

Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 5(4), 318-332.  

Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., & West, D. C. (2006). Perceptual Determinants of Nonprofit Giving 

Behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 155-165.  

54

 
Sargeant, A., & Jay, E. (2004). Fundraising Management Analysis, Planning and Practice. 

London: Routledge. 

Sargeant, A., & Lee, S. (2004). Trust and Relationship Commitment in the United Kingdom 

Voluntary Sector: Determinants of Donor Behavior. Psychology and Marketing, 21(8), 

613-635.  

Sargeant, A., & Woodliffe, L. (2005). The Antecedents of Donor Commitment to Voluntary 

Organizations. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 16(1), 61-78.  

Sargeant, A., & Woodliffe, L. (2007). Individual Giving Behaviour: A Multi-Disciplinary 

Review. In A. Sargeant & W. Wymer (Eds.), The Nonprofit Marketing Companion. 

London Routledge. 

Satow, K. L. (1975). Social Approval and Helping. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 

11, 501-509.  

Schervish, P. G., & Havens, J. J. (2002). The Boston Area Diary Study and the Moral Citizenship 

of Care. Voluntas, 13(1), 47-71.  

Schiff, J. (1985). Does Government Spending Crowd Out Charitable Contributions? National Tax 

Journal, 38, 535-546.  

Schiff, J. (1990). Charitable Giving and Government Policy: An Economic Analysis (Vol. 102). 

New York: Greenwood Press. 

Schlegelmilch, B. B., Diamantopoulos, A., & Love, A. (1997). Characteristics affecting 

charitable donations: empirical evidence from Britain. Journal of Marketing Practice: 

Applied Marketing Science, 3(1), 14-28.  

Schlegelmilch, B. B., Love, A., & Diamantopoulos, A. (1997). Responses to Different Charity 

Appeals: The Impact of Donor Characteristics on the Amount of Donations. European 

Journal of Marketing, 31(8), 548-560.  

Schroeder, D. A., Dovidio, J. F., Penner, L. A., & Piliavin, J. A. (1995). The Social Psychology of 

Helping and Altruism. New York: McGraw-Hill Humanities. 

55

 
Schuyt, T. N. M., Smit, J., & Bekkers, R. (2010, January 2010). The Philanthropy Scale: a 

sociological perspective in measuring new forms of Pro Social Behaviour. Philanthropic 

Studies Working Paper Series, 2010, from Working Paper Department of Philanthropic 

Studies, VU University Amsterdam. 

http://geveninnederland.nl/uploads/doc/WP13_Schuyt_Bekkers_Smit_jan2010.pdf 

Schwartz, R. A. (1970). Personal Philanthropic Contributions. Journal of Political Economy, 78, 

1264-1291.  

Schwartz, S. H. (1974). Awareness of interpersonal consequences, responsibility denial, and 

volunteering. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(1), 57-63.  

Schwartz, S. H. (1975). The Justice of Need and the Activation of Humanitarian Norms. Journal 

of Social Issues, 31(3), 111-136.  

Schwartz, S. H., & Howard, J. (1984). Internalized values as motivators of altruism. In E. Staub, 

D. Bar-Tal, J. Karylowski & J. Reykowski (Eds.), Development and maintenance of 

prosocial behavior: International perspectives on positive morality (pp. 229-255). New 

York: Plenum. 

Schwartz, S. H., & Howard, J. A. (1980). Explanations of the Moderating Effect of 

Responsibility Denial on the Personal Norm-Behavior Relationship. Social Psychology 

Quarterly, 43(4), 441-446.  

Silverman, W. K., Robertson, S. J., Middlebrook, J. L., & Drabman, R. S. (1984). An 

Investigation of Pledging Behavior to a National Charitable Telethon. Behavior Therapy, 

15, 304-311.  

Simmons, W. O., & Emanuele, R. (2004). Does government spending crowd out donations of 

time and money? Public Finance Review, 32(5), 498-511.  

Simon, A. F. (1997). Television news and international earthquake relief. Journal of 

Communication, 47(3), 82-93.  

56

 
Slemrod, J. (1989). Are Estimated Tax Elasticities Really Just Tax Evasion Elasticities? The Case 

of Charitable Contributions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 71(3), 517-522.  

Small, D. A., & Simonsohn, U. (2006). Friends of Victims: Personal Experience and Prosocial 

Behavior. 

Smith, D. H. (1975). Voluntary Action and Voluntary Groups. Annual Review of Sociology, 1, 

247-270.  

Smith, J. R., & McSweeney, A. (2007). Charitable Giving: The Effectiveness of a Revised 

Theory of Planned Behaviour Model in Predicting Donating Intentions and Behaviour. 

Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 17(363-386).  

Smith, V. H., Kehoe, M. R., & Cremer, M. E. (1995). The Private Provision of Public Goods: 

Altruism and Voluntary Giving. Journal of Public Economics, 58, 107-126.  

Soetevent, A. R. (2005). Anonymity in giving in a natural context - a field experiment in 30 

churches. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2301-2323.  

Sokolowski, S. W. (1996). Show me the Way to the Next Worthy Deed: Towards a 

Microstructural Theory of Volunteering and Giving. Voluntas, 7(3), 259-278.  

Staub, E., & Baer, R. S. (1974). Stimulus Characteristics of a Sufferer and Difficulty of Escape as 

Determinants of Helping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(2), 279-284.  

Steinberg, R. S. (1985). Empirical Relations Between Government Spending and Charitable 

Donations. Journal of Voluntary Action Research, 14(2-3), 55-64.  

Steinberg, R. S. (1990). Taxes and giving: new findings. Voluntas, 1, 61-79.  

Steinberg, R. S. (1991). Does Government Spending Crowd Out Donations? Annals of Public 

and Cooperative Economics, 62, 591-617.  

Stonebraker, R. J. (2003). Allocating local church funds to benevolence; the impact of 

congregational size. Review of Religious Research, 45(1), 48-58.  

57

 
Strahilevitz, M., & Myers, J. G. (1998). Donations to Charity as Purchase Incentives: How Well 

They Work May Depend on What You Are Trying to Sell. Journal of Consumer 

Research, 24(March), 434-446.  

Sullivan, D. H. (1985). Simultaneous Determination of Church Contributions and Church 

Attendance. Economic Inquiry, 23(2), 309-320.  

Sweeney, J. W. (1973). An experimental investigation of the free-rider problem. Social Science 

Research, 2, 277-292.  

Swinyard, W. R., & Ray, M. L. (1979). Effects of Praise and Small Requests on Receptivity to 

Direct-Mail Appeals. Journal of Social Psychology, 108(2), 177-184.  

Tam Cho, W. K. (2002). Tapping Motives and Dynamics Behind Campaign Contributions: 

Insights From the Asian American Case. American Politics Research, 30(4), 347-383.  

Tankersley, D., Stowe, C. J., & Huettel, S. A. (2007). Altruism is associated with an increased 

neural response to agency. Nature Neuroscience, 10(2), 150-151.  

Taussig, M. K. (1967). Economic Aspects of the Personal Income Tax Treatment of Charitable 

Contributions. National Tax Journal, 20(1), 1-19.  

Thornton, B., Kirchner, G., & Jacobs, J. (1991). Influence of a Photograph on a Charitable 

Appeal: A Picture May Be Worth a Thousand Words When It Has to Speak for Itself. 

Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21, 433-445.  

Tiehen, L. (2001). Tax policy and charitable contributions of money. National Tax Journal, 

54(4), 707-723.  

Todd, S. J., & Lawson, R. W. (1999). Towards a better understanding of the financial donor: An 

examination of donor behavior in terms of value structure and demographics. 

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 4(3), 235-244.  

Trussell, J. M., & Parsons, L. M. (2007). Financial Factors affecting Donations to Charitable 

Organizations. Advances in Accounting, 23, 265-287.  

58

 
Twenge, J. M., Ciarocco, N. J., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., & Bartels, J. M. (2007). Social 

Exclusion Decreases Prosocial Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 

92(1), 56-66.  

Unger, L. S. (1991). Altruism as a Motivation to Volunteer. Journal of Economic Psychology, 12, 

71-100.  

Van Diepen, M., Donkers, B., & Franses, P. H. (2009). Does irritation induced by charitable 

direct mailings reduce donations? International Journal of Research in Marketing, 26(3), 

180-188.  

Van Lange, P. A. M., Van Vugt, M., Bekkers, R., & Schuyt, T. N. M. (2007). From Games to 

Giving: Social Value Orientation Predicts Donations to Noble Causes. Basic & Applied 

Social Psychology., 29(4), 375–384.  

Veblen, T. (1899). The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions. New 

York: Macmillan. 

Vesterlund, L. (2006). Why do People Give? In W. E. Powell & R. S. Steinberg (Eds.), The 

Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook (Second edition ed., pp. 568-590). New Haven, 

CT: Yale University Press. 

Vriens, M., Scheer, H. R. V. d., Hoekstra, J. C., & Bult, J. R. (1998). Conjoint Experiments for 

Direct Mail Response Optimization. European journal of Marketing, 32(3/4), 323-339.  

Wagner, C., & Wheeler, L. (1969). Model, need, and cost effects in helping behaviour. Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 12(2), 111-116.  

Warwick, M. (2001). How to Write Successful Fundraising Letters. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 

Weerts, D. J., & Ronca, J. M. (2007). Profiles of Supportive Alumni: Donors, Volunteers, and 

Those Who "Do It All". International Journal of Educational Advancement, 7(1), 20-34.  

Weisbrod, B. A., & Dominguez, N. D. (1986). Demand for collective goods in private nonprofit 

markets: can fundraising expenditures help overcome free-rider behavior? Journal of 

Public Economics, 30, 83-95.  

59

 
West, P. (2004). Conspicuous Compassion: Why Sometimes it Really is Cruel to be Kind. 

London: Civitas Institute of the Study of Civil Society. 

Weyant, J. M., & Smith, S. L. (1987). Getting More by Asking Less: The Effects of Request Size 

on Donations to Charity. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 17(4), 392-400.  

Wiepking, P. (2007). The Philanthropic Poor: In Search of Explanations for the Relative 

Generosity of Lower Income Households. Voluntas, 18(4), 339-358.  

Wiepking, P. (2008a). For the Love of Mankind. A Sociological Study on Charitable Giving. PhD 

Dissertation Department of Philanthropic Studies, VU University Amsterdam: 

Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 

Wiepking, P. (2008b). Picturing Generosity: National Campaigns for Charitable Causes in the 

Netherlands For the Love of Mankind. A Sociological Study on Charitable Giving (pp. 73-

94). PhD Dissertation Department of Philanthropic Studies, VU University Amsterdam: 

Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 

Wiepking, P. (2009, January 19, 2010). Democrats support international relief and the upper class 

donates to art? How opportunity, incentives and confidence affect donations to different 

types of charitable organizations Retrieved January 19, 2010, from Working Paper 

Department of Philanthropic Studies, VU University Amsterdam. 

http://geveninnederland.nl/uploads/doc/WP6_Wiepking_Sep2008.pdf 

Wiepking, P., & Breeze, B. (2009). Feeling Poor, Acting Stingy: The Effect of Money Perception 

on Charitable Giving  Retrieved January 21, 2010, from Working Paper Department of 

Philanthropic Studies, VU University Amsterdam. 

http://geveninnederland.nl/uploads/doc/WP7_Wiepking_Breeze_Jun2009.pdf 

Wiepking, P., & Maas, I. (2009). Resources that Make You Generous: Effects of Human and 

Social Resources on Charitable Giving. Social Forces, 86(June), 1973-1996.  

Wiepking, P., Madden, K., & McDonald, K. (2010). Leaving a Legacy: Bequest Giving in 

Australia. Australasian Marketing Journal 18, 15-22.  

60

 
Wiesenthal, D. L., Austrom, D., & Silverman, I. (1983). Diffusion of Responsibilty in Charitable 

Donations. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 4(1), 17-27.  

Wilhelm, M. O., & Bekkers, R. (2010). Helping Behavior, Dispositional Empathic Concern, and 

the Principle of Care. Social Psychology Quarterly, 73(1), 1-22.  

Wilson, J. (2000). Volunteering. Annual Review of Sociology, 26, 215-240.  

Wong, C. M., Chua, V. C. H., & Vasoo, S. (1998). Contributions to charitable organizations in a 

developing country: the case of Singapore. International Journal of Social Economics, 

25(1), 25-42.  

Wunderink, S. (2000). The economics of consumers gifts and legacies to charitable organisations. 

International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 5(3), 268-287.  

Wuthnow, R. (1991). Acts of Compassion: Caring for Others and Helping Ourselves. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press. 

Yavas, U., Riecken, G., & Parameswaran, R. (1981). Personality, Organization-Specific Attitude, 

and Socio-economic Correlates of Charity Giving Behavior. Journal of the Academy of 

Marketing Science, 9(1), 52-65.  

Zaleski, P. A., & Zech, C. E. (1992). Determinants of Contributions to Religious Organizations. 

Free Riding and Other Factors. American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 51(4), 

459-472.  

Zaleski, P. A., & Zech, C. E. (1994). Economic and Attitudinal Factors in Catholic and Protestant 

Religious Giving. Review of Religious Research, 36(2), 158-167.  

Zaleski, P. A., Zech, C. E., & Hoge, D. R. (1994). Determinants of Religious Giving in Urban 

Presbyterian Congregations. Review of Religious Research, 36(2), 197-206.  

Zuckerman, M., Lazzaro, M. M., & Waldgeir, D. (1979). Undermining effects of the Foot-in-the-

door technique with Extrinsic Rewards. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 9(3), 292-

296.  

61

 
 
62

 
 
Author biography 

René Bekkers is Head of Research and Associate professor at the Department of Philanthropic 

Studies at VU University Amsterdam. His research focuses on causes and consequences of the 

prosocial behavior. 

Pamala Wiepking is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Philanthropic Studies at the VU 

University Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Her research is focussed on socio-economic 

determinants of charitable giving. 

63

 
 
Table 1. Overview of mechanisms 

Mechanism 

What? 

Where? 

Who? 

Tangible or 

Within, outside 

Actors 

Targets 

intangible 

or between 

people 

1. Need  

Tangible and 

Within, outside 

Beneficiaries and 

Donors 

intangible 

and between 

organizations 

2. Solicitation 

Tangible and 

Between 

Beneficiaries and 

Donors 

intangible 

organizations 

3. Costs/benefits  

Tangible 

Outside 

Organizations 

Donors 

4. Altruism 

Tangible 

Outside 

Donors and 

Beneficiaries 

Organizations 

5. Reputation 

Intangible 

Between 

Alters 

Donors 

6. Psychological 

Intangible 

Within 

Donors 

Donors 

costs and benefits 

7. Values 

Intangible 

Within 

Donors 

Donors and 

beneficiaries 

8. Efficacy 

Intangible 

Within 

Organizations 

Donors 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX: MODERATING FACTORS 

In the literature review we have described eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving. This 

appendix describes factors moderating the effects of the mechanisms. Moderators are factors 

that weaken the effect of the mechanism (negative moderators) or strengthen the effect 

(positive moderator). Moderators may be other mechanisms, situational conditions or personal 

characteristics. 

Mechanism 1: Awareness of need 

Moderators of the effect of need include other mechanisms: costs, reputation, 

psychological benefits and efficacy; situational conditions: dependence of the beneficiary on 

the donor; and personal characteristics: perceptions of deservingness; acceptance (vs. denial) 

of responsibility, mood religiosity, and political orientation. 

Costs. Material costs moderate the effect of need. When a larger need implies a higher 

cost, it does not increase helping behaviour (Piliavin & Piliavin, 1972). 

Reputation. An experiment on volunteering revealed that the opportunity to gain social 

approval for helping promotes the effect of need (Fisher & Ackerman, 1998). 

Psychological benefits. Awareness of need has little effect if potential donors face 

psychological costs when confronted with the need. In an early study, a picture of a needy, 

handicapped child was found to depress giving in a door-to-door fundraising campaign 

presumably because it depressed the mood of potential donors (Isen & Noonberg, 1979). 

Dyck and Coldevin (1992) came to the same conclusion in an experiment testing the effect of 

no photo, a positive and a negative photograph in appeal letters. The picture with “a less 

pleasant, needy ‘negative’ photograph” yielded lowest response rates and contributions. 

1

 
 
 
Efficacy. The display of need may backfire when the need is perceived as impossible 

to solve (Small, Loewenstein, & Slovic, 2007; for further evidence on the interaction with 

efficacy, see below; Warren & Walker, 1991) or when a picture displaying needy recipients 

depresses the potential helper (Isen & Noonberg, 1979). In face-to-face solicitations, a picture 

to illustrate need may make no difference at all (Thornton, Kirchner, & Jacobs, 1991). Finally, 

West and Brown (1975) found in an experiment with helping behaviour that severity of need 

did result in more giving when the victim was more attractive.  

Dependence. Berkowitz (1968) found that need produces helping only when the 

beneficiary is dependent on help from the donor. In addition, social class differences were 

found. Working class boys tended to react to need only when they had received help earlier, 

especially from the same person. Middle class boys were not affected by help received. Thus, 

when victims are dependent upon potential helpers and these helpers adhere to a moral 

principle of care, need produces helping. 

Perceptions of deservingness and acceptance of responsibility. Whether beneficiaries 

are perceived as deserving also moderates the effect of need (Miller, 1977). When victims are 

perceived as causes of their own misfortune, potential donors may deny their responsibility 

for relieving the needs of the victim (Furnham, 1995). E.g., people are less prepared to 

sponsor welfare recipients when they know the recipients are unwilling to engage in paid 

work (Fong, 2007). Refusals to give to the homeless are often explained in these terms 

(Radley & Kennedy, 1992), as are refusals to give to poverty relief in developing countries 

(Bennett & Kottasz, 2000; Taormina, Messick, Iwawaki, & Wilke, 1988). Denial of 

responsibility is less likely to occur when the fate of victims is perceived as beyond people’s 

control (Lerner & Simmons, 1966), at least among politically liberal individuals (Skitka, 

Mullen, Griffin, Hutchinson, & Chamberlin, 2002). Survey data reveal that awareness of need 

2

 
is not associated with giving when potential donors attribute responsibility to government 

(Eschholz & Van Slyke, 2002; Polonsky, Shelley, & Voola, 2002; Radley & Kennedy, 1992).  

It should be noted that denial of responsibility is sometimes a consequence of not 

helping, rather than a cause. People are creative in finding post hoc excuses for not giving 

(Hibbert, Chatzidakis, & Smith, 2005). Ascription of responsibility is also a dispositional 

variable that determines people’s motivation to engage in helping behaviour (Bennett, 2003; 

Furnham, 1995; Schwartz, 1973, 1974). Denial of responsibility is related to the belief in a 

just world, the belief that people get what they deserve and deserve what they get 

(Appelbaum, 2002; Furnham, 1995; Lerner & Simmons, 1966). Econometric studies suggest 

that donors weigh the needs of distant others against the future needs of their own children. 

Parents give more to charities when their children are economically better off (G.E. Auten & 

Joulfaian, 1996; Joulfaian, 2004). They reduce giving to charities and increase bequests when 

their children’s income is lower. 

Identification of a specific victim. Solicitations for contributions that identify a specific 

victim are more likely to result in willingness to contribute (Kogut & Ritov, 2005a, 2005b) 

and actual donations than solicitations that provide statistical information on the number of 

victims (Small & Loewenstein, 2003; Small, et al., 2007). Information about single victims is 

more vivid and more emotionally distressing than information about multiple unidentified 

victims (Kogut & Ritov, 2005a, 2005b).  

Religious and political preferences. Finally, what constitutes need or whether a (group 

of) needy person(s) is also deserving of assistance is controversial. A participant in an 

Australian focus group study (Polonsky, et al., 2002) said: “What constitutes a need to one 

person is not to another.” Persons from different religious backgrounds (Will & Cochran, 

1995) and with different political preferences (Skitka, et al., 2002) may evaluate the same 

objective situation differently. 

3

 
Overall strength of effect. The result of these moderating factors is that the overall effect of 

need on giving is small. It may well be that instead of the most needy, those with the best 

marketers receive the highest contributions (Polonsky, et al., 2002). Thus, it is the awareness 

of need that is related to giving rather than the objective need. As Milofsky and Blades (1991) 

point out, the largest health charities in the US include organizations for rare diseases like 

muscular dystrophy (affecting only 6 children in 100,000) and cystic fibrosis (affecting 20 in 

100,000).  

Mechanism 2: Solicitation 

Obviously, not all types of solicitations are equally effective. Ingredients of the most 

effective solicitations are discussed in the literature review under the other mechanisms. For 

instance, a solicitation for a contribution is likely to be more effective if giving in response to 

the solicitation provides an opportunity to acquire, maintain or strengthen a positive social 

reputation. In addition, some types of people may be more compliant with requests for 

charitable contributions than others. The analyses reported in Bryant et al. (2003) suggest this; 

however, because this study is based on survey data it may also reflect self-selection of these 

respondents. Finally, one remarkable study tested whether monetary compensation paid to 

solicitors for successful solicitations affects the likelihood of success (Gneezy & List, 2006). 

One group of solicitors were paid 100% more for going door to door than another group. The 

result was that an initially positive effect of overpayment waned after a few hours. 

Mechanism 3: Costs and benefits 

While we have found no studies that investigated moderators of the effects of material 

benefits of donations, many studies have examined moderators of the material costs of giving. 

4

 
 
 
Price effects depend on the psychological benefits of donations, national context, 

characteristics of recipient organizations, and personal characteristics of donors. 

Psychological benefits. It makes a difference how price reductions are framed: when 

price reductions are presented as rebates - ‘when you give €1, you pay only €0.50’ - they are 

less effective than when presented as matches - ‘when you give €1, we’ll add another €1’; 

(Bekkers, 2005; Eckel & Grossman, 2003, 2004). It is believed that framing price reductions 

as rebates yields a perceptual focus on the material costs of donating. Framing price 

reductions as matches, in contrast, yields a perceptual focus on the benefits for beneficiaries 

of donations. However, other studies cast doubt on the generality (Fraser & Hite, 1989) and 

validity (Davis, Millner, & Reilly, 2005) of the framing effect.  

That the subjective perception of costs is important also becomes apparent from the 

‘low ball-effect’. The low ball technique refers to the practice of revealing hidden costs after 

people have expressed willingness to comply with a request (Cialdini, Cacioppo, Bassett, & 

Miller, 1978). For instance, people are first asked to donate a small amount (they are thrown 

the low ball), for example a donation to a museum of $0.75. After they have agreed to do so, 

an additional amount is requested, for example $0.25 for the museums children’s program 

(Brownstein & Katzev, 1985). Another set of findings illustrating that it matters how costs are 

perceived concern the ‘door-in-the-face effect’. This effect refers to the observation that 

people are more likely to comply with a request after they received a more sizeable request 

that they find unacceptable. Compared to the first, excessive request, the second appears as a 

small concession (Abrahams & Bell, 1994; Cialdini et al., 1975; Reingen, 1978). In a study by 

Brownstein and Katzev (1985), visitors to a museum were asked to donate $1 ‘to cover 

reduced funding’. In a control group, 73% did so; in an experimental group that first received 

a request to donate $5, 87% did so (though this difference is not statistically significant, pp. 

570-571). Fundraisers who want to use this technique should be aware that the first request 

5

 
should be perceived as legitimate. If not, a boomerang effect may occur (Schwarzwald, Raz, 

& Zvibel, 1979). The Door-in-the-face effect can be enhanced by having a person make the 

request whose approval the potential donor finds more important (Williams & Williams, 

1989). 

National context. There are substantial differences between countries in the price of 

giving as well as in the price effect. Wong, Chua and Vassoo (1998) find much stronger price 

effects for donations in Singapore (varying from -2.0 to –5.5) than commonly found in U.S. 

studies; Wu, Huang and Kao (2004) find price effects ranging from –2.2 to –3.3 in Taiwan. 

However, UK residents seem to be less responsive to tax incentives (A. Jones & J. Posnett, 

1991; A. M. Jones & J. W. Posnett, 1991). In addition, there are also large differences in the 

extent that people choose to itemize their gifts. For example, in the Netherlands, religious 

groups use tax deductions extensively (Wiepking, 2007). But those religiously affiliated in 

Canada itemize rarely (Kitchen, 1992). Non-itemizers are less sensitive to changes in tax price 

(Duquette, 1999; Eaton, 2001). One reason may be that they don’t know about the deduction 

(McGregor-Lowndes, Newton, & Marsden, 2006). Obviously, if households do not know 

about the possibility of deducing donations from their tax income, they are unlikely to 

respond to tax incentives. In such cases, publicizing favourable tax treatment of charitable 

contributions is likely to increase the donor pool and/or the amount contributed (Boatright, 

Green, & Malbin, 2006). 

Subsector. Different studies find different price effects for different types of 

organizations. Widely different estimates are reported by Schiff (1990). Religious donations 

appear less price sensitive than donations to non-religious organizations in three studies 

(Feldstein, 1975b; McClelland & Kokoski, 1994; Taussig, 1967) but more price sensitive in 

another (Reece, 1979). Price effects on donations to international relief and development 

6

 
organizations appear to be larger than on donations to other organizations (Ribar & Wilhelm, 

1995).  

Personal characteristics. Personal characteristics moderating the price effect include marriage 

and income. Married males are found to be more sensitive to the price of giving than married 

females (Andreoni & Payne, 2003). Price effects usually increase with income (G. E. Auten, 

Cilke, & Randolph, 1992; Duquette, 1999; Feldstein & Taylor, 1976; O'Neill, Steinberg, & 

Thompson, 1996; Robinson, 1990); some studies find that among the highest income groups 

price effects decline again (Boskin & Feldstein, 1977; Feldstein, 1975a; Taussig, 1967). A 

study of philanthropy in Singapore found that the tax price effect declined with education 

(Chua & Wong, 1999).  

Mechanism 4: Altruism 

Effects of altruism vary with the awareness of need and the efficacy of donations, the 

information about donations of others provided to potential donors, beliefs about changes in 

contributions by others; the size of contributions of others; fundraising activities by nonprofit 

organizations. Also, altruism effects differ between sectors receiving donations and between 

donors with different levels of income.  

Awareness of need and efficacy. If the nonprofit organization publicizes donations 

received, donors may react in several ways. If the need for contributions is perceived as lower 

because of the increase in contributions by others, donors may lower their own contribution. 

This tendency, however, may be offset by the quality signal sent out by the donations of 

others. If high status individuals made a contribution, donors may take that contribution as a 

signal that the charity is of a good quality, enhancing the organizations’ perceived 

trustworthiness and efficacy. 

7

 
 
Amount contributed by others. Contributions by others may have decreasing marginal 

utility: studies of American theatres (Borgonovi, 2006) and symphony orchestras (Brooks, 

2000b) reveal that small increases in public funding have a stronger crowding-in effect than 

large increases. 

Subsector. Crowding out estimates appear to be stronger in the human services sector 

with a number of studies finding considerable crowding out (Amos, 1982; Ferris & West, 

2003; Hungerman, 2005; Payne, 1998; Schiff, 1990), while other studies find smaller or no 

crowding out effects (Brooks, 2002; Lindsey & Steinberg, 1990; Long, 2000; Reece, 1979; 

Steinberg, 1985). One study from the U.K. found slight crowding in (Posnett & Sandler, 

1989). Bielefeld, Rooney & Steinberg (2005) find that higher state social service spending is 

associated with a lower likelihood of households donating, but find no link with the amount 

contributed. For organizations in the health sector several studies find some crowding out 

(Brooks, 2000a; Khanna, Posnett, & Sandler, 1995). State funding for research has been 

found to crowd in private contributions (Connolly, 1997). Results for nonprofit organizations 

in the arts and culture sector have been mixed (Brooks, 1999, 2000a; Hughes & Luksetich, 

1999).  

Obviously, the effect of a third party contribution depends on the information about 

the third party contribution given to other potential donors. In many cases, donors do not 

know about changes in the contributions of others (Horne, Johnson, & Van Slyke, 2005). In 

most cases when government grants are announced, it is unclear to individuals that the grants 

are financed with taxes ultimately paid by citizens themselves. When this is made clear to 

individuals, third party contributions crowd out individual contributions (Eckel, Grossman, & 

Johnston, 2005). In ‘crowding out’ experiments, information about the behaviour of others is 

explicitly provided to participants. Hence, it should come as no surprise that laboratory 

8

 
experiments usually find larger crowd-out estimates than studies using survey or tax data 

(Andreoni, 1993; Vesterlund, 2006).  

Fundraising activities. The net effect of a change in contributions from third parties 

depends on the reaction by the nonprofit organization. One potential reaction is to reduce 

fundraising efforts (Andreoni & Payne, 2003). Another potential reaction is to increase the 

number or quality of services rendered to donors. A study of American theatres revealed that 

government funding at both the state and federal level had a crowding in-effect on private 

contributions (Borgonovi, 2006), a finding potentially caused by the provision of more or 

better services paid for by government grants. 

Group size. The weight of altruistic concerns decreases with group size. In a large 

economy, individual contributions have little impact on the provision of public goods. 

Because most philanthropic organizations raise funds from a large audience, altruism is likely 

to be only a minor force (Ribar & Wilhelm, 2002). 

Income. One characteristic of donors examined as a moderator of crowding out effects 

is income. Altruism seems to decrease with income until $100,000, after which it increases 

(Andreoni, 1990). 

Mechanism 5. Reputation 

The effect of reputation on giving increases with the value of approval received by 

donors. The value of approval depends on the strength of ties with persons who may observe 

donation acts, liking of the solicitor, group size, social norms and social status of the donor 

and solicitor.  

Strong ties. Approval has a more pronounced effect when third parties with whom the 

potential donor has a stronger social bond (a ‘strong tie’) are able to observe the act of giving. 

In this condition, a mix of social and psychological benefits enhances the effect of reputation. 

9

 
 
When a complete stranger can observe giving, there is less social pressure than when a friend 

or family member is present. Social pressure is especially strong when a strong tie makes a 

request for a donation. A survey study on giving intentions showed that solicitations by 

persons at a closer social distance are more likely to be honoured (Bekkers, 2004). Evidence 

on the impact of relationship strength on donations from surveys is mixed. While Sokolowski 

(1996) found that being asked to contribute by a significant other does not increase the total 

amount donated, Schervish and Havens (1997) find that people who are asked to give by a 

relative or a friend donate a larger percentage of their income. Booth, Higgins and Cornelius 

(Booth, Higgins, & Cornelius, 1989) find that per capita United Way contributions are higher 

in communities with stable populations and higher voter turnout. Not giving in social contexts 

where peers value giving and are important in daily life would not only endanger one’s 

reputation, but also the relationship with these peers.  

Psychological benefits: liking of solicitor. The value of approval increases with liking 

of the solicitor, which increases the psychological benefits of donating. One way to increase 

liking is through similarity (Byrne, 1971). Requests by similar persons are more likely to be 

honoured because we like them better. Field experiments on helping behaviour have found 

similarity effects for religion (Yinon & Sharon, 1985), race (Bryan & Test, 1967; Gaertner & 

Dovidio, 1977), gender (Bryan & Test, 1967; Lindskold, Forte, Haake, & Schmidt, 1977), 

social attitudes (Sole, Marton, & Hornstein, 1975), educational institution (Aune & Basil, 

1994; Howard, Gengler, & Jain, 1995), and personal characteristics such as sharing a birthday 

or name (Burger, Messian, Patel, del Prado, & Anderson, 2004). 

Even when total strangers solicit contributions, familiarity with these strangers created 

by a brief unrelated dialogue increases the likelihood of contributions, possibly because 

familiarity increases liking (Dolinski, Grzyb, Olejnik, Prusakowski, & Urban, 2005; Dolinski, 

Nawrat, & Rudak, 2001; Macaulay, 1975). Increased liking is also a likely explanation for the 

10

 
finding that students tend to give more to professors who remember their name (Howard, et 

al., 1995). 

Another mundane factor that promotes liking is beauty. A few studies have found that 

people are more likely to give to physically attractive people (Landry, Lange, List, Price, & 

Rupp, 2006; West & Brown, 1975; Wiesenthal, Austrom, & Silverman, 1983). One study 

found this to be the case more strongly for males answering the door (Landry, et al., 2006). 

This may be a reason why female solicitors are sometimes more successful than male 

solicitors (Lindskold, et al., 1977). One survey study on alumni giving found an opposite sex-

effect (Belfield & Beney, 2000), but an experimental study did not (Bekkers, 2007).  

Attire may also moderate the effect of approval. Well-dressed solicitors raised more 

money in two studies, (Levine, Bluni, & Hochman, 1998; Williams & Williams, 1989), but 

not in two others (Bull & Gibson-Robinson, 1981; McElroy & Morrow, 1994). 

Group size. The value of approval increases with the number of persons recognizing 

the gift. One study found that people give more when accompanied by others, especially by 

females (Jiobu & Knowles, 1974). Another study we found tested the effect of multiple 

solicitors. When requests for donations are made by two solicitors, people are more likely to 

give – though less than twice (Jackson & Latané, 1981). 

Social norms. The value of approval also increases with the perceived desirability of 

giving among one’s peers. Religious persons are expected to be more generous than the non-

religious (Bekkers & Schuyt, 2008). A failure to give has a more negative effect on the 

reputation of religious persons than on that of non-religious persons (Bailey & Young, 1986).  

Social status. Social status of both the donor and the solicitor enhance the value of 

approval. When people are solicited for a donation by a person of higher social status, they 

are more likely to give (Jackson & Latané, 1981; Pandey, 1979; Vriens, Scheer, Hoekstra, & 

Bult, 1998). One study found that Baptists in the Netherlands donated more when ministers 

11

 
recommend an offering (Soetevent, 2005). Also when the potential donor has a higher social 

status she is more likely to give, probably because the norm to give is stronger. The 

expression ‘noblesse oblige’ represents this observation. The elite is given a special obligation 

to look after those lower on the status rank of society. Not giving would endanger one’s elite 

position (Odendahl, 1990; Ostrower, 1997). 

Need for social approval. Some individuals may be more sensitive to social approval 

for helping, and react more strongly to the observability of a donation (Satow, 1975). Such 

individuals are likely to have an altruistic self-image, which will be discussed below 

(mechanism 6). 

Overall strength of effect. Reputation has a strong effect on giving. It may easily 

overpower effects by other mechanisms. This holds for the costs mechanism, for instance. 

When asked for a contribution to a charitable cause by one’s spouse, the amount requested 

does not matter (Bekkers, 2004). Spouses also draw each other into volunteering (Rotolo & 

Wilson, 2006). One study found reputation to have a stronger effect than awareness of need. 

In this study, the effect of reputation in face-to-face solicitations, even by unknown solicitors, 

was so strong that it took away the effect of a picture of beneficiaries. In a direct-mail 

campaign for the same cause, the picture increased donations (Thornton, et al., 1991). 

Mechanism 6. Psychological benefits 

In the discussion of moderators of the other mechanisms, we have included 

psychological benefits. From the perspective of the other mechanisms, psychological benefits 

enhance the effects of these mechanisms. Viewed from the perspective of the psychological 

benefits, one could also say that the other mechanisms enhance the effects of psychological 

benefits.  

12

 
 
We have not yet discussed the interaction between psychological benefits and 

solicitation. Such an interaction occurs in the foot-in-the-door effect (DeJong, 1981; Gueguen 

& Fischer-Lokou, 1999; Pliner, Hart, Kohl, & Saari, 1974; Reingen, 1978; Rittle, 1981; 

Seligman, Bush, & Kirsch, 1976; Williams & Williams, 1989). It is believed that the initial 

small request creates or activates a self-image of helpfulness, which creates pressure to 

behave in a helpful manner on a subsequent occasion. In line with the self-image explanation, 

the effect of an initial request is reduced when pay is offered in return for compliance with the 

initial request (Zuckerman, Lazzaro, & Waldgeir, 1979). Another study found that when the 

first request is too small to activate a helpful self-image, it does not increase compliance with 

the second request (Seligman, et al., 1976). However, it should be noted that alternative 

explanations for the Foot-in-the-door effect are possible (Kilbourne & Kilbourne, 1984). One 

alternative explanation is that the first request heightens awareness of need. 

However, the foot in the door-technique does not always work. Brownstein and 

Katzev (1985) found that first asking to sign a petition in support of an art institution did not 

increase compliance with a subsequent request for a donation for this art institution. Allison, 

Messick and Samuelson (1985) found that sending a flyer with a questionnaire actually 

reduced the amount contributed subsequently. Weyant (1996) found a negative effect of the 

foot-in-the-door technique in a door-to-door collection for the American Cancer Society.  

Mechanism 7. Values 

Very few studies have tested for moderators in relationships of values with 

philanthropy. An exception is Fong (2007), showing that humanitarianism/egalitarianism is 

only positively related to donations to welfare recipients when the recipients appeared more 

worthy of support. Another exception is a recent study of guilt appeals, showing that feelings 

of responsibility are increased by the presence of others who may approve of donations (Basil, 

13

 
 
Ridgway, & Basil, 2006). Also, a survey study revealed that contributions to religion are less 

strongly related to social values than contributions to other organizations (Bekkers & Schuyt, 

2008). 

Mechanism 8. Efficacy 

We have not found any experimental studies showing how effects of efficacy are 

moderated by other factors. One survey study shows that perceived efficacy is more strongly 

related to donations to religious causes, international relief, and domestic public benefit 

organizations among people with stronger altruistic values (Bekkers, 2006). 

14

 
 
 
REFERENCES 

Abrahams, M. F., & Bell, R. A. (1994). Encouraging Charitable Contributions: An 

Examination of Three Models of Door-in-the-Face Compliance. Communication 

Research, 21(2), 131-153.  

Allison, S. T., Messick, D. M., & Samuelson, C. D. (1985). Effects of Soliciting Opinions on 

Contributions to a Public Good. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 15(3), 201-

206.  

Amos, O. M. (1982). Empirical Analysis of Motives Underlying Individual Contributions to 

Charity. Atlantic Economic Journal, 10(4), 45-52.  

Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure Altruism And Donations To Public-Goods - A Theory Of Warm-

Glow Giving. Economic Journal, 100(401), 464-477.  

Andreoni, J. (1993). An Experimental Test Of The Public-Goods Crowding-Out Hypothesis. 

American Economic Review, 83(5), 1317-1327.  

Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2003). Do government grants to private charities crowd out 

giving or fund-raising? American Economic Review, 93(3), 792-812.  

Appelbaum, L. D. (2002). Who Deserves Help? Students' Opinions About the Deservingness 

of Different Groups Living in Germany to Receive Aid. Social Justice Research, 

15(3), 201-225.  

Aune, R. K., & Basil, M. D. (1994). A Relational Obligations Approach To The Foot-In-The-

Mouth Effect. Journal Of Applied Social Psychology, 24(6), 546-556.  

Auten, G. E., Cilke, J. M., & Randolph, W. C. (1992). The Effects Of Tax-Reform On 

Charitable Contributions. National Tax Journal, 45(3), 267-290.  

Auten, G. E., & Joulfaian, D. (1996). Charitable Contributions and Intergenerational 

Transfers. Journal of Public Economics, 59, 55-68.  

15

 
Bailey, R. C., & Young, M. D. (1986). The value and vulnerability of perceived religious 

involvement. Journal of Social Psychology, 126(5), 693-694.  

Basil, D. Z., Ridgway, N. M., & Basil, M. D. (2006). Guilt appeals: The mediating effect of 

responsibility. Psychology & Marketing, 23(12), 1035-1054.  

Bekkers, R. (2004). Giving and Volunteering in the Netherlands: Sociological and 

Psychological Perspectives. Ph.D.-dissertation, Department of Sociology, Utrecht 

University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.    

Bekkers, R. (2005, November 19, 2005). When and Why Matches are More Effective 

Subsidies Than Rebates. Paper presented at the 34th Arnova Annual Conference, 

Washington, DC, USA. 

Bekkers, R. (2006, September 13-14, 2006). Keeping the Faith: Origins of Confidence in 

Charitable Organizations and its Consequences for Philanthropy. Paper presented at 

the the NCVO/VSSN Researching the Voluntary Sector Conference 2006, Warwick 

University, UK. 

Bekkers, R. (2007). George Gives to Geology Jane: The Name Letter Effect and Other 

Similarities in Fundraising. Working paper, Department of Sociology, Utrecht 

University. 

Bekkers, R., & Schuyt, T. (2008). And who is your neighbor? Explaining denominational 

differences in charitable giving and volunteering in the Netherlands. Review Of 

Religious Research, 50(1), 74-96.  

Belfield, C. R., & Beney, A. P. (2000). What Determines Alumni Generosity? Evidence for 

the UK. Education Economics, 8(1), 65-80.  

Bennett, R. (2003). Factors Underlying the Inclination to Donate to Particular Types of 

Charity. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 8(1), 12-

29.  

16

 
Bennett, R., & Kottasz, R. (2000). Emergency fund-raising for disaster relief. Disaster 

Prevention and Management, 9(5), 352-359.  

Berkowitz, L. (1968). Responsibility, Reciprocity, and Social Distance in Help-Giving: An 

Experimental Investigation of English Social Class Differences. Journal of 

Experimental Social Psychology, 4, 46-63.  

Bielefeld, W., Rooney, P., & Steinberg, K. (2005). How Do Need, Capacity, Geography, and 

Politics Influence Giving? In A. C. Brooks (Ed.), Gifts of Money in Americas 

Communities (pp. 127-158). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc. 

Boatright, R. G., Green, D. P., & Malbin, M. J. (2006). Does publicizing a tax credit for 

political contributions increase its use? Results from a randomized field experiment. 

American Politics Research, 34(5), 563-582.  

Booth, A., Higgins, D., & Cornelius, R. (1989). Community Influences on Funds Raised by 

Human Service Volunteers. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 18(1), 81-92.  

Borgonovi, F. (2006). Do public grants to American theatres crowd-out private donations? 

Public Choice, 126(3-4), 429-451.  

Boskin, M. J., & Feldstein, M. (1977). Effects of the Charitable Deduction of Contribution by 

low and Middle Income Households: New Evidence of the National Survey of 

Philanthropy. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 59, 351-354.  

Brooks, A. C. (1999). Do public subsidies leverage private philanthropy for the arts? 

Empirical evidence on symphony orchestras. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector 

Quarterly, 28(1), 32-45.  

Brooks, A. C. (2000a). Is There a Dark Side to Government Support for Nonprofits? Public 

Administration Review, 60(3), 211-218.  

Brooks, A. C. (2000b). Public Subsidies and Charitable Giving: Crowding out, Crowding in, 

or Both? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 19(3), 451–464.  

17

 
Brooks, A. C. (2002). Welfare Receipt and Private Charity. Public Budgetting & Finance, 

22(3), 101-114.  

Brownstein, R. J., & Katzev, R. D. (1985). The Relative Effectiveness of Three Compliance 

Techniques in Eliciting Donations to a Cultural Organization. Journal of Applied 

Social Psychology, 15(6), 564-574.  

Bryan, J. H., & Test, M. A. (1967). Models and Helping: Naturalistic Studies in Aiding 

Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6(4), 400-407.  

Bryant, W. K., Slaughter, H. J., Kang, H., & Tax, A. (2003). Participating in Philanthropic 

Activities: Donating Money and Time. Journal of Consumer Policy, 26(1), 43-73.  

Bull, R., & Gibson-Robinson, E. (1981). The Influences of Eye-Gaze, Style of Dress, and 

Locality on the Amounts of Money Donated to a Charity. Human Relations, 34(10), 

895-905.  

Burger, J. M., Messian, N., Patel, S., del Prado, A., & Anderson, C. (2004). What a 

coincidence! The effects of incidental similarity on compliance. Personality And 

Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(1), 35-43.  

Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press. 

Chua, V. C. H., & Wong, C. M. (1999). Tax incentives, individual characteristics and 

charitable giving in Singapore. International Journal of Social Economics, 26(12), 

1492-1504.  

Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J. T., Bassett, R., & Miller, J. A. (1978). Low-Ball Procedure for 

Producing Compliance: Commitment then Cost. Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology, 36(5), 436-476.  

Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, J., Wheeler, D., & Darby, B. L. (1975). 

Reciprocal concessions procedure for inducing compliance: The door-in-the-face 

technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 206-215.  

18

 
Connolly, L. S. (1997). Does external funding of academic research crowd out institutional 

support? Journal Of Public Economics, 64(3), 389-406.  

Davis, D. D., Millner, E. L., & Reilly, R. J. (2005). Subsidy schemes and charitable 

contributions: A closer look. Experimental Economics, 8(2), 85-106.  

DeJong, W. (1981). Consensus Information and the Foot-in-the-Door-Effect. Personality and 

Social Psychology Bulletin, 7(3), 423-430.  

Dolinski, D., Grzyb, T., Olejnik, J., Prusakowski, S., & Urban, K. (2005). Let's dialogue 

about penny: Effectiveness of dialogue involvement and legitimizing paltry 

contribution techniques. Journal Of Applied Social Psychology, 35(6), 1150-1170.  

Dolinski, D., Nawrat, M., & Rudak, I. (2001). Dialogue involvement as a social influence 

technique. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 27(11), 1395-1406.  

Duquette, C. M. (1999). Is charitable giving by nonitemizers responsive to tax incentives? 

New evidence. National Tax Journal, 52(2), 195-206.  

Dyck, E. J., & Coldevin, G. (1992). Using Positive Vs Negative Photographs For Third-

World Fund Raising. Journalism Quarterly, 69(3), 572-579.  

Eaton, D. H. (2001). Charitable Contributions and Tax Price Elasticities for Nonitemizing 

Taxpayers. International Advances in Economic Research, 7(4), 432-442.  

Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2003). Rebate versus matching: does how we subsidize 

charitable contributions matter? Journal Of Public Economics, 87(3-4), 681-701.  

Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2004). Giving to secular causes by the religious and 

nonreligious: An experimental test of the responsiveness of giving to subsidies. 

Nonprofit And Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 33(2), 271-289.  

Eckel, C. C., Grossman, P. J., & Johnston, R. M. (2005). An experimental test of the 

crowding out hypothesis. Journal Of Public Economics, 89(8), 1543-1560.  

19

 
Eschholz, S. L., & Van Slyke, D. M. (2002). New evidence about women and philanthropy: 

Findings from Metro Atlanta: United Way of Metropolitan Atlanta's Women's Legacy. 

Feldstein, M. (1975a). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part I - Aggregate and 

Distributional Effects. National Tax Journal, 28, 81-99.  

Feldstein, M. (1975b). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part II - The Impact on 

Religious, Educational, and Other Organizations. National Tax Journal, 28, 209-226.  

Feldstein, M., & Taylor, A. (1976). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions. 

Econometrica, 44(6), 1201-1222.  

Ferris, J. S., & West, E. G. (2003). Private versus public charity: Reassessing crowding out 

from the supply side. Public Choice, 116(3-4), 399-417.  

Fisher, R. J., & Ackerman, D. (1998). The effects of recognition and group need on 

volunteerism: A social norm perspective. Journal Of Consumer Research, 25(3), 262-

275.  

Fong, C. M. (2007). Evidence from an experiment on charity to welfare recipients: 

Reciprocity, altruism and the empathic responsiveness hypothesis. Economic Journal, 

117(522), 1008-1024.  

Fraser, C., & Hite, R. E. (1989). The Effect of Matching Contribution Offers and Legitimation 

of Paltry Contributions on Compliance. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 19(12), 

1010-1018.  

Furnham, A. (1995). The Just World, Charitable Giving And Attitudes To Disability. 

Personality And Individual Differences, 19(4), 577-583.  

Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (1977). The subtlety of white racism, arousal, and helping 

behaviour. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 691-708.  

Gneezy, U., & List, J. A. (2006). Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for gift 

exchange in labor markets using field experiments. Econometrica, 74(5), 1365-1384.  

20

 
Gueguen, N., & Fischer-Lokou, J. (1999). Sequential request strategy: Effect on donor 

generosity. Journal Of Social Psychology, 139(5), 669-671.  

Hibbert, S., Chatzidakis, A., & Smith, A. (2005, 24 June 2005). Help? Who...Me? Building 

Understanding of Non-Donors: An Application of Neutralisation. Paper presented at 

the ESRC and NCVO Seminar on Charitable Giving and Donor Motivation. 

Horne, C. S., Johnson, J. L., & Van Slyke, D. M. (2005). Do charitable donors know enough - 

and care enough-about government subsidies to affect private giving to nonprofit 

organizations? Nonprofit And Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 34(1), 136-149.  

Howard, D. J., Gengler, C., & Jain, A. (1995). Whats In A Name - A Complimentary Means 

Of Persuasion. Journal Of Consumer Research, 22(2), 200-211.  

Hughes, P. N., & Luksetich, W. A. (1999). The Relationship Among Funding Sources for Art 

and History Museums. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 10(1), 21-37.  

Hungerman, D. M. (2005). Are church and state substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 welfare 

reform. Journal Of Public Economics, 89(11-12), 2245-2267.  

Isen, A. M., & Noonberg, A. (1979). The effect of photographs of the handicapped on 

donation to charity: when a thousand words may be too much. Journal of Applied 

Social Psychology, 9, 426-431.  

Jackson, J. M., & Latané, B. (1981). Strength and Number of Solicitors and the Urge Toward 

Altruism. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7(3), 415-422.  

Jiobu, R. M., & Knowles, E. S. (1974). Norm Strength and Alms Giving: An Observational 

Study. Journal of Social Psychology, 94, 205-211.  

Jones, A., & Posnett, J. (1991). Charitable Donations By Uk Households - Evidence From 

The Family Expenditure Survey. Applied Economics, 23(2), 343-351.  

Jones, A. M., & Posnett, J. W. (1991). The Impact Of Tax Deductibility On Charitable Giving 

By Covenant In The Uk. Economic Journal, 101(408), 1117-1129.  

21

 
Joulfaian, D. (2004). Gift taxes and lifetime transfers: time series evidence. Journal Of Public 

Economics, 88(9-10), 1917-1929.  

Khanna, J., Posnett, J., & Sandler, T. (1995). Charity Donations In The Uk - New Evidence 

Based On Panel-Data. Journal Of Public Economics, 56(2), 257-272.  

Kilbourne, B. K., & Kilbourne, M. T. (1984). Norms of Social Conduct and the Foot-In-The-

Door. Journal of Social Psychology, 123(1), 13-20.  

Kitchen, H. (1992). Determinants of Charitable Donations in Canada: A Comparison Over 

Time. Applied Economics Letters, 24, 709-713.  

Kogut, T., & Ritov, I. (2005a). The "Identified victim" effect: An identified group, or just a 

single individual? Journal Of Behavioral Decision Making, 18(3), 157-167.  

Kogut, T., & Ritov, I. (2005b). The singularity effect of identitied victims in separate and 

joint evaluations. Organizational Behavior And Human Decision Processes, 97(2), 

106-116.  

Landry, C. E., Lange, A., List, J. A., Price, M. K., & Rupp, N. G. (2006). Toward an 

understanding of the economics of charity: Evidence from a field experiment. 

Quarterly Journal Of Economics, 121(2), 747-782.  

Lerner, M. J., & Simmons, C. H. (1966). Observer's Reaction to the "Innocent Victim": 

Compassion or Rejection? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4(2), 203-

210.  

Levine, L. R., Bluni, T. D., & Hochman, S. H. (1998). Attire and charitable behavior. 

Psychological Reports, 83(1), 15-18.  

Lindsey, L., & Steinberg, R. S. (1990). Joint crowdout: An empirical study of the impact of 

federal grants on state government expenditures and charitable donations. NBER 

Working Paper Series, No. 3226. 

22

 
Lindskold, S., Forte, R. A., Haake, C. S., & Schmidt, E. K. (1977). The Effects of Directness 

of Face-to-Face Requests and Sex of Solicitor on Streetcorner Donations. Journal of 

Social Psychology, 101, 45-51.  

Long, J. E. (2000). Omitted-variables bias when using state tax rates to estimate the tax price 

effect on itemized deductions. Public Finance Review, 28(2), 120-133.  

Macaulay, J. (1975). Familiarity, Attraction, and Charity. Journal of Social Psychology, 95, 

27-37.  

McClelland, R., & Kokoski, M. F. (1994). Econometric Issues In The Analysis Of Charitable 

Giving. Public Finance Quarterly, 22(4), 498-517.  

McElroy, J. C., & Morrow, P. C. (1994). Personal-Space, Personal Appearance, And Personal 

Selling. Psychological Reports, 74(2), 425-426.  

McGregor-Lowndes, M., Newton, C., & Marsden, S. (2006). Did tax incentives play any part 

in increased giving? Australian Journal Of Social Issues, 41(4), 493-509.  

Miller, D. T. (1977). Personal Deserving versus Justice for Others: An Exploration of the 

Justice Motive. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology(13), 1-13.  

Milofsky, C., & Blades, S. D. (1991). Issues of Accountability in health Charities: A Case 

Study of Accountability Problems Among Nonprofit Organizations. Nonprofit and 

Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 20(4), 371-393.  

O'Neill, C. J., Steinberg, R. S., & Thompson, G. R. (1996). Reassessing the tax-favored status 

of the charitable deduction for gifts of appreciated assets. National Tax Journal, 49(2), 

215-233.  

Odendahl, T. (1990). Charity Begins at Home: Generosity and Self-Interest among the 

Philanthropic Elite. New York: Basic Books. 

Ostrower, F. (1997). Why the Wealthy Give: The Culture of Elite Philanthropy. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press. 

23

 
Pandey, J. (1979). Effects of Benefactor and Recipient Status on Helping Behavior. Journal of 

Social Psychology, 108(2), 171-176.  

Payne, A. A. (1998). Does the government crowd-out private donations? New evidence from 

a sample of non-profit firms. Journal Of Public Economics, 69(3), 323-345.  

Piliavin, J. A., & Piliavin, I. M. (1972). Effect of Blood on Reactions to a Victim. Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 23(3), 353-361.  

Pliner, P., Hart, H., Kohl, J., & Saari, D. (1974). Compliance Without Pressure: Some Further 

Data on the Foot-in-the-Door Technique. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 

10, 17-22.  

Polonsky, M. J., Shelley, L., & Voola, R. (2002). An Examination of Helping Behavior - 

Some Evidence from Australia. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 

10(2), 67-82.  

Posnett, J., & Sandler, T. (1989). Demand For Charity Donations In Private Non-Profit 

Markets - The Case Of The Uk. Journal Of Public Economics, 40(2), 187-200.  

Radley, A., & Kennedy, M. (1992). Reflections Upon Charitable Giving - A Comparison Of 

Individuals From Business, Manual And Professional Backgrounds. Journal Of 

Community & Applied Social Psychology, 2(2), 113-129.  

Reece, W. S. (1979). Charitable Contributions: New Evidence on Household Behavior. The 

American Economic Review, 69(1), 142-151.  

Reingen, P. H. (1978). On inducing compliance with requests. Journal of Consumer 

Research, 5, 96-102.  

Ribar, D. C., & Wilhelm, M. O. (1995). Charitable Contributions To International Relief And 

Development. National Tax Journal, 48(2), 229-244.  

Ribar, D. C., & Wilhelm, M. O. (2002). Altruistic and joy-of-giving motivations in charitable 

behavior. Journal Of Political Economy, 110(2), 425-457.  

24

 
Rittle, R. H. (1981). Changes in Helping Behavior: Self- versus Situational Perceptions as 

Mediators of the Foot-in-the-Door Effect. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 

7(3), 431-437.  

Robinson, J. (1990). Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Charitable Giving: A Reappraisal 

Using 1985 Itemizer and Norutemizer Charitable Deduction Data. Journal of the 

American Taxation Association, 12, 39-50.  

Rotolo, T., & Wilson, J. (2006). Substitute or complement? Spousal influence on 

volunteering. Journal Of Marriage And The Family, 68(2), 305-319.  

Satow, K. L. (1975). Social Approval and Helping. Journal of Experimental Social 

Psychology, 11, 501-509.  

Schervish, P. G., & Havens, J. J. (1997). Social participation and charitable giving: a 

multivariate analysis. Voluntas, 8(3), 235-260.  

Schiff, J. (1990). Charitable Giving and Government Policy: An Economic Analysis (Vol. 

102). New York: Greenwood Press. 

Schwartz, S. H. (1973). Normative Explanations of Helping Behavior: A Critique, Proposal, 

and Empirical Test. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9, 349-364.  

Schwartz, S. H. (1974). Awareness of interpersonal consequences, responsibility denial, and 

volunteering. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30(1), 57-63.  

Schwarzwald, J., Raz, M., & Zvibel, M. (1979). The Applicability of the Door-in-the Face 

Technique when Established Behavioral Customs Exist. Journal of Applied Social 

Psychology, 9(6), 576-586.  

Seligman, C., Bush, M., & Kirsch, K. (1976). Relationship Between Compliance in the Foot-

in-the-Door Paradigm and Size of First Request. Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology, 33(5), 517-520.  

25

 
Skitka, L. J., Mullen, E., Griffin, T., Hutchinson, S., & Chamberlin, B. (2002). Dispositions, 

scripts, or motivated correction? Understanding ideological differences in explanations 

for social problems. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 83(2), 470-487.  

Small, D. A., & Loewenstein, G. (2003). Helping a victim or helping the victim: Altruism and 

identifiability. Journal Of Risk And Uncertainty, 26(1), 5-16.  

Small, D. A., Loewenstein, G., & Slovic, P. (2007). Sympathy and callousness: The impact of 

deliberative thought on donations to identifiable and statistical victims. Organizational 

Behavior And Human Decision Processes, 102(2), 143-153.  

Soetevent, A. R. (2005). Anonymity in giving in a natural context - a field experiment in 30 

churches. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2301-2323.  

Sokolowski, S. W. (1996). Show me the Way to the Next Worthy Deed: Towards a 

Microstructural Theory of Volunteering and Giving. Voluntas, 7(3), 259-278.  

Sole, K., Marton, J., & Hornstein, H. A. (1975). Opinion Similarity and Helping: Three Field 

Experiments Investigating The Bases of Promotive Tension. Journal of Experimental 

Social Psychology, 11, 1-13.  

Steinberg, R. S. (1985). Empirical Relations Between Government Spending and Charitable 

Donations. Journal of Voluntary Action Research, 14(2-3), 55-64.  

Taormina, R. J., Messick, D. M., Iwawaki, S., & Wilke, H. (1988). Cross-Cultural 

Perspectives On Foreign-Aid Deservingness Decisions. Journal Of Cross-Cultural 

Psychology, 19(4), 387-412.  

Taussig, M. K. (1967). Economic Aspects of the Personal Income Tax Treatment of 

Charitable Contributions. National Tax Journal, 20(1), 1-19.  

Thornton, B., Kirchner, G., & Jacobs, J. (1991). Influence Of A Photograph On A Charitable 

Appeal - A Picture May Be Worth A 1000 Words When It Has To Speak For Itself. 

Journal Of Applied Social Psychology, 21(6), 433-445.  

26

 
Vesterlund, L. (2006). Why do People Give? In W. E. Powell & R. Steinberg (Eds.), The 

Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook (Second edition ed., pp. 568-590). New 

Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Vriens, M., Scheer, H. R. V. d., Hoekstra, J. C., & Bult, J. R. (1998). Conjoint Experiments 

for Direct Mail Response Optimization. European journal of Marketing, 32(3/4), 323-

339.  

Warren, P. E., & Walker, I. (1991). Empathy, Effectiveness And Donations To Charity - 

Social-Psychology Contribution. British Journal Of Social Psychology, 30, 325-337.  

West, S. G., & Brown, T. J. (1975). Physical Attractiveness, the Severity of the Emergency 

and Helping: A Field Experiment and Interpersonal Simulation. Journal of 

Experimental Social Psychology, 11, 531-538.  

Weyant, J. M. (1996). Application of compliance techniques to direct-mail requests for 

charitable donations. Psychology & Marketing, 13(2), 157-170.  

Wiepking, P. (2007). The Philanthropic Poor: In Search of Explanations for the Relative 

Generosity of Lower Income Households. Voluntas, 18(4), 339-358.  

Wiesenthal, D. L., Austrom, D., & Silverman, I. (1983). Diffusion of Responsibilty in 

Charitable Donations. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 4(1), 17-27.  

Will, J. A., & Cochran, J. K. (1995). God Helps Those Who Help Themselves - The Effects 

Of Religious Affiliation, Religiosity, And Deservedness On Generosity Toward The 

Poor. Sociology Of Religion, 56(3), 327-338.  

Williams, K. D., & Williams, K. B. (1989). Impact Of Source Strength On 2 Compliance 

Techniques. Basic And Applied Social Psychology, 10(2), 149-159.  

Wong, C. M., Chua, V. C. H., & Vasoo, S. (1998). Contributions to charitable organizations 

in a developing country: the case of Singapore. International Journal of Social 

Economics, 25(1), 25-42.  

27

 
Wu, S.-Y., Huang, J.-T., & Kao, A.-P. (2004). An Analysis of the Peer Effects in Charitable 

Giving: The Case of Taiwan. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 25(4), 483-505.  

Yinon, Y., & Sharon, I. (1985). Similarity in Religiousness of the Solicitor, the Potential 

Helper, and the Recipient as Determinants of Donating Behavior. Journal of Applied 

Social Psychology, 15(8), 726-734.  

Zuckerman, M., Lazzaro, M. M., & Waldgeir, D. (1979). Undermining effects of the Foot-in-

the-door technique with Extrinsic Rewards. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 

9(3), 292-296.  

28