Managing
Brand Equity
Capitalizing
on the Value
of a Brand Name

David A. Aaker
·

THE FREE PRESS
NEW YORK LONDON TORONTO SYDNEY

Managing Brand Equity

THE FREE PRESS
A Division of Simon & Schuster Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, N.Y. 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 1991 by David A. Aaker
All rights reserved,
including the right of reproduction
in whole or in part in any form.
THE FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks
of Simon & Schuster Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America
20 19 18
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Aaker, David A.
Managing brand equity: capitalizing on the value of a brand name /
David A. Aaker.
p.

cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-02-900101-3
eISBN-13: 978-1-4391-8838-5

1. Brand name products—Valuation—United States—Management.
2. Intangible property—Valuation—United States—Management.
I. Title.
HD69.B7A22 1991
658.8′27-dc20

91-10380
CIP

Contents

Preface and Acknowledgments
1. What Is Brand Equity?
The Ivory Story
The Role of Brands
Brand-Building Neglect
The Role of Assets and Skills
What Is Brand Equity?
What Is the Value of a Brand?
Brand Value Based upon Future Earnings
Issues in Managing Brand Equity
The Plan of the Book
2. Brand Loyalty
The MicroPro Story
Brand Loyalty
Measuring Brand Loyalty
The Strategic Value of Brand Loyalty
Maintaining and Enhancing Loyalty
Selling Old Customers Instead of New Ones
3. Brand Awareness
The Datsun-Becomes-Nissan Story
The GE-Becomes-Black & Decker Story
What Is Brand Awareness?
How Awareness Works to Help the Brand
The Power of Old Brand Names
How to Achieve Awareness
4. Perceived Quality
The Schlitz Story
What Is Perceived Quality?

How Perceived Quality Generates Value
What Influences Perceived Quality?
5. Brand Associations: The Positioning Decision
The Weight Watchers Story
Associations, Image, and Positioning
How Brand Associations Create Value
Types of Associations
6. The Measurement of Brand Associations
The Ford Taurus Story
What Does This Brand Mean to You?
Scaling Brand Perceptions
7. Selecting, Creating, and Maintaining Associations
The Dove Story
The Honeywell Story
Which Associations
Creating Associations
Maintaining Associations
Managing Disasters
8. The Name, Symbol, and Slogan
The Volkswagen Story
Names
Symbols
Slogans
9. Brand Extensions: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
The Levi Tailored Classics Story
The Good: What the Brand Name Brings to the Extension
More Good: Extensions Can Enhance the Core Brand
The Bad: The Name Fails to Help the Extension
The Ugly: The Brand Name Is Damaged
More Ugly: A New Brand Name Is Foregone
How to Go About It
Strategy Considerations
10. Revitalizing the Brand
The Yamaha Story
Increasing Usage

Finding New Uses
Entering New Markets
Repositioning the Brand
Augmenting the Product/Service
Obsoleting Existing Products with New-Generation Technologies
Alternatives to Revitalization: The End Game
11. Global Branding and a Recap
The Kal Kan Story
The Parker Pen Story
A Global Brand?
Targeting a Country
Analyzing the Context
A Recap
Notes
Index

Preface and
Acknowledgments

THE POWER OF BRANDS
Larry Light, a prominent advertising research professional, was asked by
the editor of the Journal of Advertising Research for his perspective on
marketing three decades into the future. Light’s analysis was instructive:
The marketing battle will be a battle of brands, a competition for
brand dominance. Businesses and investors will recognize brands as the
company’s most valuable assets. This is a critical concept. It is a vision
about how to develop, strengthen, defend, and manage a business…. It
will be more important to own markets than to own factories. The only
way to own markets is to own market-dominant brands.
The power of brand names is not restricted to consumer markets. In fact,
brand equity may be more important in industrial goods markets than in
consumer marketing. Brand-name awareness often is pivotal in being
considered by an industrial buyer. Further, after analysis, many industrial
purchase alternatives tend to be toss-ups. The decisive factor then can turn
upon what a brand means to a buyer.
THE INTEREST IN BRANDING
Brand equity is one of the hottest topics in management today. The
Marketing Science Institute recently did a survey of its membership, which
includes 50 or so of the top marketing companies in the country, to learn their
opinion as to what were the pressing questions in need of research. The
runaway winner was brand equity. Academic research interest has also
mushroomed: A recent research proposal competition sponsored by the
Marketing Science Institute received 28 proposals.
The growing interest is reflected in the proliferating conferences, articles,
and press attention on branding. Another indicator is the experimentation with
different organizational forms in order to better enhance and protect brand
equity. Some, like Colgate-Palmolive and Canada Dry, have created a
management of brand equity position to be a guardian of the value of brands.

There are several driving forces behind the interest in branding. First,
firms have shown a willingness to pay substantial premiums for brand names
because alternative development of new brand names either is not feasible or
is too costly. This phenomenon raises several questions, such as: How much
is brand equity worth? On what is it based? Why should so much be paid?
Second, marketing professionals sense that an increased emphasis upon
price, often involving the excessive use of price promotions, is resulting in the
deterioration of industries into commodity-like business areas. They believe
that more resources should be diverted into brand-building activities, to
develop points of differentiation. The recognized need is to develop
sustainable competitive advantages based upon non-price competition. The
problem is that brand-building efforts, unlike price promotions, have little
visible impact upon sales in the short run. How then are such activities
justified in a world with extreme pressures for delivering short-term
performance?
Third, managers realize a need to fully exploit their assets in order to
maximize the performance of their business. A key asset is usually the brand
name. How can it be exploited? Can it be extended to new products, or
exposed to new markets? Is there an opportunity to get more out of it by
strengthening it or by altering its components? Conversely, how might it be
damaged, and how can that be avoided?
THE APPROACH OF THE BOOK
This book has several objectives. One objective is to define and illustrate
brand equity, providing a structure that will help managers see more clearly
how brand equity does provide value. Another is to document research
findings and illustrative examples which demonstrate that value has emerged
(or has been lost) from marketing decisions or environmental events that have
enhanced (or damaged) the brand. A third objective is to discuss how brand
equity should be managed: How should it be created, maintained, and
protected? How should it be exploited? A fourth objective is to raise questions
and suggest issues that should be addressed by thoughtful managers who are
trying to think strategically.
I have written this book for managers having either direct or indirect
responsibility for brands and their equity. Such managers will represent firms
that are either large or small, consumer or industrial, service- or productfocused. They will be concerned with the need to develop and protect the
equity in their core brands. In addition, they will (or should) be addressing
such questions as the following: What is the role of the company name in the
branding equation? Should we develop a subbrand name? Should the brand
name be extended to other products? I hope also, however, that it will be used

in schools of management where faculty and students are attempting to
improve our ability to, in general, manage strategically and, in particular,
manage brand equity.
The first chapter discusses the Ivory brand, provides an historical
background, and both defines brand equity and suggests a variety of
approaches to place a value on it. Four dimensions of brand equity are the
focus of the next six chapters, which collectively define the dimensions,
specify how each creates value for the customer and the firm, and discuss
their measurement and management.
Chapter 2 considers the importance of the brand loyalty. Chapter 3 covers
the creation, measurement, and role of brand awareness. Chapter 4 discusses
perceived quality, how it can be managed, and the evidence as to its role in
business performance. Chapter 5 introduces the concept of associations and
positioning. Methods to measure associations are covered in Chapter 6.
Selecting, creating, and maintaining associations is the subject of Chapter 7.
Clearly, the management of associations, covering three chapters, is both
important and complex.
The brand is identified by the name, and often by a symbol and a slogan
as well. Chapter 8 discusses these indicators and their selection. Brand
extensions (the good, the bad, and the ugly) is the topic of Chapter 9. Chapter
10 presents methods to revitalize a tired brand—to breathe new life into both
it and its context. It also discusses the end game: how to allow a brand a
graceful decline and, if needed, death. Chapter 11 provides a discussion about
global branding, presents a summary model of brand equity, and concludes
with a set of observations from each chapter that collectively summarize the
major points presented in the book.
An historical analysis of a brand that has experienced a dramatic event, or
has been especially good or bad at building brand equity, begins each chapter.
There is much to be learned from history. Each of these analyses provides a
vivid illustration of how a wide variety of actions can affect a brand. In
several cases a dollar value is placed upon a set of actions affecting a brand,
even though it is impossible to know for sure what caused what. Too, there is
a host of case studies throughout, to illustrate the concepts and methods and
to make them more tangible and understandable.
In addition to the historical flavor—what has happened to individual
brands—more systematic studies are sought out and reported. The past 15
years have seen the development of studies about such brand constructs as
market share, awareness, brand extensions, perceived quality, and others that
provide significant evidence about their role. Some of these studies have been
based upon large-scale data bases. Others come from controlled experiments.

They all help provide substance to an area that has too long relied upon
opinion.
Each chapter closes with a set of questions to consider. The goal is to
provide a vehicle with which to translate the ideas in the chapter into a
diagnostic and action agenda. Some questions will stimulate new ways of
looking at your brand and its environment, and others will suggest a need to
find out more information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people helped in the writing of this book. Let me offer my special
thanks here to the following: Bob Wallace, my editor at The Free Press, for
his enthusiasm for the project and Kevin Keller, my research colleague on the
first two branding research efforts in which I was involved, for his stimulating
ideas. From among those who read large portions of the manuscript and gave
helpful comments: Stuart Agres of Lowe & Partners; Alec Biel of Ogilvy;
Patrick Crane of Kodak; Stephen King of WPP Group; Vijay Mahajan of
Texas; Larry Percy of Lintas; and Al Riley of Campbell Soup. Among my
colleagues who read chapters or gave helpful suggestions: Jennifer Aaker of
Lowe & Partners; Russell Berg of H-P; Pete Bucklin and Rashi Glazier of
Berkeley; Robert Jones of Ruhr/Paragon; Kent Mitchel of MSI; August
Swanenberg of Nielsen; Al Shocker of Minnesota; Doug Stayman of Cornell;
and Bill Wells of DDB Needham. Lisa Cuff of The Free Press and Serena Joe
of Berkeley were extremely helpful. Then there was MSI, who sponsored
three branding conferences, provided inspiration and support. And a series of
research assistants and students who helped enormously—including Susan
Anderson, Ziv Carmon, Anastasia Jackson, Andy Keane, Said Saffari, and
Iegor Siniavski.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, who put up with yet another
writing project.
David A. Aaker
Berkeley
Managing Brand Equity

1
What Is Brand Equity?

·
A product is something that is made in a factory; a brand is
something that is bought by a customer. A product can be copied by a
competitor; a brand is unique. A product can be quickly outdated; a
successful brand is timeless.
Stephen King WPP Group, London

THE IVORY STORY
One Sunday in 1879 Harley Procter, one of the founders of the candle and
soap firm Procter & Gamble (P&G), heard a sermon based on the Forty-fifth
Psalm, “All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of ivory
palaces.”1 The word “ivory” stuck in his mind—and became the name of the
firm’s white soap.
In December, 1881, P&G ran their first Ivory ad in a religious weekly,
stating that the soap “floated” and that it was “99 44/100% pure,” a dual claim
which has become one of the most famous ad slogans ever. That ad is shown
in Figure 1-1. Figure 1-2 shows a 1920 Ivory ad illustrating the consistency of
the positioning over time. Note the imagery created by the forest, the barefoot
girl, and the clear water.
The purity claim was supported by a chemist, who had tested Ivory and
found that only 56/100% contained impurities. The flotation property, first
created by a production mistake which fed air into the soap mixture, was
discovered by customers—who attempted to reorder the “floating” soap.

FIGURE 1-1 The First Ivory Ad Appearing in 1881
© The Procter & Gamble Company. Used with permission.

FIGURE 1-2 A 1920 Ivory Ad
© The Procter & Gamble Company. Used with permission.
Ivory was a remarkable product in a time in which most soaps were
yellow or brown, irritated skin, and damaged clothes. The fact that it floated
had practical value to those used to being frustrated by trying to find their
soap in the bath water. It was thus well positioned—a soap that was pure, was
mild, and floated. From the outset, the fact that it was mild enough for babies
was stressed, and babies were often featured in the advertising. The claims of
purity and mildness were supported by the white color, the name Ivory, the
twin slogans, and the association with babies. The soap’s brand name, along
with its distinctive wrapping, gave customers confidence that they were
getting the mild, gentle soap they wanted. The “aggressive” 1882 national
advertising budget of $11,000 provided a start toward high brand awareness,
and customer confidence that the manufacturer was backing the product and
would stand behind it.
Ivory, now over 110 years old, is a prime example of the value of creating
and sustaining brand equity. Brand equity will be carefully defined and
detailed later in this chapter. Briefly, it is a set of assets such as name
awareness, loyal customers, perceived quality, and associations (e.g. being
“pure” and “it floats”) that are linked to the brand (its name and symbol) and

add (or subtract) value to the product or service being offered.
Curiously, in 1885 a yellow soap named Sunlight, when introduced to
dreary, sun-starved England, became the start of Unilever, now one of the
largest firms in the world. Unlike Ivory, however, Sunlight gave way to other
brands, such as Lifebuoy, Lux, and Rinso.
Nearly thirty years later, in 1911, P&G introduced Crisco, the first allvegetable shortening, using an ad showing a woman in her kitchen admiring a
freshly baked rhubarb pie. The ad was the precursor of the “slice of life” type
of advertising (linking brands to people’s life contexts) that was to be a P&G
staple over the years. By 1933 the firm had added Chipso, a washing-machine
soap; Dreft, a synthetic detergent; Ivory Flakes; Ivory Snow; and Camay, a
competitor to Ivory.
P&G demonstrated its commitment to Ivory’s brand equity during the
depression. In the face of tremendous economic hardships, P&G resisted
pressures to reduce advertising. In fact, in part by sponsoring “The O’Neills,”
a radio “soap opera,” Ivory doubled its sales between 1933 and 1939.
The loyalty and market presence that Ivory had built was challenged in
1941 by an Ivory clone called Swan from Lever Brothers. It was billed as
“The first really new floating soap since the Gay Nineties.” P&G reacted with
aggressive advertising to protect Ivory. Without any clear product difference,
Lever could not dislodge Ivory, and ultimately withdrew from the market.
In May of 1931 a memo by Neil McElroy, then working on P&G’s Camay
account and frustrated by being in the shadow of Ivory, put forth the idea of
developing a brand management team. He argued that there were not enough
people caring about Camay. The marketing effort (and the effort to create and
maintain equity) was diffused and uncoordinated, and lacked a budget
commitment. The solution, creating a brand management team responsible for
the marketing program and its coordination with sales and manufacturing,
was a key event in the history of branding.
During the late 1940s and 1950s the firm added Spic & Span cleaner, Tide
detergent, Prell shampoo, Lilt home permanent, Joy dishwashing detergent,
Blue Cheer, Crest toothpaste, Dash low-sudsing detergent, Comet cleanser
with bleach, Duz soap, Secret cream deodorant, Jif peanut spread, Duncan
Hines, Charmin, and Ivory Liquid. The sixties and seventies saw the addition
of Pampers disposable diapers, Folger’s coffee, Scope mouthwash, Bounty
paper towels, Pringles potato chips, Bounce fabric softener, Rely tampons,
and Luv disposable diapers.
In the late 1980s, P&G had 83 advertised brands and annual sales of
nearly $20 billion. In the U.S. it had the No. 1 brand in 19 of the 39 categories
in which it competed, and one of the top three brands in all but five. In these

39 categories, P&G commanded an average market share close to 25%.
Most firms will focus efforts upon one brand, protecting its position by
pursuing a given positioning strategy. New segments are usually therefore
uncovered by competitors who are attempting to gain a position in the market.
One striking aspect of P&G has been its willingness to develop competing
brands in order to serve new segments, even if the new brands pressure (or
even threaten) existing brands. The mature, fragmented laundry detergent
category is an excellent example of how a set of brands can combine to reach
a variety of segments and result in a dominant position: P&G holds a 50%plus share of the market.
P&G’s ten brands use different associations to target different market
segments. Thus:
Ivory Snow—“Ninety-nine and forty-four one-hundredths percent
pure,” the “Mild, gentle soap for diapers and baby clothes”
Tide—For extra-tough family laundry jobs—“Tide’s in, dirt’s out”
Cheer—Works in cold, warm, or hot water—“All-temperature
Cheer”
Gain—Originally an “enzyme” detergent but now a detergent with a
fragrance—“Bursting with freshness”
Bold 3—Includes fabric softener—“Cleans, softens, and controls
static”
Dash—Concentrated power, less suds to avoid clogging washing
machines
Dreft—With “Borax, nature’s natural sweetener” for baby’s clothes
Oxydol—Contains bleach—for “Sparkling whites—with color-safe
bleach”
Era—Concentrated liquid detergent—with proteins to clean stains
Solo—Heavy-duty, with a fabric softener
In few other companies is the power of branding so apparent. Without
question the key to the success of P&G is its commitment to the development
of brand equity, the brand management system that supports it, and the
ongoing investment in marketing that sustains it.
There are a few publicly available numbers that allow a crude estimate of
the profits that the Ivory brand name has provided to P&G over the past
century. We know that just over $300 million was spent on U.S. measured
media during the 10-year period from 1977 to 1987. It is estimated that during
this period measured media was about 75% of total advertising at P&G. If
similar ratios hold for Ivory products, the total Ivory advertising expenditures

would be around $400 million.
Assuming an ad-to-sales ratio of 7% (the ratio for P&G as a firm ranged
from 6% to 8% during this period), worldwide sales of Ivory products would
have been $5.7 billion. Assuming an exponential sales-growth curve since
1887, the total sales of Ivory products since Ivory was first introduced would
be around $25 billion. Assuming an average profitability of 10% (the average
profitability for laundry and cleaning products from 1987 to 1989 was 10%),
a reasonable estimate of total Ivory profits would be $2 to $3 billion.
Interestingly and not coincidentally, P&G is known on Wall Street as a
firm which takes a long-term view of its brand profitability. Although this can
be frustrating and risky in the short term for an investor, P&G is patient with
brands even when they absorb losses over a long time period. Their
persistence with Pringles chips, Duncan Hines ready-to-eat soft cookies, and
Citrus Hill orange juice in the face of substantial losses are examples. The
long-term perspective of P&G may in part be due to the fact that it is 20%
owned by its employees.
In this book we shall explore brand equity. As the P&G example
illustrates, the development of brand equity can create associations that can
drive market positions, persist over long time periods, and be capable of
resisting aggressive competitors. However, it can also involve an initial and
ongoing investment which can be substantial and will not necessarily result in
short-term profits. Payoffs, when they come, can involve decades. Thus,
management of brand equity is difficult, requiring patience and vision.
In the following pages we will define brand equity and suggest that it is
based on a set of dimensions each of which potentially needs to be managed.
Several perspectives on how to place a value on a brand will then be detailed.
First, however, several basic questions must be addressed. For example: What
exactly is a brand? Have brand equities been eroding? How do price
promotions affect brands? What is behind the pressures for short-run financial
results? Can a focus on brand equity provide a counterpoint to the tyranny of
short-term financials?

THE ROLE OF BRANDS
A brand is a distinguishing name and/or symbol (such as a logo,
trademark, or package design) intended to identify the goods or services of
either one seller or a group of sellers, and to differentiate those goods or
services from those of competitors. A brand thus signals to the customer the

source of the product, and protects both the customer and the producer from
competitors who would attempt to provide products that appear to be
identical.
There is evidence that even in ancient history names were put on such
goods as bricks in order to identify their maker.2 And it is known that trade
guilds in medieval Europe used trademarks to assure the customer and
provide legal protection to the producer. In the early sixteenth century,
whiskey distillers shipped their products in wooden barrels with the name of
the producer burned into the barrel. The name showed the consumer who the
maker was and prevented the substitution of cheaper products. In 1835 a
brand of Scotch called “Old Smuggler” was introduced in order to capitalize
on the quality reputation developed by bootleggers who used a special
distilling process.
Although brands have long had a role in commerce, it was not until the
twentieth century that branding and brand associations became so central to
competitors. In fact, a distinguishing characteristic of modern marketing has
been its focus upon the creation of differentiated brands. Market research has
been used to help identify and develop bases of brand differentiation. Unique
brand associations have been established using product attributes, names,
packages, distribution strategies, and advertising. The idea has been to move
beyond commodities to branded products—to reduce the primacy of price
upon the purchase decision, and accentuate the bases of differentiation.
The power of brands, and the difficulty and expense of establishing them,
is indicated by what firms are willing to pay for them. For example, Kraft was
purchased for nearly $13 billion, more than 600% over its book value, and the
collection of brands under the RJR Nabisco umbrella brought over $25
billion. These values are far beyond the worth of any balance sheet item
representing bricks and mortar.
An even clearer example of the value of a brand name is licensing. For
example, Sunkist in 1988 received $10.3 million in royalties by licensing its
name for use on hundreds of products such as Sunkist Fruit Gems (Ben
Myerson candy), Sunkist orange soda (Cadbury Schweppes), Sunkist juice
drinks (Lipton), Sunkist Vitamin C (Ciba-Geigy), and Sunkist fruit snacks
(Lipton).3 Lipton used the name Sunkist Fun Fruits to overcome an
established Fruit Corner line of fruit snacks from General Mills. The Fruit
Corner tag line, “Real fruit and fun rolled up in one,” was overshadowed by
Sunkist Fun Fruits, a name that said it all.
The value of an established brand is in part due to the reality that it is
more difficult to build brands today than it was only a few decades ago. First,
the cost of advertising and distribution is much higher: One-minute

commercials and sometimes even half-minute commercials are now
considered too expensive to be practical, for example. Second, the number of
brands is proliferating: Approximately 3,000 brands are introduced each year
into supermarkets. There were at this writing 750 nameplates of cars, over
150 brands of lipstick, and 93 cat-food brands. All this meant, and continues
to mean, increased competition for the customer’s mind as well as for access
to the distribution channel. It also means that a brand often is relegated to a
niche market, and so will lack the sales to support expensive marketing
programs.

BRAND-BUILDING NEGLECT
Despite the often obvious value of a brand, there are signs that the brandbuilding process is eroding, loyalty levels are falling, and price is becoming
more salient. The accompanying insert suggests a series of indicators of a lack
of attention to brands which most firms will find familiar.
Managers cannot identify with confidence the brand associations and the
strength of those associations. Further, there islittle knowledge about
how those associations differ across segments and through time.
Knowledge of levels of brand awareness is lacking. There is no feel for
whether a recognition problem exists among any segment. Knowledge is
lacking as to top-of-mind recall that the brand is getting, and how that
has been changing.
There is no systematic, reliable, sensitive, and valid measure of customer
satisfaction and loyalty—nor any diagnostic modelthat guides an
ongoing understanding of why such measures may be changing.
There are no indicators of the brand tied to long-term success of the
business that are used to evaluate the brand’s marketingeffort.
There is no person in the firm who is really charged with protecting the
brand equity. Those nominally in charge of the brand,perhaps termed
brand managers or product marketing managers, are in fact evaluated on
the basis of short-term measures.
The measures of performance associated with a brand and its managers
are quarterly and yearly. There are no longer-term objectivesthat are
meaningful. Further, the managers involved do not realistically expect to
stay long enough to think strategically,nor does ultimate brand
performance follow them.

There is no mechanism to measure and evaluate the impact of elements
of the marketing program upon the brand. Sales promotions,for example,
are selected without determining their associations and considering their
impact upon the brand.
There is no long-term strategy for the brand. The following questions
about the brand environment five or ten years into thefuture are
unanswered, and may have not been addressed: What associations
should the brand have? In what product classes shouldthe brand be
competing? What mental image should the brand stimulate in the future?
There is evidence that loyalty levels for supermarket products have
declined.4 Nielsen charted the market share for 50 selected major supermarket
brands and found that it fell 7% from 1975 to 1987. The research firm NPD
revealed that in a study of 20 supermarket product categories the average
number of brands purchased in a six-month period increased by 9% from
1975 to 1983.
The ad agency BBDO found a surprising perception of brand parity
among consumers throughout the world in 13 consumer product categories.5
They asked consumers whether they felt that the brands they had to choose
from in a given product category were more or less the same. The percent
who indicated brand parity ranged from 52% for cigarettes to 76% for credit
cards. It was noticeably higher for such products as paper towels and dry
soup, which emphasize performance benefits, than for products like
cigarettes, coffee, and beer, for which imagery has been the norm.
One survey of department-store shoppers involving 11 product categories
such as underwear, shoes, housewares, furniture, and appliances documented
the erosion of price.6 Only 39% of a national probability sample of 400
randomly dialed adults indicated that they paid full price, while 41% waited
for a sale and 16% more bought discounted merchandise not on sale.
Interestingly, the study found a high negative correlation between media
advertising in a product category and category sales at full price. Advertising,
of course, creates strong brands which can hold share in the face of
discounting.
THE USE OF SALES PROMOTION
It is tempting to “milk” brand equity by cutting back on brand-building
activities, such as advertising, which have little impact upon short-term
performance. Further, declines in brand equity are not obvious. In contrast,
sales promotions, whether they involve soda pop or automobiles, are effective
—they affect sales in an immediate and measurable way. During a week in

which a promotion is run, dramatic sales increases are observed for many
product classes: 443% for fruit drinks, 194% for frozen dinners, and 122% for
laundry detergents.7
Promotions provide a way to keep a third- or fourth-ranking brand on the
shelf. They are also attractive to the Pepsis of the world that want to beat
Coke and, not so incidentally, squeeze out the 7-Up’s of the world.
There has been a dramatic increase in sales promotion during the past two
decades or so, both customer-directed (such as couponing and rebates) and
trade-directed (such as wholesale case discounts). Just over a decade ago
there was a 40/60 relationship between expenditures in promotions and
advertising. The ratio is now 60/40 and still changing. Coupon distributions
grew at an annual rate of 11.8% through the 1980s.8 Even in categories such
as automobiles, price promotions have been the norm.
Unlike brand-building activities, most sales promotions are easily copied.
In fact, competitors must retaliate or suffer unacceptable losses. When a
promotion/price-cutting cycle begins it is most difficult to stop because both
the customer and the trade become used to it and begin planning their
purchases around the promotion cycle. The inevitable result is a great increase
in the role of price. There is pressure to reduce the quality, features, and
services offered. At the extreme, the product class starts to resemble a
commodity, since brand associations have less importance. At that point,
promotions look even better with respect to short-term impact, but their value
declines. One recent study of more than 1,000 promotions concluded that only
16% paid off when costs and forward-buying were factored in.9
The enhanced role of promotions is in part driven by measurement. With
the advent of the scanner-based databases in food and drug stores, the shortterm measures of some marketing actions are better than ever. They show that
price promotions affect sales. However, they are not well suited to measure
long-term results, in part because such results are difficult to detect in a noisy
marketplace, and also because experiments covering multiple years are very
expensive to conduct. Because there are no easy, defensible ways to measure
the long-term effects of marketing actions, short-term measures have added
influence. The situation is a bit like that of the drunk who looks for car keys
under a street light because the light is better than where the keys were
actually lost.
The visibility of the short-term success of price promotions and other
potentially brand-debilitating activities is fed by the short-term orientation of
many marketing organizations. Brand managers and other key people often
are rotated regularly so that they can expect to stay in any one position for
only two to five years. This then becomes their time horizon. Worse, during

this time they are evaluated on the basis of short-term measures such as
market share movements and short-term profitability. This is in part because
such measures are available and reliable while indicators of long-term success
are elusive, and, too, because the organization itself is concerned with shortterm performance.
PRESSURES FOR SHORT-TERM RESULTS
Branding decisions take place in organizations experiencing extreme
pressures to deliver short-term performance, particularly in the U.S. A myriad
of diverse spokespeople, including the chairman of Sony, a political scientist
from Harvard, and the authors of the MIT Commission on Productivity, have
forcefully concluded that U.S. managers have an excessive preoccupation
with short-term profits at the expense of long-range strategy.
A prime reason why American managers might have a short-term focus is
the prominence and acceptance of the maximization of stockholder value as
the prime objective of U.S. firms. The problem is that shareholders are
inordinately influenced by quarterly earnings. Their crude model is that future
returns will be related to current performance. The resulting need for
managers to demonstrate good quarterly earnings percolates into
organizational objectives and brand-management evaluation. As a result, there
is intense pressure throughout the firm to deliver good short-term financials.
A basic problem is that shareholders usually are incapable of
understanding the strategic vision of a firm, in part because they are not privy
to strategic decision-making, and also because they cannot interpret the
uncertain strategic environment or the complexities of the organization.
Further, there is an absence of credible alternative indicators of long-term
performance.
After decades of effort, we have been markedly unsuccessful at modeling
the long-term value of advertising in the absence of multiple-year field
experiments. Measure of new-product effort is similarly difficult to quantify.
Firms can keep track of new product research expenditures, the number of
new products, the percent of business associated with products introduced
within five years, and so on, but it is difficult to generate measures that are
convincing surrogates for long-term performance. The long-term value of
activities which will enhance or erode brand equity are similarly difficult to
convincingly demonstrate. Without alternatives, short-term financials fill a
vacuum and come to dominate performance measurement.
Managing with a long-term perspective is difficult in the face of the
shareholder value emphasis, and other pressures, facing U.S. managers. What
is to be done? Simply put, we need to find measures of long-term
performance to supplement or replace short-term financials, measures that

will be convincing enough to satisfy shareholders.
The Brand-Building Potential of Advertising
A rare effort to document the brand-building effect of advertising was
made by the research firm IRI.10 An analysis of hundreds of heavy-up
advertising experiments (where heavy advertising is compared to moderate or
normal advertising) was conducted. On average over half of such heavy-up
tests show no significant change in sales at all during the test period. IRI
examined 15 of these experiments that did achieve significant sales gains
during a test year. Sales averaged 22% over the base period. Sales in years 2
and 3, after the heavy advertising was withdrawn, were still above the base
period, 17% and 6% respectively. Thus, the impact of advertising may be
grossly underestimated if only a one year perspective is employed. Of course,
advertising and promotion results are more often expected in months, or even
weeks.

THE ROLE OF ASSETS AND SKILLS
One approach to introducing a strategic orientation is to change the
primary focus from managing short-term financials to the development and
maintenance of assets and skills.11 An asset is something a firm possesses,
such as a brand name or retail location, which is superior to that of the
competition. A skill is something a firm does better than its competitors do,
such as advertising or efficient manufacturing.
Assets and skills provide the basis of a competitive advantage that is
sustainable. What a business does (the way it competes and where it chooses
to do so) usually is easily imitated. It is more difficult to respond to what a
business is, since that involves acquiring or neutralizing specialized assets or
skills. Anyone can decide to distribute cereal or detergent through
supermarkets, but few have the clout to do it as effectively as, say, General
Mills. The right assets and skills can provide the barriers to competitor thrusts
that allow the competitive advantage to persist over time and thus lead to
long-term profits. The challenges are to identify key assets and skills on
which the firm should base its competitive advantage, to build upon and
maintain them, and then to use them effectively.
The concept of an asset as a generator of a profit stream is familiar,
especially when that asset is capitalized and appears on the balance sheet. A

government bond is the prototypical example. A factory which houses plant,
equipment, and people is another example. But of course a factory, unlike a
government bond, requires active management and must be maintained.
The most important assets of a firm, however (such as the people in the
organization and the brand names), are intangible in that they are not
capitalized and thus do not appear on the balance sheet. Depreciation is not
assessed, on “intangible assets,” and thus maintenance must come directly out
of cash flow and short-term profits. Everyone understands that even in bad
times a factory must be maintained, in part because of the depreciation term
in the income statement and also because maintenance needs are visible. An
intangible asset, by contrast, is more vulnerable, and its “maintenance” is
more easily neglected.
MANAGING THE BRAND NAME
One such intangible asset is the equity represented by a brand name. For
many businesses the brand name and what it represents are its most important
asset—the basis of competitive advantage and of future earnings streams. Yet,
the brand name is seldom managed in a coordinated, coherent manner with a
view that it must be maintained and strengthened.
Instead of focusing upon an asset such as a brand, too often American
“fast-track” managers get caught up in day-to-day performance measures
which are easily available. What caused the share drop in the Northeast?
Would a promotion fight off a new product challenge? How can we combat a
new entry? Can we put a name on another division’s product and thus provide
an interim solution? How can growth be sustained? Can a brand name be used
to gain entry into a new product market?
A focus on short-run problems facing the brand can result in an operation
that performs well, sometimes over a long time-period. However, the danger
is that this performance is achieved by exploiting the brand and allowing it to
deteriorate. The brand might be extended so far that its core associations are
weakened. Its associations might be tarnished by expanding its market to
include less-prestigious outlets and customers. Price promotions might be
used to provide a perceived bargain for customers. The brand should be
thought of as an asset, such as a timber reserve. Short-term profits can be
substantial if the reserve is depleted without regard to the future but the asset
can be destroyed in the process.
It is not enough to avoid damaging a brand—it needs to be nurtured and
maintained. A more subtle danger facing a brand is from a firm with a strong
cost/efficiency culture. The focus is on improving the efficiency of operations
including purchasing, product design, manufacturing, promotions, and
logistics. A problem, however, is that in such a culture the brand may not be

nurtured, and thus may slowly deteriorate. Further, efficiency pressures lead
to difficult compromises between cost goals on the one hand and customer
satisfaction on the other.
The value of brand-building activities on future performance is not easy to
demonstrate. The challenge is to understand better the links between brand
assets and future performance, so that brand-building activities can be
justified. What are the assets that underlie brand equity? How do they relate
to future performance? Which assets need to be developed, strengthened, or
maintained? What exactly is the nature of the payoff/risk of such activities?
What is the value of an improvement in perceived quality or brand awareness,
for example? If answers to such questions would emerge, there would be
more support for brand-building and more resistance to short-term
expediency.
All brand-building activities require justification. However, the need is
particularly acute in advertising because of the large expenditures involved
that are often vulnerable to short-term pressures. Peter A. Georgescu,
president of Young & Rubicam, captured the pressure on advertising by
noting a need to learn how to measure, forecast, and manage the
communication elements that go into the making of strong brands.12 He
warned: “We have to find ways to measure and justify the megamillions our
clients have to spend to build strong brands—or else.” The “or else” referred
to brands becoming “faceless, lifeless” commodities.
The first step in identifying the value of brand equity is to understand
what it is—what really contributes to the value of a brand. Thus, we now turn
to the definitional issue. Subsequently, we shall look at several methods of
placing a value upon a brand which will provide additional insight regarding
the brand concept. And, finally, some issues facing those who create or
manage brands will be introduced.

WHAT IS BRAND EQUITY?
Brand equity is a set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its
name and symbol, that add to or subtract from the value provided by a
product or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers. For assets or
liabilities to underlie brand equity they must be linked to the name and/or
symbol of the brand. If the brand’s name or symbol should change, some or
all of the assets or liabilities could be affected and even lost, although some
might be shifted to a new name and symbol. The assets and liabilities on

which brand equity is based will differ from context to context. However,
they can be usefully grouped into five categories:
1. Brand loyalty
2. Name awareness
3. Perceived quality
4. Brand associations in addition to perceived quality
5. Other proprietary brand assets—patents, trademarks,
relationships, etc.

channel

The concept of brand equity is summarized in Figure 1-3. The five
categories of assets that underlie brand equity are shown as being the basis of
brand equity. The figure also shows that brand equity creates value for both
the customer and the firm.
PROVIDING VALUE TO THE CUSTOMER
Brand-equity assets generally add or subtract value for customers. They
can help them interpret, process, and store huge quantities of information
about products and brands. They also can affect customers’ confidence in the
purchase decision (due to either past-use experience or familiarity with the
brand and its characteristics). Potentially more important is the fact that both
perceived quality and brand associations can enhance customers’ satisfaction
with the use experience. Knowing that a piece of jewelry came from Tiffany
can affect the experience of wearing it: The user can actually feel different.
PROVIDING VALUE TO THE FIRM
As part of its role in adding value for the customer, brand equity has the
potential to add value for the firm by generating marginal cash flow in at least
half a dozen ways. First, it can enhance programs to attract new customers or
recapture old ones. A promotion, for example, which provides an incentive to
try a new flavor or new use will be more effective if the brand is familiar, and
if there is no need to combat a consumer skeptical of brand quality.

FIGURE 1-3 Brand Equity
Second, the last four brand equity dimensions can enhance brand loyalty.
The perceived quality, the associations, and the well-known name can provide
reasons to buy and can affect use satisfaction. Even when they are not pivotal
to brand choice, they can reassure, reducing the incentive to try others.
Enhanced brand loyalty is especially important in buying time to respond
when competitors innovate and obtain product advantages. Note that brand
loyalty is both one of the dimensions of brand equity and is affected by brand
equity. The potential influence on loyalty from the other dimensions is
significant enough that it is explicitly listed as one of the ways that brand
equity provides value to the firm.
It should be noted that there exist similar interrelationships among the
other brand equity dimensions. For example, perceived quality could be
influenced by awareness (a visible name is likely to be well made), by
associations (a visible spokesperson would only endorse a quality product),

and by loyalty (a loyal customer would not like a poor product). In some
circumstances it might be useful to explicitly include other brand equity
dimensions as outputs of brand equity as well as inputs, even though they do
not appear in Figure 1-3.
Third, brand equity will usually allow higher margins by permitting both
premium pricing and reduced reliance upon promotions. In many contexts the
elements of brand equity serve to support premium pricing. Further, a brand
with a disadvantage in brand equity will have to invest more in promotional
activity, sometimes just to maintain its position in the distribution channel.
Fourth, brand equity can provide a platform for growth via brand
extensions. Ivory, as we have seen, has been extended into several cleaning
products, creating business areas that would have been much more expensive
to enter without the Ivory name.
Fifth, brand equity can provide leverage in the distribution channel. Like
customers, the trade has less uncertainty dealing with a proven brand name
that has already achieved recognition and associations. A strong brand will
have an edge in gaining both shelf facings and cooperation in implementing
marketing programs.
Finally, brand-equity assets provide a competitive advantage that often
presents a real barrier to competitors. An association—e.g., Tide is the
detergent for tough family laundry jobs—may preempt an attribute that is
important for a given segment. For example, another brand would find it
difficult to compete with Tide for the “tough cleaning job” segment.
A strong perceived quality position, such as that of Acura, is a competitive
advantage not easily overcome—convincing customers that another brand has
achieved quality superior to the Acura (even if true) will be hard. Achieving
parity in name awareness can be extremely expensive for a brand with an
awareness liability.
We now turn to the five categories of assets that underlie brand equity. As
each is discussed, it will become clear that brand-equity assets require
investment to create, and will dissipate over time unless maintained.
BRAND LOYALTY
For any business it is expensive to gain new customers and relatively
inexpensive to keep existing ones, especially when the existing customers are
satisfied with—or even like—the brand. In fact, in many markets there is
substantial inertia among customers even if there are very low switching costs
and low customer commitment to the existing brand. Thus, an installed
customer base has the customer acquisition investment largely in its past.
Further, at least some existing customers provide brand exposure and
reassurance to new customers.

The loyalty of the customer base reduces the vulnerability to competitive
action. Competitors may be discouraged from spending resources to attract
satisfied customers. Further, higher loyalty means greater trade leverage,
since customers expect the brand to be always available.
AWARENESS OF THE BRAND NAME AND SYMBOLS
People will often buy a familiar brand because they are comfortable with
the familiar. Or there may be an assumption that a brand that is familiar is
probably reliable, in business to stay, and of reasonable quality. A recognized
brand will thus often be selected over an unknown brand. The awareness
factor is particularly important in contexts in which the brand must first enter
the consideration set—it must be one of the brands that are evaluated. An
unknown brand usually has little chance.
PERCEIVED QUALITY
A brand will have associated with it a perception of overall quality not
necessarily based on a knowledge of detailed specifications. The quality
perception may take on somewhat different forms for different types of
industries. Perceived quality means something different for Hewlett Packard
or IBM than for Solomon Brothers or Tide or Heinz. However, it will always
be a measureable, important brand characteristic.
Perceived quality will directly influence purchase decisions and brand
loyalty, especially when a buyer is not motivated or able to conduct a detailed
analysis. It can also support a premium price which, in turn, can create gross
margin that can be reinvested in brand equity. Further, perceived quality can
be the basis for a brand extension. If a brand is well-regarded in one context,
the assumption will be that it will have high quality in a related context.
A SET OF ASSOCIATIONS
The underlying value of a brand name often is based upon specific
associations linked to it. Associations such as Ronald McDonald can create a
positive attitude or feeling that can become linked to a brand such as
McDonald’s. The link of Karl Maiden to American Express provides
credibility, and (to some) may stimulate confidence in the service. The
association of a “use context” such as aspirin and heart-attack prevention can
provide a reason-to-buy which can attract customers. A life-style or
personality association may change the use experience: The Jaguar
associations may make the experience of owning and driving one “different.”
A strong association may be the basis of a brand extension: Hershey’s
chocolate milk provides the drink with a competitive advantage based upon
Hershey’s associations.
Branding an Ingredient: Nutrasweet

Perdue chickens and Chiquita bananas illustrate that a commodity product
can be successfully branded. Each has developed a formidable awareness
level and quality reputation for a product that was thought not long ago to be
a pure commodity.
The Nutrasweet Company, a unit of Monsanto, faced an even more difficult
task: to brand a patented ingredient, the sugar substitute aspartame.13 The
brand had to be strong enough to survive the expiration of the patent in the
early 1990s.
Their strategy was to create a consumer-level brand name (drawing upon the
words “nutrition” and “sweet”) and symbol (the familiar swirl) and establish
it so firmly that consumers will prefer products with Nutrasweet over the
same products from a low-cost competitor. Although Nutrasweet has
advertised extensively, the cornerstone of the brand-creation effort has been
their insistence that each of the some 3,000 products that use Nutrasweet
display the brand name and symbol. The brand has been extremely successful
in the market: In 1989, only six years after its introduction, it had profits of
$180 million on sales of over $850 million.
Some fascinating questions emerge: How strong will the Nutrasweet brand be
in the face of cheap substitutes? What will Nutrasweet do to help retain
consumer loyalty? Can the firm repeat its success with its newest commodity,
the fat substitute Simplesse? Will a similar strategy work again?
If a brand is well positioned upon a key attribute in the product class (such
as service backup or technological superiority), competitors will find it hard
to attack. If they attempt a frontal assault by claiming superiority via that
dimension, there will be a credibility issue. It would be difficult for a
competing department store to make credible a claim that it has surpassed
Nordstrom on service. They may be forced to find another, perhaps inferior,
basis for competition. Thus, an association can be a barrier to competitors.
OTHER PROPRIETARY BRAND ASSETS
The last three brand-equity categories we have just discussed represent
customer perceptions and reactions to the brand; the first was the loyalty of
the customer base. The fifth category represents such other proprietary brand
assets as patents, trademarks, and channel relationships.
Brand assets will be most valuable if they inhibit or prevent competitors
from eroding a customer base and loyalty. These assets can take several
forms. For example, a trademark will protect brand equity from competitors
who might want to confuse customers by using a similar name, symbol, or
package. A patent, if strong and relevant to customer choice, can prevent
direct competition. A distribution channel can be controlled by a brand

because of a history of brand performance.
Assets, to be relevant, must be tied to the brand. If distribution is a basis
for brand equity, it needs to be based on a brand rather than on a firm (such as
P&G or Frito-Lay). The firm could not simply access the shelf space by
replacing one brand with another. If the value of a patent could easily be
transferred to another brand name, its contribution to brand equity would be
low. Similarly, if a set of store locations could be exploited using another
brand name, they would not contribute to brand equity.

WHAT IS THE VALUE OF A BRAND?
Developing approaches to placing a value on a brand is important for
several reasons. First, as a practical matter, since brands are bought and sold,
a value must be assessed by both buyers and sellers. Which approach makes
the most sense? Second, investments in brands in order to enhance brand
equity need to be justified, as there always are competing uses of funds. A
bottom-line justification is that the investment will enhance the value of the
brand. Thus, some “feel” for how a brand should be valued may help
managers address such decisions. Third, the valuation question provides
additional insight into the brand-equity concept.
What is the value of a brand name? Consider IBM, Boeing, Betty
Crocker, Ford, Weight Watchers, Bud, and Wells Fargo. What would happen
to those firms if they lost a brand name but retained the other assets
associated with the business? What would it cost in terms of expenditures to
avoid damage to their business if the name were lost? Would any expenditure
be capable of avoiding an erosion, perhaps permanent, to the business?
Black & Decker bought the GE small-appliance business for over $300
million, but only had the use of the GE name for three years. After going
through the effort to change the name, their conclusion was that they might
have been better off simply to enter the business without buying the GE line.
The cost to switch equity from GE to Black & Decker was as high as
developing a new line and establishing a new name. Clearly, the GE name
was an important part of the business.
At least five general approaches to assessing the value of brand equity
have been proposed. One is based on the price premium that the name can
support. The second is the impact of the name on customer preference. The
third looks at the replacement value of the brand. The fourth is based on the
stock price. The fifth focuses on the earning power of a brand. We shall now

consider these in the listed order.
PRICE PREMIUMS
GENERATED BY THE BRAND NAME
Brand equity assets such as name awareness, perceived quality,
associations, and loyalty all have the potential to provide a brand with a price
premium. The resulting extra revenue can be used (for example) to enhance
profits, or to reinvest in building more equity.
One approach to the measurement of a price premium attached to a brand
is simply to observe the price levels in the market. What are the differences,
and how are they associated with different brands? For example, what are the
price levels of comparable automobiles? How much are the different brands
depreciating each year? How responsive is the brand to a firm’s own price
changes, or to price changes of competitors?
Price premiums can also be measured through customer research.
Customers can be asked what they would pay for various features and
characteristics of a product (one characteristic would be the brand name).
Termed a dollarmetric scale, this survey device provides a direct measure of
the value of the brand name.
Using a variant of the dollarmetric measure, American Motors tested a car
(then called the Renault Premier) by showing an “unbadged” (unnamed)
model of it to customers and asking them what they would pay for it.14 The
same question was then asked with the car identified by various names. The
price was around $10,000 with no name, and about $3,000 more with the
Renault Premier name on it. When Chrysler bought American Motors the car
became the Chrysler Eagle Premier, and it was sold for a price close to the
level suggested by the study.
Additional insight is acquired by obtaining buyer-preference or purchaselikelihood measures for different price levels. In such a study, the resistance
of a buyer preference to price decreases of competition, and the
responsiveness to a brand’s own decrease in price, can be determined. A highequity brand will lose little share to a competitor’s lower price, and will gain
share when its own relative price is decreased (up to a point).
Trade-off (conjoint) analysis is still another approach. Here, respondents
are asked to make trade-off judgments about brand attributes. For example,
suppose that the attributes of a computer included on-site service (supplied vs.
not supplied), price ($3,200 vs. $3,700) and name (Compaq vs. Circle). A
respondent would prefer on-site service, a low price, and an established brand
name. To determine the relative value of each, the respondent would be asked
to choose between:
Compaq at $3,700 vs. Circle at $3,200

Service at $3,700 vs. No Service at $3,200
Compaq with No Service vs. Circle with Service
The output of trade-off analysis would be a dollar value associated with
each attribute alternative. The dollar value of the brand name would thus be
created in the context of making judgments relative to other relevant attributes
of the product class.
Given that a price premium can be obtained, the value of the brand name
in a given year would be that price differential multiplied by the unit sales
volume. Discounting these cash flows over a reasonable time horizon would
provide one approach to valuing the brand.
BRAND NAME AND CUSTOMER PREFERENCE
Considering the price premium earned by a brand may not be the best way
to quantify brand equity especially for product classes like cigarettes and air
travel where prices are fairly similar. An alternative is to consider the impact
of the brand name upon the customer evaluation of the brand as measured by
preference, attitude, or intent to purchase. What does the brand name do to the
evaluation?
One study showed that the approval rating for Kellogg’s Corn Flakes went
from 47% to 59% when the consumers were told the identity of the brand
name.15 And when Armstrong tested a line of tiles against comparable
products, the Armstrong name resulted in the preference going from 50-50 to
90-10. The issue often is how much the brand name provides to market share
and brand loyalty.
The value of the brand would then be the marginal value of the extra sales
(or market share) that the brand name supports. Suppose, for example, it was
believed that sales would be 30% less if the brand name was discarded, or
sales would decline 30% over a five-year period if the advertising support for
the name was eliminated. The profits on the lost marginal sales would
represent the value of the brand.
The size of any price premium and the preference rating of a brand can
both be measured and tracked over time using survey research. They can
become one basis of tracking brand equity. However, this approach is static,
in that it looks at the current power of the brand—a view which does not
necessarily take into account the future impact of changes (such as
improvements in quality).
REPLACEMENT COST
Another perspective is the cost of establishing a comparable name and
business. Kidder Peabody estimates that it would cost from $75 million to
$100 million to launch a new consumer product, and that the chances of
success would be around 15%. If it was felt that it would cost $100 million to

develop and introduce a product and that the chance for success was 25%, on
average four products costing a total of $400 million would need to be
developed to ensure one winner. A firm should thus be willing to pay $400
million for an established brand with prospects comparable to those being
developed.
BRAND VALUE BASED
UPON STOCK PRICE MOVEMENTS
Another approach, suggested by finance theory and implemented by
University of Chicago professors Carol J. Simon and Mary W. Sullivan, is to
use stock price as a basis to evaluate the value of the brand equities of a
firm.16 The argument is that the stock market will adjust the price of a firm to
reflect future prospects of its brands.
The approach starts with the market value of the firm, which is a function
of the stock price and the number of shares. The replacement costs of the
tangible assets (such as plant and equipment, inventories and cash) are
subtracted. The balance, intangible assets, is apportioned into three
components: the value of brand equity, the value of nonbrand factors (such as
R&D and patents), and the value of industry factors (such as regulation and
concentration). Brand equity is assumed to be a function of the age of a brand
and its order of entry into the market (an older brand has more equity), the
cumulative advertising (advertising creates equity), and the current share of
industry advertising (current advertising share is related to positioning
advantages).
To estimate the model, the stock-market valuation of 638 firms (less the
value of their tangible assets) was related to the indicators of the three types
of intangible assets. The resulting estimates allowed an estimate of the brand
equities for each firm. The model operates at the level of a publically traded
firm and thus will be most valid and useful for a firm with a dominant brand.
However, it does have the attraction of being based upon the stock price,
which reflects future rather than past earnings, and generates some interesting
results.
Table 1-1 shows the average brand equity as a percent of firm tangible
asset value by industry, based upon 1985 data for 638 firms. As expected,
there is little in the way of brand-equity in industries such as metals and
primary building products, whereas firms in the apparel and tobacco
industries have substantial brand equities. Applying the model to specific
firms suggests that Dreyers Ice Cream (which uses the Edy’s name in Eastern
markets) and Smucker’s have high levels of brand equity relative to their
tangible assets and Pillsbury has a lower, but still very substantial, level.
An analysis of the soft drink industry using this model dramatically

demonstrates how marketing actions can affect brand equity. The introduction
of Diet Coke in July of 1982 caused brand equity for Coke to increase by 65%
while that of Pepsi was unchanged. In contrast, the introduction of the illfated New Coke in April of 1985 caused the Pepsi brand equity to increase by
45% (even though soft drinks are only 40% of sales at the Pepsi firm) while
the brand equity at Coke declined by 10%.
TABLE 1-1 Brand Equity as a Percent of Firm Tangible Assets
Industry
Apparel
Tobacco
Food products
Chemicals
Electric machinery
Transportation equipment
Primary metals
Stone, glass, and clay

Food Product Firms
Dreyers
Smucker
Brown-Forman
Kellogg’s
Sara Lee
General Mills
Pillsbury

Brand Equity
61
46
37
34
22
20
1
0

Brand Equity
151
126
82
61
57
52
30

BRAND VALUE BASED
UPON FUTURE EARNINGS
The best measure of brand equity would be the discounted present value
of future earnings attributable to brand-equity assets. The problem is how to
provide such an estimate.

One approach is to use the long-range plan of the brand. Simply discount
the profit stream that is projected. Such a plan should take into account brand
strengths and their impact upon the competitive environment. One firm that
uses the brand’s plan to provide a value for brand equity adjusts the
manufacturing costs to reflect the industry average rather than the actual
costs. The logic is that any above (or below) average efficiency should be
credited to manufacturing and not to brand equity.17
Another approach that can be used even when a brand profit plan is
unavailable or unsuitable is to estimate current earnings and apply an earnings
multiplier. The earnings estimate could be current earnings with any
extraordinary charges backed out. If the current earnings are not
representative because they reflect a down or up cycle, then some average of
the past few years might be more appropriate. If the earnings are negative or
low due to correctable problems, then an estimate based upon industry norms
of profit as a percent of sales might be useful.
The earnings multiplier provides a way to estimate and place a value upon
future earnings. To obtain a suitable earnings multiplier range, the historical
price earnings (P/E) multipliers of firms in the involved industry or in similar
industries should be examined. For example, a multiplier range for a brand
might be 7 to 12 or 16 to 25 depending upon the industry.
The use of an industry-based P/E ratio provides a judgment that
stockmarket investors have placed upon the industry prospects—its growth
potential, the future competitive intensity from existing and potential
competitors, and the threat of substitute products. The question remains,
which P/E multiplier within the identified range should be used for the brand?
To determine the actual multiplier value within that range, an estimate of
the competitive advantage of the brand is needed. Will the brand earnings
strengthen over time and generally be above the industry average, or will they
weaken and be below average? The estimate should be based upon a weighted
average of an appraisal of the brand on each of the five dimensions of brand
equity.
APPRAISING BRAND ASSETS
An appraisal of the brand upon the five dimensions involves addressing
and obtaining answers to questions such as the following:
Brand Loyalty. What are the brand-loyalty levels by segment? Are
customers satisfied? What do “exit interviews” suggest? Why are customers
leaving? What is causing dissatisfaction? What do customers say are their
problems with buying or using the brand? What are the marketshare and sales
trends?
Awareness. How valuable an asset is brand awareness in this market?

What brand awareness level exists as compared to that of competitors? What
are the trends? Is the brand being considered? Is brand awareness the
problem? What could be done to improve brand awareness?
Perceived Quality. What drives perceived quality? What is important to
the customer? What signals quality? Is perceived quality valued—or is the
market moving toward a commodity business? Are prices and margins
eroding? If so, can the movement be slowed or reversed? How do competitors
stack up with respect to preceived quality? Are there any changes? In blinduse tests, what is our brand name worth? Has it changed over time?
Brand Associations. What mental image, if any, does the brand stimulate?
Is that image a competitive advantage? Is there a slogan or symbol that is a
differentiating asset? How are the brand and its competitors positioned?
Evaluate each position with respect to its value/relevance to customers and
how protected/vulnerable it is to competitors: Which position is the most
valuable and protected? What does the brand mean? What are its strongest
associations?
Should the Value of a Brand
Be Reported to Shareholders?
A case can be made that the brand value should be placed on the balance
sheet or at least reported to shareholders as part of a firm’s financial report. In
fact, several British firms have added brand equity to the balance sheet. For
example, in 1988 Ranks Hovis McDougall decided to put a balance sheet
value of $1.2 billion on its 60 brands. First, such an intangible asset can easily
exceed in value that of tangible assets which are scrupulously reported and
affect shareholder’s valuation of firms. Second, reported brand equity can
focus attention upon intangible assets and thus make it easier to justify brand
building activities that are likely to pay off in the long term. Without such
information, shareholders must rely upon short-term financials.
The major difficulty involves a question of whether any valuation of brand
equity can be both objective and verifiable. Unless brand valuation can be
defended, it will not be helpful and can result in legal liability. It is no
coincidence that in England, where brand value has been placed upon the
balance sheet, there is a less litigious environment.
Other Brand Assets. Are sustainable competitive advantages attached to
the brand name that are not reflected in the other four equity dimensions? Is
there a patent or trademark that is important? Are there channel relationships
that provide barriers to competitors?
ESTIMATING A MULTIPLIER

In addition to an appraisal of brand strength, it is important to know the
importance/relevance of that strength in the market, the firm’s ability to
exploit it, and the commitment to protecting it.
The various dimensions of brand equity are not equally important in all
markets. The need is to determine their relative value. Which dimensions
represent, or could represent, a sustainable competitive advantage that
matters? Do awareness levels explain the relative success of competitors? Or
is there awareness parity among the relevant competitors? Perceived quality
may be critical in a cleaning product or high-technology device, but in a
mature market where it is difficult to convince customers that brands differ, it
might be of less consequence.
Another issue is whether a brand asset such as a strong customer base is
being, or will be, exploited. A brand asset will have little value if it is not
used. Brand loyalty will not generate value by itself. Programs are needed to
increase satisfaction and switching costs—to make sure that the customer
base is protected so that the costs of regaining customers will not have to be
incurred. A perceived quality advantage should result in either a price
premium or a perceived value advantage. Programs will be needed to make
sure that the market does not become a commodity area that weakens the
value of a perceived quality advantage.
Finally, the brand asset needs to be protected. The exploitation of
perceived quality, for example, may be short-lived if programs are not in
place to maintain the perceived quality level.
Thus, a relatively high multiplier will be appropriate when there is
strength in the more important asset categories, and when that strength is both
exploited and protected. The multiplier will be lower when strength in the key
asset areas is lacking, or when strengths are not being either protected or
exploited.
TWO QUALIFICATIONS
The evaluation of brand equity needs to deal with two problems: the
evaluation of other firm assets, and the value of brand extensions.
First, some part of the discounted present value of a business is due to
such tangible assets as working capital, inventory, buildings, and equipment.
What portion should be so attributed? One argument is that such assets are
book assets that are being depreciated, and their depreciation charge times an
earnings multiplier will reflect their asset value. Another tact would be to
focus upon cash flow instead of earnings, and provide an estimate of such
assets using book value or market value. This estimate would then be
subtracted from the estimate of discounted future earnings.
A second problem is to estimate the earnings streams from brand

extensions (the use of the brand name to enter new product classes— for
example, Kellogg’s bread products, or Hershey s ice cream). Usually, the
value of potential brand extensions will have to be estimated separately.
The extension value will depend upon the attractiveness of market area of
any proposed extension, its growth and competitive intensity, and the strength
of the extension. The extension strength will be a function of the relevance of
the brand association and perceived quality, the extent to which it could
translate into a sustainable competitive advantage, and the extent to which the
brand will fit the extension. Chapter 9 will elaborate.

ISSUES IN MANAGING BRAND EQUITY
The introduction of the brand-equity concept raises a host of practical
issues about the management of a brand. An overview of some of these issues
will set the stage for the following chapters.
1. The bases of brand equity: On what should the brand equity be based?
What associations should form the basis of the positioning? How
important is awareness? Among which segments? Can barriers be
created to make it more difficult for competitors to dislodge loyal
customers?
2. Creating brand equity: How is brand equity created? What are the
driving determinants? What is the role in any given context of the name,
the channel, the advertising, the spokesperson, and the package, and how
do they interrelate? As a practical matter, decisions on such elements
need to be made as brand equity is created or changed.
3. Managing brand equity: How should a brand be managed over time?
What actions will meaningfully affect the elements of equity—in
particular the associations and perceived loyalty? What is the “decay
rate” if supporting activities (such as advertising) are withdrawn? Often
a reduction of advertising results in no detectable drop in sales. Is there
damage to the equity if a reduction is prolonged? How can the impact of
a promotion or another marketing program be determined?
4. Forcasting the erosion of equity: How can erosion of brand equity, and
other future problems, be forecast? The danger is that by the time that
damage to the brand is recognized, it is too late. The cost of correcting a
problem can be extremely high relative to the cost of maintaining equity.
The forecasting issue is especially crucial in durables like automobiles,

where the time needed to replace a product can be as long as five years.
If a decline can be detected two years before the brand’s damage
becomes obvious, then the remedy can be more timely. A disaster such
as the Tylenol tampering case has the advantage that the threat to brand
equity, and the need to take action, are both obvious. More commonly, a
brand is eroded so slowly that it is difficult to generate a sense of
urgency.
5. The extension decision: To what products should the brand be extended?
How far can the brand be extended before brand equity is affected? Of
particular concern is the vertical brand extension: Can an upscale version
of the brand be marketed? If so, will there be spillover impact upon the
brand name? Do the Earnest and Julio Gallo varietals help the basic
Gallo line? What about the temptation to exploit the brand by putting the
name on a downscale product? How can the extent of damage to brand
equity be predicted? Will the new associations of an extension be helpful
or harmful?
6. Creating new names: The investment in a new brand name (an
alternative to a brand extension) will generate a name with a new set of
associations which can provide a platform for another growth stream.
What are the trade-offs between these alternatives? Under what
circumstances should the one be preferred over the other? How many
brand names can a business support?
7. Complex families of names and subnames: How should different levels
of brand-name families be managed? What mix of advertising should
Black & Decker place behind the Black & Decker name, the Space Saver
name that indicates a product subgroup, or the Black & Decker
Dustbuster? Should the recruiting effort of the U.S. government be
centered around the individual military branches, or should the U.S.
defense team be the focus? Delicate considerations of the vertical
relationships among brands and “subbrands” have to be made.
8. Brand-equity measurement: A basic question which underlies all these
issues is how to measure brand equity and the assets on which it is based.
If it can be conceptualized in a given context precisely enough to
measure and monitor it, the other problems become manageable. Clearly,
there are several approaches to brand equity and its measurement. The
need is to determine which is the most appropriate and to select a
measurement method.
9. Evaluating brand equity and its component assets: A pressing related
issue is how to value a brand. Given that there is a market for brands, it
is of enormous practical value to actually provide methods to estimate

that value. Of even more importance is to place a value upon the
underlying assets (such as awareness and perceived quality). The key to
justifying investment in building such assets is to be able to estimate the
value of such activities. Although some progress has been made, this
area remains a signficant challenge for marketing professionals.

THE PLAN OF THE BOOK
This book has several objectives. One is to define and illustrate brand
equity, providing a structure which will help managers see more clearly how
brand equity provides value. Another is to document research findings and
illustrative examples that demonstrate that value has emerged (or has been
lost) from marketing decisions or environmental events that have enhanced
(or damaged) the brand. A third objective is to discuss how brand equity
should be managed. How should it be created, maintained, and protected?
How should it be exploited? A fourth objective is to raise questions and
suggest issues that should be addressed by thoughtful managers who are
trying to think strategically.
The next chapter will discuss the brand loyalty of the customer base and
its link to brand equity. Chapters 3 and 4 cover brand awareness and
perceived quality. Chapter 5 introduces the concept of associations and
positioning. Methods to measure associations are covered in Chapter 6.
Selecting, creating, and maintaining associations is the subject of Chapter 7.
Clearly the management of associations, covering three chapters, is both
important and complex.
The brand is identified by the name, and often by a symbol and a slogan
as well. Chapter 8 discusses these indicators and their selection. Brand
extensions—the good, the bad, and the ugly—is the topic of Chapter 9.
Chapter 10 presents methods to revitalize a tired brand, to breathe new life
into it and its context; and the end game—how to allow a brand a graceful
decline and, if needed, death. Chapter 11 contains some thoughts about global
brands, a recap of some major themes of the book, and the presentation of an
overall “model” of brand equity.

2
Brand Loyalty

·
You have to have a brand become a friend.
Fred PosnerN W Ayer
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O! I have lost my reputation. I
have lost the immortal part of myself and what remains is bestial.
William Shakespeare

THE MICROPRO STORY
In 1979, MicroPro introduced a word-processing program called
WordStar to run on CP/M, the standard operating system of the day for
personal computers.1 The first reliable, full-featured word-processing
program, WordStar came to dominate the market for serious word-processing
users. With a clever use of pairs of keystrokes, a touch typist could do a wide
variety of word-processing tasks extremely quickly.
MicroPro’s sales exploded:
1.5 million in 1980
4.4 million in 1981
22.3 million in 1982
43.8 million in 1983
66.9 million in 1984
In 1981, IBM entered the personal computer business, thereby
legitimatizing both the product and its supporting word-processing programs

for business use. The IBM computer and its operating system, MS-DOS,
became the new de facto industry standard. The following year, MicroPro
adapted WordStar to MS-DOS. However, in doing so they did not really
utilize the 10 function keys that were a main attribute of the new computer,
choosing instead to retain the use of their multi-keystroke command structure.
A true touch typist had little interest in the new function keys, but then the
emerging business user often was not a skilled touch typist anyway, and was
attracted to the power of the function keys.
The entry of IBM brought dozens of competitors, the most serious of
which turned out to be WordPerfect, introduced in 1982, and Microsoft Word,
which appeared in 1983. Both offered several advances, including the full use
of function keys. MicroPro responded with WordStar Release 3.3, which
largely closed the gap. However, it was to be the last release for four years in
a field which saw continuous refinement of programs in response to
competitive software innovations and hardware improvement.
MICROPRO’S FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
In 1983, MicroPro literally dominated the market, and (more importantly)
by early 1984 had an installed base of over 800,000 WordStar users. Because
there are large switching costs in word processing, and because new buyers
rely heavily upon colleagues and friends who are “knowledgeable,” the value
of the installed base is substantial. However, in the context of a rapidly
growing industry, MicroPro’s sales fell to $42.6 million in 1985 and then
remained flat through 1990. Much more importantly, market share fell
precipitously to 12.7% by 1987, and by late 1989 to under 5%. After earning
over $4 million in 1983 and nearly $6 million in 1984, earnings virtually
disappeared during the next three years (averaging well under $1 million per
year) and substantial losses followed (averaging over $4 million a year from
1988 to 1990). The stock price fell from over $10 in July of 1984 to under $1
in April of 1990, providing a company value of under $10 million.
During the same time frame WordPerfect, the upstart firm, went from zero
share in 1982 to over 30% at end of 1987, and during 1989 soared to over
70%. Although their stock is not traded, it holds a value of from $1 billion
(assuming profitability and price-earnings ratio at the industry average) to
over $2 billion (with the more likely assumption their profitability and priceearnings ratio are comparable to that of Microsoft).
Of course, literally hundreds of other word-processing firms did not
survive, largely because they could not get off the ground; they could not get
enough distribution and sales to be viable. However, they also never had the
installed base that WordStar enjoyed.
WHY DID WORDSTAR LOSE IT?

WordStar lost position in large part because it turned its back upon its
installed base. First, it failed to adequately provide support for existing
customers. Second, the major follow-on product was not backwardcompatible with the original WordStar, and in fact competed with it.
As late as 1987, MicroPro was deservedly known as being indifferent to
customers, who would call with problems and not be able to get through. The
firm had the industry nickname “MicroPro-please-hold.” Further, the calls
were at the customers’ expense. Worse, when customers did get through, they
often were referred to their dealer—even though the dealer might be either
unwilling or unable to help. Understandably, the customer frustration level
was high.
By contrast, WordPerfect developed an unlimited-access, toll-free, phonein advisory service which became an important point of distinction in part
because of the MicroPro legacy. One writer noted that the WordPerfect
systems provided a no-questions-asked, all-questions-answered technical help
with a style and class that others lacked, and sarcastically concluded: “Paying
customers like the idea of a software vendor that answers the phone when
they call.”2 Figure 2-1 shows a WordPerfect ad that focuses upon their
customer support system.
In November of 1984, MicroPro started to ship WordStar 2000, which
was eagerly awaited by WordStar users who wanted to upgrade the program
they loved. Although WordStar 2000 was competitive with respect to other
features, it remained slow—and used more memory than WordStar. Worse, it
was not backward-compatible with the prior version: It involved learning a
new set of instructions. Further, WordStar touch typists now were forced to
use the function keys set apart from the keyboard.
In fact, WordStar 2000 proved to be the product that launched
WordPerfect, in that it virtually endorsed the kind of function-key processing
that WordPerfect (and Microsoft Word) had touted. More importantly,
WordStar users now knew that to have the most advanced features, they
would have to learn a new program. It was no easier to switch to WordStar
2000 than to Wordperfect or Microsoft Word.

FIGURE 2-1 Supporting the Customer
Courtesy of WordPerfect Corporation.
EFFORTS TO GAIN BACK LOYALTY
In early 1986 a second release of WordStar 2000 corrected many of its
problems and made it a more competitive product, but it still was not
backward-compatible with WordStar—nor was the November 1987 Release 3
of WordStar 2000.
Meanwhile (late in 1986), MicroPro had bought Newstar Software, which
had developed a “modern WordStar” program, for $3.1 million. The program
was introduced in February of 1987 as WordStar Professional Release 4. At
long last Wordstar users had an update—but it was years late. It was followed
in August of 1988 by WordStar Professional Release 5, which got favorable
reviews in the trade press, and by Release 5.5 in 1989.
There were, however, a pair of serious problems with the two product
lines Wordstar Professional and Wordstar 2000. First, they competed with
each other: Both basically were after the same market, with similar features.
Second, the double offering was confusing to customers—and even to
MicroPro’s salespeople and retail representatives. Which one should a
customer select? There was no obvious answer.
The confusion between the two was not helped by the advertising. In
1987, WordStar Professional had a “Word Stars on WordStar” campaign,

featuring testimonials from such famous users as Tom Wolfe. However, the
campaign broke just after WordStar 2000 Release 3 was introduced!
In 1989, MicroPro made a belated effort to turn it all around. WordStar
2000 was de-emphasized in favor of WordStar Professional—the program
that was backward-compatible with the installed base of 1.9 million WordStar
users. The WordStar Professional was positioned as a productivity tool for
touch typists who could exploit the unique control-key commands. A
responsive telephone customer back-up system was installed, and “WordStar
News,” a customer newsletter which provided additional support, first
appeared. WordStar graphics were sharpened up. A “Lost Stars Come Home
upgrade, targeted at prior WordStar users, was presented. And (hardly the
least important) a direct sales force, bypassing the national distributors who
might have helped them stay removed from their customers, was developed. It
appears that WordStar will survive, but as a bit player in a market they once
commanded.
OBSERVATIONS
We have seen that an enormous asset that WordStar had in 1984 was its
dominant installed base, in an industry in which there are high switching costs
and customer world-of-mouth is pivotal. And that WordStar, by inadequately
supporting its product and going to the WordStar 2000, turned its back on this
asset—the result being an incredible opportunity that competitors (the makers
of WordPerfect and Microsoft Word) exploited.
It is not impossible to create a new model that obsoletes the old one,
particularly if an established name can be used. In the mid-1960s, IBM came
out with the System 360, a completely new line that entirely replaced the old
one. However, there were two sharp distinctions between IBM then, and
WordStar back in 1984. First, unlike the WordStar 2000, the IBM 360 was a
superior state-of-the-art product. Second, IBM had a loyal customer base
which had confidence that IBM would back up the product. In contrast
WordStar, instead of a reservoir of good will, had a substantial customer
group unhappy with MicroPro’s attitude.

BRAND LOYALTY
The brand loyalty of the customer base is often the core of a brand’s
equity. If customers are indifferent to the brand and, in fact, buy with respect
to features, price, and convenience with little concern to the brand name, there
is likely little equity. If, on the other hand, they continue to purchase the brand

even in the face of competitors with superior features, price, and convenience,
substantial value exists in the brand and perhaps in its symbol and slogans.
Brand loyalty, long a central construct in marketing, is a measure of the
attachment that a customer has to a brand. It reflects how likely a customer
will be to switch to another brand, especially when that brand makes a
change, either in price or in product features. As brand loyalty increases, the
vulnerability of the customer base to competitive action is reduced. It is one
indicator of brand equity which is demonstrably linked to future profits, since
brand loyalty directly translates into future sales.
LEVELS OF BRAND LOYALTY
There are several levels of loyalty as Figure 2-2 suggests. Each level
represents a different marketing challenge and a different type of asset to
manage and exploit. All may not be represented in a specific product class or
market.
The bottom loyalty level is the nonloyal buyer who is completely
indifferent to the brand—each brand is perceived to be adequate and the brand
name plays little role in the purchase decision. Whatever is on sale or
convenient is preferred. This buyer might be termed a switcher or price buyer.

FIGURE 2-2 The Loyalty Pyramid
The second level includes buyers who are satisfied with the product or at
least not dissatisfied. Basically, there is no dimension of dissatisfaction that is

sufficient to stimulate a change especially if that change involves effort.
These buyers might be termed habitual buyers. Such segments can be
vulnerable to competitors that can create a visible benefit to switching.
However, they can be difficult to reach since there is no reason for them to be
on the lookout for alternatives.
The third level consists of those who are also satisfied and, in addition,
have switching costs—costs in time, money, or performance risk associated
with switching. Perhaps they have invested in learning a system associated
with a brand, as in the MicroPro case. Or perhaps there is a risk that another
brand may not function as well in a particular use context. To attract these
buyers, competitors need to overcome the switching costs by offering an
inducement to switch or by offering a benefit large enough to compensate.
This group might be called switching-cost loyal.
On the fourth level we find those that truly like the brand. Their
preference may be based upon an association such as a symbol, a set of use
experiences, or a high perceived quality. However, liking is often a general
feeling that cannot be closely traced to anything specific; it has a life of its
own. People are not always able to identify why they like something (or
someone), especially if the relationship has been a long one. Sometimes just
the fact that there has been a long-term relationship can create a powerful
affect even in the absence of a friendly symbol or other identifiable
contributor to liking. Segments at this fourth level might be termed friends of
the brand because there is an emotional/ feeling attachment.
The top level are committed customers. They have a pride of discovering
and/or being users of a brand. The brand is very important to them either
functionally or as an expression of who they are. Their confidence is such that
they will recommend the brand to others. The value of the committed
customer is not so much the business he or she generates but, rather, the
impact upon others and upon the market itself.
The ultimate committed customer is the Harley Davidson rider who wears
the Harley symbol as a tattoo, the Macintosh user who attends shows and will
spend considerable effort to insure that an acquaintance does not buy IBM
and forego the pleasure of the user-friendly Macintosh, or the Beetle owner of
the 1960s who flaunted the funkiness of the car. A brand that has a substantial
group of extremely involved and committed customers might be termed a
charismatic brand. Not all brands should aspire to be charismatic, of course,
but when a Macintosh, NEXT, Beetle, or Harley does achieve that aura, there
can be a big payoff.
These five levels are stylized; they do not always appear in the pure form
and others could be conceptualized. For example, there will be customers who

will appear to have some combination of these levels—i.e., buyers who like
the brand and have switching costs. Others may have profiles somewhat
different from those represented—i.e., those who are dissatisfied but have
sufficient switching costs to continue buying the brand in spite of being
dissatisfied. These five levels do, however, provide a feeling for the variety of
forms that loyalty can take and how it impacts upon brand equity.
BRAND LOYALTY AS ONE BASIS OF BRAND EQUITY
A set of habitual buyers has considerable value because they represent a
revenue stream that can go forward for a long time. The attrition rate for those
with stronger levels of loyalty will be lower, causing their value to be higher.
If a relationship between loyalty and the frequency of buying a brand can be
estimated, the value of a change in brand loyalty can be estimated. A
conceptual approach to providing such an estimate is discussed at the close of
the chapter.
Brand loyalty is qualitatively different from the other major dimensions of
brand equity in that it is tied more closely to the use experience. Brand loyalty
cannot exist without prior purchase and use experience. In contrast,
awareness, associations, and perceived quality are characteristics of many
brands that a person has never used.
Brand loyalty is a basis of brand equity that is created by many factors,
chief among them being the use experience. However, loyalty is influenced in
part by the other major dimensions of brand equity, awareness, associations,
and perceived quality. In some cases, loyalty could arise largely from a
brand’s perceived quality or attribute associations. However, it is not always
explained by these three factors. In many instances it occurs quite
independent of them and, in others, the nature of the relationship is unclear. It
is very possible to like and be loyal to something with low perceived quality
(e.g., McDonald’s) or dislike something with high perceived quality (e. g., a
Japanese car). Thus, brand loyalty provides an important basis of equity that
is sufficiently distinct from the other dimensions.
Perrier’s Bubble Burst
Perrier developed a special niche during the 1980s.3 With its distinctive
bottle, naturally sparkling water, and remarkable cache, Perrier enjoyed
intense loyalty especially in the restaurant market. In 1989, it held nearly 50%
of the market for bottled water in the face of intensive marketing efforts by a
host of new entrées. For many, Perrier was bottled water.
In February of 1990, Perrier recalled its product worldwide after it was found
to be contaminated by traces of benzene, a suspected carcinogen. Off the
shelves for over five months, the effect was devastating—its share by late

1990 had dropped to under 20% even with aggressive price promotions.
The Perrier image was tainted by the realization that its “natural water”
(“Earth’s First Soft Drink”) may not be so premium, the use of price
promotions to attempt to regain distribution and customers, and the fact that it
was no longer stocked in the finest restaurants and bars.
However, the biggest factor was that the habit of ordering Perrier had been
broken. A large part of the Perrier success was the loyalty of its installed base.
Many customers simply always ordered Perrier—never just bottled water
(Perrier was like Kleenex—it represented the product to many). When the
supply was interrupted, by necessity customers had to sample other brands.
They found that they were as good or better than Perrier. Because Perrier had
little real product advantages, such a break in supply disrupted its customer
base. The bubble had burst. Perrier may never bounce back.
In fact, all the brand equity dimensions have causal interrelationships.
Perceived quality, for example, will in part be based upon associations and
even awareness (a visible brand might be considered more able to provide
quality). An association with a symbol, for example, might affect awareness.
Thus, there is no claim that the four major dimensions of brand equity are
independent.
A key premise is that the loyalty is to the brand—that it is not possible to
transfer it to another name and symbol without spending substantial amounts
of money and forgoing significant sales and profits. If the loyalty is to a
product rather than the brand, equity would not exist. Buying a commodity
like oil or wheat rarely involves loyalty to the product itself, although the
surrounding service may be attached to a brand and it could engender
considerable loyalty.
A customer base can too easily be taken for granted when the interest is in
short-term sales rather than in building and maintaining equity. The focus is
often upon faceless sales statistics to be analyzed and controlled rather than
on the people and organizations who are the customers. As a result, brand
loyalty often is treated with benign neglect, and is neither nurtured nor
exploited. Considering brand loyalty is a key, core bases of brand equity
should help a firm treat customers as the brand assets that they are.

MEASURING BRAND LOYALTY
To more clearly understand brand loyalty and its management, it is useful

to consider approaches to its measurement. A consideration of several
measurement tacks will provide additional insights into its scope and nuances
as well as provide a practical tool in using the construct and linking it to
profitability. One approach is to consider actual behavior. Other approaches
are based upon the loyalty constructs of switching costs, satisfaction, liking,
and commitment.
BEHAVIOR MEASURES
A direct way to determine loyalty, especially habitual behavior, is to
consider actual purchase patterns. Among the measures that can be used are:
Repurchase rates: What percent of Oldsmobile owners purchase an
Oldsmobile on their next car purchase?
Percent of purchases: Of the last five purchases made by a customer, what
percent went to each brand purchased?
Number of brands purchased: What percent of coffee buyers bought only
a single brand? Two brands? Three brands?
The loyalty of customers can vary widely among some product classes,
depending upon the number of competing brands and the nature of the
product. The percentage of users buying only one brand is over 80% for
products like salt, cooking spray, waxed paper, and pet shampoos, and under
40% for gasoline, tires, canned vegetables, and garbage bags.4
Behavior data, although objective, has limitations. It may be inconvenient
or expensive to obtain, and provides only limited diagnostics about the future.
Further, using behavior data, it can be difficult to discriminate between or
among those who actually switched brands and the purchases of multiple
brands by different members of a family (or by different units in an
organization). Thus, an apparent switch from IBM to Compaq could be
simply because the one group in an organization is loyal to IBM, and another
to Compaq.
SWITCHING COSTS
An analysis of switching costs can provide insight into the extent to which
switching costs provide a basis for brand loyalty. If it is very expensive or
risky for a firm or a consumer to change suppliers, then the attribution rate
from the customer base will be lower.
The most obvious type of switching cost is an investment in a product or
system. When a firm buys a computer system, the hardware investment is
only part of the investment involved. They have to also invest in software,
and in training people. Thus, when an industry standard such as IBM DOS
becomes entrenched, it is hard to be dislodged by, for example, Apple or
NEXT. The firm would have to reinvest in software and training, a process
which would cost in time and productivity as well as money.

Another type of switching cost is the risk of change. If the current system
works, even if there are problems, there is always the risk that a new system
will be worse. A consumer who has a relationship with a particular hospital
and doctor may be reluctant, even when unhappy, to try unknowns. There is a
reluctance to fix something that is not demonstrably broken. Operationally,
customers might be queried to see what risks are associated with change. A
lack of awareness of certain risks in changing from AT&T to MCI, for
example, might suggest the need for a communication effort.
A business should value the switching costs that it enjoys. WordStar, of
course, did not follow that maxim. Further, it should work to increase the
dependence of the customer upon its product or service.
MEASURING SATISFACTION
A key diagnostic to every level of brand loyalty is the measurement of
satisfaction and, perhaps more important, dissatisfaction. What problems are
customers having? What are the sources of irritation? Why are some
customers switching? What are the precipitating reasons? A key premise of
the second and third levels of loyalty is that the dissatisfaction is absent or
low enough to avoid precipitating a decision to switch.
It is important that any measure of satisfaction be current, representative,
and sensitive. Asking users of a service to return cards on which they can
check whether the service (such as courtesy on the phone) is usually
satisfactory is neither representative nor sensitive. By such measures, the
firms in the insurance industry (with 95% + approval) looked good just prior
to the passing of Proposition 103 which mandated a 20% reduction in
insurance rates in California. Clearly, there was an enormous level of
resentment and frustration among customers which was not reflected in the
surveyed measures of satisfaction that were used.
LIKING OF THE BRAND
The fourth loyalty level involves liking. Do the customers “like” the firm?
Are there feelings of respect or friendship toward the firm or brand? Is there a
feeling of warmth toward the brand? A positive affect can result in resistance
to competitive entries. It can be much harder to compete against a general
feeling of liking rather than a specific feature.
General overall liking can be scaled in a variety of ways, such as:
Liking
Respect
Friendship
Trust
The concept is that there is a general liking or affect which is distinct from
specific attributes that underlie it. People simply like a brand, and this liking

cannot be explained completely by their perceptions and beliefs about the
brand’s attributes. It is rather reflected by general statements of liking, such as
those listed above. The concept of reliability may, in some cases, represent a
specific attribute. However, it also is often highly correlated with general
affect.
Another measure of liking is reflected in the additional price that
customers would be willing to pay to obtain their brand and the price
advantage that competitors would have to generate before they could attract a
loyal buyer. Several approaches to estimating the price premium that the
brand name can support were discussed in Chapter 1. The simplest, the
dollarmetric, asks how much a customer would pay to get his or her preferred
brand.
COMMITMENT
The strongest brands, the ones with extremely high equity, will have a
large number of committed customers. When a substantial commitment level
exists, it can be relatively easy to detect because it usually manifests itself in
many ways. One key indicator is the amount of interaction and
communication that is involved with the product. Is it something that the
customer likes to talk about with others? Does he or she not only recommend
the product but tell others why they should buy it? Another is the extent to
which the brand is important to a person in terms of his or her activities and
personality. Is it particularly useful or enjoyable to use?

THE STRATEGIC VALUE OF BRAND LOYALTY
The brand loyalty of existing customers represents a strategic asset that, if
properly managed and exploited, has the potential to provide value in several
ways as Figure 2-3 suggests.
REDUCED MARKETING COSTS
A set of customers with brand loyalty reduces the marketing costs of
doing business. It is simply much less costly to retain customers than to get
new ones. Because potential new customers usually lack motivation to change
from their current brands, they will be expensive to contact, in part because
they are not making an effort to locate brand alternatives. Even when they are
exposed to alternatives, they will often need a substantial reason to risk
buying and using another brand. A common mistake—attempting to grow by
attracting new customers while neglecting existing ones—will be discussed at
the close of this chapter.

FIGURE 2-3 The Value of Brand Loyalty
Existing customers, by contrast, usually are relatively easy to hold if they
are not dissatisfied. The familiar is comfortable and reassuring. It is usually
far less costly to keep existing customers happy, to reduce the reasons to
change, than to find new ones. Of course, the higher the loyalty, the easier it is
to keep customers happy. Yet, customers will leave, especially if their
problems and concerns are not addressed. The challenge is to reduce this
flow.
Loyalty of existing customers represents a substantial entry barrier to
competitors. Entering a market in which existing customers are loyal or even
satisfied with an established brand, and must be enticed to switch, can require
excessive resources. The profit potential for the entrant is thus reduced. For
the barrier to be effective, potential competitors must know about it; they
cannot be allowed to entertain the delusion that customers are vulnerable.
Thus, signals of strong customer loyalty which can be sent to competitors,
such as advertisements about documented customer loyalty or product quality,
can be useful.
TRADE LEVERAGE
Brand loyalty provides trade leverage. Strong loyalty toward brands like
Nabisco Premium Saltines, Cheerios, or Tide will ensure preferred shelf space
because stores know that customers will have such brands on their shopping
list. At the extreme, brand loyalty may dominate store choice decisions.
Unless a supermarket, for example, carries brands like Weight Watchers
frozen dinners, Paul Newman’s salad dressing, Asahi Super Dry beer, or Grey
Poupon mustard, some customers will switch stores. Trade leverage is
particularly important when introducing new sizes, new varieties, variations,
or brand extensions.
ATTRACTING NEW CUSTOMERS
A customer base with segments that are satisfied and others that like the
brand can provide assurance to a prospective customer, especially when the
purchase is somewhat risky. A purchase will thus not represent an

adventuresome thrust away from the crowd. The old phrase that “You won’t
get fired for buying IBM” is largely based upon this logic. Especially in
product areas that are new or otherwise risky, the acceptance of the brand by a
group of existing customers can be an effective message, a way to exploit the
installed base. Using existing customers to sell new customers rarely happens
automatically; it usually takes an explicit program.
A relatively large satisfied customer base provides an image of the brand
as an accepted, successful product which will be around and will be able to
afford service backup and product improvements. In many businesses where
follow-on service and product support are important, such as computers and
automobiles, two of the main concerns often are whether the firm is healthy
and committed enough to be around when it is needed, and whether its
products are accepted. For example, Dell computer, a mail-order computer
firm, in 1989 advertised an installed base of 100,000 customers (including
over 50% of the Fortune 500 companies) to reassure prospective customers
wary of buying a mail-order computer.
Brand awareness can also be generated from the customer base. Existing
customers and dealers will enhance recognition merely by being there.
Friends and colleagues of users will become aware of the product just by
seeing it. Further, this type of exposure—actually seeing it “in action” or even
on a retailer’s shelf—will be much more vivid and have more impact than
only seeing an ad several times (unless the ad is highly unusual and effective).
Seeing a product being used by a friend will generate the kind of memory
links to the use context and the user that any advertisement would have great
difficulty in doing. Brand recall thus would be stronger. In selecting target
markets, one consideration should be their potential to create visibility and
awareness for the brand.
TIME TO RESPOND TO COMPETITIVE THREATS
Brand loyalty provides a firm with time to respond to competitive moves
—some breathing room. If a competitor develops a superior product, a loyal
following will allow the firm time needed for the product improvements to be
matched or neutralized. For example, some newly developed high-tech
markets have some customers who are attracted by the most advanced product
of the moment; there is little brand loyalty in this group. In contrast, loyal,
satisfied customers will not be looking for new products, and thus may not
learn of an advancement. Further, they will have little incentive to change
even if exposed to the new product. With a high level of brand loyalty, a firm
can allow itself the luxury of pursuing a less risky follower strategy.

MAINTAINING AND ENHANCING LOYALTY
In many situations it is difficult to get rid of customers—to get them to
move to a competitor. You literally have to work at it. For perhaps two
decades General Motors had, by many objective measures, inferior cars.
Logically its share of the U.S. market should have fallen to nearly zero—yet it
remained in the 33% range: One of every three cars sold domestically still
was a GM product. The fact is that customers do not like to change; you
almost have to beat some of them off with a baseball bat. Incredibly, some
firms (such as MicroPro) have done just about that.
Changing brands requires effort, especially if the decision involves
substantial investment or risk. Further, positive attitudes toward an incumbent
brand are likely to develop which will not only justify but enhance prior
decisions. People do not like to admit that they were wrong—it is much easier
to rationalize prior decisions. In truth an enormous inertia exists in consumer
choice. The familiar is comfortable and reassuring.
Consider the efforts of Coca-Cola to popularize “new” Coke. The large
and loyal group of “real” Coke users rebelled. They (even those who could
not tell the difference between “new” Coke, “old” Coke, and Pepsi in blindtaste tests) wanted their product back! And they ultimately carried the day:
The withdrawn original Coke formula reappeared—although this time it was
forced to bear the dubiously distinctive name Coke Classic.
The bottom line is that it should be easy to keep customers merely by
following some basic rules, as Figure 2-4 suggests.

FIGURE 2-4 Creating and Maintaining Brand Loyalty
TREAT THE CUSTOMER RIGHT
Tom Peters talks about the “secret” to the success of Maytag—they
deliver a washing machine that works—it washes clothes. Hardly an
unbelievable concept. The point is that a product or service that works—that

functions as expected—provides a basis for loyalty, a reason not to switch.
Again, customers need reasons to change. The key to keeping them often is
simply to avoid driving them away.
To get rid of customers, a business often actually has to be rude, uncaring,
unresponsive, and/or disrespectful. It should not be difficult to avoid such
behavior, yet customers experience it all the time. The goal, of course, is to
have the interaction be positive—to treat the customer as any person would
like to be treated: with respect.
Among the keys to ensuring a positive customer experience are training
and culture. In Japan, where a negative customer interaction is rare, the
training is intense and detailed, and the customer culture usually is very
strong. A bank teller will spend weeks learning and practicing exactly how to
respond to various customer contacts. Further, the bank’s culture would not
tolerate negative customer interaction.
STAY CLOSE TO THE CUSTOMER
The companies that have strong customer cultures find ways to stay close
to the customer. Even the top executives at IBM, for example, have account
contact and responsibility. Disneyland executives work in the Park in an “on
stage” capacity for two weeks each year. Worthington Steel sends its
production people to meet customers who are using the product, so they
realize that real people with real concerns are depending upon the quality.
Focus groups can be used to see and hear real customers voice concerns. Just
the act of encouraging customer contact can help send signals to both the
organization and the customers that the customer is valued.
MEASURE/MANAGE CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
Regular surveys of customer satisfaction/dissatisfaction are particularly
useful in understanding how customers feel and in adjusting products and
services. These surveys need to be timely, sensitive, and comprehensive, so
that the firm can learn why overall satisfaction is changing. If no change is
detected from period to period, perhaps the surveys either are being
conducted too frequently, or are too insensitive.
For customer satisfaction measures to have impact they need to be
integrated into day-to-day management. Marriott Hotels, for example, uses
weekly measures of guest satisfaction to identify current problems and
stimulate responsive programs. For example, the manager of the front desk
will be concerned with the measures associated with waiting time, with
checking in, and with checking out. The satisfaction instrument will prompt
detailed discussions of problems and possible responses.
One way to ensure that satisfaction surveys are used is to make them part
of the compensation system. Domino’s Pizza, for example, conducts weekly

phone surveys of customers measuring dimensions such as response time,
lumpiness of dough, freshness of pepperoni, and attitude of delivery people.
Indicators are developed for each outlet. A bonus pool is distributed monthly
based upon these measures. Such a system will elevate the satisfaction
measures so that operations will be affected.
CREATE SWITCHING COSTS
One way to create switching costs is to create a solution for a customer
problem that may involve redefining the business. Drug wholesaling once was
characterized by a host of distributors, each with a sales force negotiating
price. Then McKesson installed computer terminals for their drug retailers,
and basically provided them with inventory control and automated ordering
services. By doing this they created enormous switching costs for the retailer,
and transformed the entire drug wholesaling business.
Another approach is to reward loyalty directly. The airlines’ frequent-flyer
clubs have become a way to reward and keep customers. The concept has
been extended to other products. A program termed “The Great Payback”
provides customers of such brands as Post cereals, Weight Watchers entrees,
and Clorox with points that they can use to obtain merchandise in a Sears
store. Another system, termed the GiftLink Shoppers Reward, provides
buyers of products of Kraft, Campbell soup, Ocean Spray, and P&G with
merchandise from Samsonite, Sony, and others.
PROVIDE EXTRAS
It is often relatively easy to change customer behavior from tolerance to
enthusiasm just by providing a few extra unexpected services. A mint on a
pillow, an explanation of a procedure, or a sample from a bakery can really
make a good impression. A simple apology can have the potential to turn even
a disastrous situation into a tolerable one. Yet how many times has an
appropriate apology not been forthcoming in a customer contact?
Nordstrom’s department store is legendary for providing extra services not
afforded by its competition. A pianist, a full-service concierge, and a
shoeshine stand complete with telephone are among the extras. Even more
impressive are the salespeople who help customers throughout the store, often
write letters to customers, and go to extraordinary lengths to accommodate
customers’ needs. A business doesn’t have to try to be another Nordstrom’s,
but it can’t go wrong by following its example in certain respects.

SELLING OLD CUSTOMERS
INSTEAD OF NEW ONES

Perhaps the most common mistake that firms make is to attempt to grow
mainly by attracting new customers. Often, aggressive marketing programs
are involved. The problem is that new customers are almost always difficult
to attract. They simply may have little reason to consider moving from
another brand. Further, they may be expensive to contact—after all, they are
not generally making an effort to read ads for alternatives, or to contact
salespeople.
In contrast, there usually is an enormous payoff in retaining existing
customers, in part because retention programs are relatively inexpensive. If
the migration of existing customers to competitors can be reduced, growth
will naturally occur. New customers, even without much effort to attract
them, will appear, some influenced by existing customers. A customer base is
like a leaky bucket: Increasing the input may be more wasteful than patching
the leaks.
What is needed here is a reduction of dissatisfied customers’ motivation to
leave, and an increase in the switching costs of those who are satisfied. The
first step is to analyze irritations and problems causing people to switch
brands by contacting lost customers. They often represent the best source of
information about the dynamics of the customer base. Why did they leave?
Exactly what was the motivation, and what can be done to remove it? A
systematic program of exit interviews can aid in the detection of problems.
Too often a bank manager, for example, will know exactly how many new
accounts were opened last month, and perhaps why those new customers
selected his or her bank, but little or nothing about why existing customers
became dissatisfied and left.
An aggressive customer-retention program will move beyond removing
sources of discontent, to building switching costs by rewarding customers.
Waldenbooks, for example, developed a “preferred reader” program to reward
customers and create switching costs. A preferred reader has a card which
allows the member to:
Access a toll-free line, to order books by phone.
Save 10% on all purchases.
Earn a $5 coupon for each $100 spent.
Get instant check approval.
The program provides a strong incentive for a Waldenbook customer to
increase his or her loyalty toward Waldenbooks.

A CUSTOMER-RETENTION ANALYSIS
How should a customer-retention program be justified? Will it pay off in
terms of future profit streams? The answers to these and related problematical
questions are to be found in systematically analyzing customer retention.
One approach to the needed analysis is to estimate the relationship
between customer-retention levels and profitability.5 Given current levels of
annual retention as the base, how much would marginal annual profit change
if annual retention were increased or decreased by one, five, or ten percentage
points? Figure 2-5 illustrates. Over some range the dominant cost
consideration would be the variable cost involved. With only the variable cost
affected, there will be high leverage associated with affecting retention.
The annual profit achieved by a change in retention needs to be converted
into a net present value. Basically, the annual profit is projected into the
future, then discounted by both the firm’s cost of capital and the retention
rate. Thus, given a cost of capital of 15% and a retention rate of 90%, an
annual profit of $100 this year would be expected to deliver next year $100 ×
.85 (the cost of capital) × .90 (the retention rate), or $76.50.

FIGURE 2-5 Customer-Retention Analysis
One analysis showed that a 5% reduction in customer defections resulted
in dramatic increases in the profit stream for the average customer. The profit
increase depended upon the type of business.6 For auto-service firms, where
loyalty tends to be low, a 30% profit increase was estimated. It was 35% for
software. For industries with higher levels of loyalty like credit cards and
bank deposits, it was over 75%.

The hardest part of the analysis is to link a retention program to a change
in retention rates. What impact will any given program have upon retention?
At times judgment and experience, perhaps supported by market research, can
provide guidance, but usually some kind of market experiment is needed. To
judge its impact, try the program out on a subset of customers.
One associated problem is that, in most contexts, the decision to change
brands is so rare that retention becomes an insensitive measure, and it
becomes necessary to use measures such as satisfaction, dissatisfaction, and
the likelihood of a decision to change brands. The link between these
measures and retention then needs to be established, perhaps using past data
of changes in retention—either over time or over different customer units.
1. Who are your customers? Is the customer base being exploited to help
sell other customers by providing referrals, reassurance, or awareness?
2. What are the brand-loyalty levels by segment? Would alternative
methods to measure loyalty be helpful? Why are some low and some
high? Is there a program of “exit interviews” for those who are no longer
users of the brand?
3. What are the levels of satisfaction? Of dissatisfaction? What is causing
dissatisfaction? How is this changing over time?
4. Should you audit the existing programs to improve loyalty? Hire a
“consumer consultant” to determine how the consumer could use the
product or service better? Are there customer needs which remain
unmet? What sort of programs should be considered to improve loyalty
levels. What is the relationship between retention and profitability?

3
Brand Awareness

·
A good name is better than riches.
Cervantes Don Quixote
Ever since Mortons put a little girl in a yellow slicker and declared
“When it rains, it pours” no advertising person worth his or her salt has
had any excuse to think of a product as having parity with anything.
Malcolm MacDougalJordan Case McGrath

THE DATSUN-BECOMES-NISSAN STORY
In 1918 a Japanese automobile firm soon to become Nissan produced a
two-seat automobile they called Datson—“the son of Dat.” In part an
acronym, this name reflected the initials of the car’s three main financial
backers: Den, Aoyama, and Takeuchi.1 The name was later changed to
Datsun, in part to avoid confusion with a similar word which in Japanese
meant “to lose money.”
When the firm returned to making cars after World War II, they chose to
market them in Japan under the name Nissan. However, in 1961 the U.S. car
market was entered under the old Datsun name—perhaps in part to minimize
the Japanese relationship. By 1981 the name Datsun was used not only in the
U.S. but in many other countries, even though the firm was marketing its cars,
trucks, and other products under the name Nissan in Japan. In fact, the
awareness level of Nissan in the U.S. was only 2% as compared to 85% for

the Datsun name.
The decision to change the name from Datsun to Nissan in the U.S. was
announced in the fall of 1981. The rationale was that the name change would
help the pursuit of a global strategy. A single name worldwide would increase
the possibility that advertising campaigns, brochures, and promotional
materials could be used across countries and simplify product design and
manufacturing. Further, potential buyers would be exposed to the name and
product when traveling to other countries.
Industry observers, however, speculated that the most important
motivation was that a name change would help Nissan market stocks and
bonds in the U.S. They also presumed substantial ego involvement, since the
absence of the Nissan name in the U.S. surely rankled Nissan executives who
had seen Toyota and Honda become household words.
During the years 1982-1984 the change was implemented. The products
were changed gradually. On the 1982 models the Nissan name appeared on
the car’s front grille while the rear carried the Datsun name on the left and the
Nissan name on the right. Other Datsun models simply had a “by Nissan” tag
line. A lot of cars were thus sold with both names on them. In 1983 some
models were switched over completely. For example, with the 1983 model the
Datsun 510 was replaced by the Nissan Stanza. It wasn’t until the 1984 line
that the entire transition was complete.
Advertising was of course the cornerstone of the name-change effort. The
successful “Datsun: We Are Driven” campaign (exemplified by Figure 3-1),
which was initiated in 1977 and had a $60 million budget in 1981, was
dropped. In its place appeared a “Come Alive, Come and Drive: Major
Motion from Nissan” and “Major Motion: The Name Is Nissan” set of
campaigns supported by a budget which grew from $120 million in 1983 to
$180 million in 1987. Around $240 million was estimated spent on
advertising implementing the “The Name Is Nissan” campaign (illustrated by
Figure 3-2). The enlarged advertising budget was undoubtedly in part due to
the added mission: to register the new name. It seems very likely that “The
Name is Nissan” campaign with its name registration mission was
considerably less effective than the successful Datsun campaign it replaced.
The most incredible aspect of this story is the resilience of the Datsun
name. In the spring of 1988, a national survey found that the recognition and
esteem of the Datsun name was essentially the same as that of the Nissan
name, despite the virtual absence of the Datsun name from the commercial
scene for five years, and the money effort placed behind the Nissan name.2

FIGURE 3-1 “Datsun: We Are Driven”
Permission to reprint this advertisement granted by Nissan Motor
Corporation in U.S.A.

FIGURE 3-2 “The Name Is Nissan”
Permission to reprint this advertisement granted by Nissan Motor
Corporation in U.S.A.
The greatest potential cost of the name change was the bottomline effect
upon sales. Nissan saw its share drop from 5.9% in 1982 to 5.5% in 1983, and
to 4.5% in 1984—a loss of 1.4 share points as compared to the 0.9 share
points that Toyota lost during the same period. However, during that time
period there also were import restrictions, some quality problems with the
Nissan line, and growth in the Honda line. Thus it is impossible to determine
precisely to what extent the share drop was caused by the confusion of the
name change—yet that surely was a contributory factor of some notable
degree.
The cost to change the name could easily have exceeded half a billion
dollars, and probably was much more. First, it is known that the operational
costs, including changing signs at the 1,100 dealerships, cost around $30
million. Second, one may assume that $200 million was spent on advertising
between 1982 and 1984 because of the name change, and that another $50
million was wasted because the “Datsun, We Are Driven” campaign was
prematurely stopped. Finally, assume even that .3% market share was lost for
a three-year period because of buyer confusion. That loss alone would

represent many hundreds of millions of dollars in marginal profit. And the
cost would go much higher if the reasonable assumption were made that the
name change has had effects that have lingered into the nineties.

THE GE-BECOMES-BLACK & DECKER STORY
In contrast, Black & Decker, which in 1985 acquired GE’s smallappliance business, decided on an abrupt name change even though they had
the freedom to use the GE name for several years. They immediately changed
the name on the products, and supported the effort with an investment of $100
million of advertising—mainly to establish awareness of the new name. As a
result of the advertising, awareness of Black & Decker as a maker of small
kitchen appliances increased from 15% to 57% during the first 18 months. Yet
Black & Decker concluded that the name-awareness campaign took much
longer than they thought it would, and also was much more difficult and
expensive than planned.
Again, just as in the Nissan story, the most remarkable aspect of the Black
& Decker story is the persistence of the GE name. A random sample of 1,000
households was polled for a discount-store trade magazine in late 1988, more
than three years after the Black & Decker name change.3 Among other
questions, each respondent was asked which brand they would buy in a
variety of product categories. For housewares the percent of shoppers who
selected each brand were tabulated (as shown in Table 3-1)
A reasonable person might have forecast that the GE name would recede
after over three years of having no presence in the housewares category.
Incredibly, however, the GE name was preferred over four times more often
than that of Black & Decker.

WHAT IS BRAND AWARENESS?
Brand awareness is the ability of a potential buyer to recognize or recall
that a brand is a member of a certain product category. A link between
product class and brand is involved. Publicity about the Metropolitan
Museum does not necessarily help the awareness of Metropolitan Life.
Similarly, the use of a large balloon with the word Levi’s on it may make the
Levi name more salient, but it will not necessarily help improve name

awareness. However, if the balloon is shaped to resemble a pair of Levi’s 301
jeans, the link to the product is provided, and the balloon’s effectiveness at
creating awareness is enhanced.
Brand awareness involves a continuum ranging from an uncertain feeling
that the brand is recognized, to a belief that it is the only one in the product
class. As Figure 3-3 suggests, this continuum can be represented by three very
different levels of brand awareness.4 The role of brand awareness in brand
equity will depend upon both the context and upon which level of awareness
is achieved.
TABLE 3-1 Consumer Brand Preferences in Housewares
Brands
Percent Would Prefer
Rubbermaid
14.6
General Electric
12.8
Corning
9.9
Cannon
5.7
Corelle
5.1
Ecko
4.0
Visions
3.5
Sunbeam
3.3
Black & Decker
3.0
Libbey
2.8
SOURCE: Reprinted by permission from Discount Store News, October 24,
1988 Issue. Copyright Lebhar-Friedman, Inc., 425 Park Avenue, New York,
NY 10022.

FIGURE 3-3 The Awareness Pyramid
The lowest level, brand recognition, is based upon an aided recall test.
Respondents, perhaps in a telephone survey, are given a set of brand names
from a given product class and asked to identify those that they had heard of
before. Thus, although there needs to be a link between the brand and the
product class, it need not be strong. Brand recognition is a minimal level of
brand awareness. It is particularly important when a buyer chooses a brand at
the point of purchase.
The next level is brand recall. Brand recall is based upon asking a person
to name the brand in a product class; it is termed “unaided recall” because,
unlike as in the recognition task, the respondent is not aided by having the
names provided. Unaided recall is a substantially more difficult task than
recognition, and is associated with a stronger brand position. A person can
recall many more items on an aided recall basis than when unaided.
The first-named brand in an unaided recall task has achieved top-of-mind
awareness, a special position. In a very real sense, it is ahead of the other
brands in a person’s mind. (Of course, there may be another brand close
behind.)
A still stronger recall position, not represented in Figure 3-3, would be
that of a dominant brand, a brand that is the only brand recalled for a high
percentage of the respondents.5 Consider Arm & Hammer baking soda (which
has 85% of the market and a symbol with a 95% recognition level), Band-Aid
adhesive bandages, Jell-O gelatin, Crayola crayons, Morton Salt, Lionel
trains, Philadelphia cream cheese, V-8 vegetable juice, and A-1 steak sauce.
In each case, how many other brands can you name? Having a dominant

brand provides a strong competitive advantage. In many purchase situations it
means that no other brand will even be considered.

HOW AWARENESS WORKS
TO HELP THE BRAND
Brand awareness creates value in at least four ways as Figure 3-4
suggests.
ANCHOR TO WHICH OTHER ASSOCIATIONS CAN BE ATTACHED
Brand recognition is the basic first step in the communication task. It
usually is wasteful to attempt to communicate brand attributes until a name is
established with which to associate the attributes. A name is like a special file
folder in the mind which can be filled with name-related facts and feelings.
Without such a file readily accessible in memory, the facts and feelings
become misfiled, and cannot be readily accessed when needed.
Figure 3-5 illustrates using an anchor metaphor. The associations, such as
Golden Arches, clean/efficient, Ronald McDonald, kids, fun, and Big Mac,
are linked to the McDonald’s name via chains (representing links in memory).
Note that the chain can be thick and sturdy or rather weak. Note also that the
structure can be strengthened by links between the associations—there is a
chain connecting Ronald McDonald and kids.

FIGURE 3-4 The Value of Brand Awareness

FIGURE 3-5 The McDonald’s Associations
Courtesy of Jennifer Aaker.
A new product or service is, of course, particularly concerned with
gaining recognition. Virtually all models attempting to forecast newproduct
success have brand recognition as a key initial construct; only rarely can a
purchase decision occur without recognition. Further, learning about features
and benefits of the new product is difficult without achieving recognition.
With recognition established, the task is simply to attach a new association,
such as a product attribute.
FAMILIARITY/LIKING
Recognition provides the brand with a sense of familiarity—and people
like the familiar. Especially for low-involvement products like soap, chewing
gum, paper towels, sugar, disposable pens, or facial tissues, familiarity can
sometimes drive the buying decision. In the absence of motivation to engage
in attribute evaluation, familiarity may be enough.
Studies have shown a positive relationship between the number of
exposures and liking, whether the stimuli are abstract pictures, names, music,
or whatever. One study, for example, showed Turkish-like words either three
or six times. Even though different words were used so that there could be no
inherent appeal of a word, those words that were recognized were liked more
than those that were not recognized.
Interestingly, these recognition studies have found that exposure repetition

can affect liking even when the recognition level apparently is unaffected.6
One explanation is that the recognition (or familiarity) effect can exist below
the threshold of recognition measurement.
Consider the case of such old brand names as Ipana and Black Jack,
which have been reissued and have done well. The recognition value of the
brand undoubtedly contributed.
SUBSTANCE/COMMITMENT
Name awareness can be a signal of presence, commitment, and substance,
attributes which can be very important even to industrial buyers of big-ticket
items, and consumer buyers of durables. The logic is that if a name is
recognized, there must be a reason—such as:
The firm has advertised extensively.
The firm has been in the business for a long time.
The firm is widely distributed.
The brand is successful—others use it.
These suppositions are not necessarily based upon knowledge of specific
facts about the brand. Even if a person has not been exposed to advertising
and knows little about the firm, brand awareness could still lead to the
assumptions that the firm is substantial and backs the brand with advertising.
If a brand is completely unknown before it was put forth as a choice
alternative, there is a suspicion that it is not substantial with a committed firm
behind it.
Sometimes, even in the case of large and involved purchase decisions,
brand familiarity and perceptions of substance associated with brand
awareness can make all the difference. When there is no clear winner after
extensive analyses as to (let us say) which computer or which advertising
agency to select, the strength of brand awareness can be pivotal.
BRANDS TO CONSIDER
The first step in the buying process often is to select a group of brands to
consider—a consideration set. In selecting an advertising agency, a car to testdrive, or a computer system to evaluate, for example, three or four
alternatives might be considered. The buyer probably will not be exposed to
many brand names during the process, except by happenstance. Thus, brand
recall can be crucial to getting into this group. Who makes computers? The
first firms that come to mind will have an advantage. A firm which lacks
recall may not even hear about the opportunity.
Brand Recall and Buying Decisions

Toronto’s Professor Prakash Nedungadi, in a clever experiment,
demonstrated how brand recall influences purchase decisions.7 In a product
category (e.g., fast foods) two subcategories (e.g., national chains and local
stores) were created. Within each subcategory, a major brand (e.g.,
McDonald’s, Joe’s Deli) and a minor brand (e. g., Wendy’s, Subway) were
identified on the basis of usage and liking surveys. Subjects first answered a
series of 12 yes/no questions about four brands (e.g., Irish Spring is a laundry
detergent). Each subject had three of the questions involve one of the four test
brands (the brand name was “primed”) unless they were in a control group.
Subjects were then asked what brand they would select for a specific lunch
and what others they would consider. Later, they were asked to indicate their
intentions of visiting a list of different restaurants. The findings (which were
replicated using burger condiments and alcohol mixers) were intriguing:
When one of the major brands was primed (McDonald’s or Joe’s Deli) the
percent selecting that brand went up dramatically EVEN THOUGH the
relative liking of that brand (as measured by the intentions question) DID
NOT change. Brand recall (as measured by the consideration set question)
was enhanced and affected choice WITHOUT affecting liking.
For the local store subcategory, a similar dramatic increase in choice for the
major brand (Joe’s Deli) occurred when the minor brand in the subcategory
(Subway) was primed. Brand recall for Joe’s Deli was indirectly enhanced—
introducing Subway made the subject think of local stores which reminded
them of Joe’s Deli. This finding shows that recall is complex and that a strong
position in a subcategory can create recall by calling attention to the
subcategory as well as by creating notice for the brand.
The role of brand recall (or, better yet, top-of-mind recall) can also be
crucial for frequently purchased products like coffee, detergent, and headache
remedies, for which brand decisions usually are made prior to going to the
store. Further, in some categories (such as cereal) there are so many
recognized alternatives that the shopper is overwhelmed. Thus, even though
Nut & Honey is prominently displayed, it may be critical that it be a
“recalled” brand, or even “top-of-mind recalled,” to get the purchase.
Certain studies have shown a relationship between recall and
consideration sets: Generally, if a brand does not achieve recall it will not be
included in the consideration set. However, people usually will also recall
brands that they dislike strongly. Several other studies have demonstrated the
relationship between top-of-mind recall and attitudes/purchase behavior. One
such study, of six brands in three product classes (fast food, soda, and
banking), showed large differences in preference and purchase likelihood,

depending on whether the brand was the first, second, or third mentioned in
an unaided recall task.8
THE COFFEE STUDY
A study of the coffee market clearly showed the impact of awareness.9 For
19 successful bimonth periods, market-share and advertising expenditure data
were obtained and linked to the results of 19 coincident telephone surveys
that measured unaided recall and attitudes toward the brands. The results are
summarized in Figure 3-6. Advertising impacted on market share only
indirectly through its impact upon awareness and attitude. Further, there was
as much influence from a change in awareness as there was via a change in
attitude, suggesting that awareness can be an important factor independent of
changes in attitude. The implication is that awareness, influenced by reminder
advertising, affects purchase decisions.

FIGURE 3-6 Impact of Awareness upon Sales in the Coffee Market
LANDOR’S IMAGEPOWER
Landor Associates has developed a measure of the power of a brand
name; the measurement is based upon a survey of 1,000 American
consumers.10 Two dimensions are averaged. The one, termed “the share-ofmind score,” is a measure of brand recognition. The other, termed “esteem,”
is a measure of favorable opinon that people have for companies and brands
they know. The ratings are averaged to form an overall “ImagePower” score.
Table 3-2 shows the ratings for several of the 667 brands tested (in 1988).
Of interest is how dominant Coca-Cola is in the survey. The gap between
Coca-Cola and the second name, Campbell’s, is as large as the gap between
Campbell’s and the number 50 brand, Dole (not shown). The high recognition
score as reflected in the Landor work was undoubtedly the basis of the
remarkably successful launch of brand extensions, some with very little
marketing support. In the mid-1980s, the Coke name was attached to nine
different soft drinks, including Diet Cherry Coke, a brand which received no
advertising support at all.
TABLE 3-2 The Most Powerful Brands in the U.S.
Image Power Rank

Company/

Esteem

Share of Mind

Order
1
2
3
4
5
6

Brand
Coca-Cola
Campbell’s
Pepsi-Cola
AT&T
McDonald’s
American
Express
Kellogg’s
IBM
Levi’s
Sears

Index
68
67
61
64
50

Index
78
60
67
63
77

60

65

7
58
64
8
65
58
9
63
58
10
59
62
.
.
.
30
Rolls-Royce
63
46
.
.
.
169
Nissan
43
66
.
.
.
177
Datsun
41
67
.
.
.
667
Asahi
28
27
SOURCE: Mim Ryan, “Assessment: The First Step in Image Management,”
Tokyo Business Today, September 1988, pp. 36-38. (The numbers shown are
approximate indices.)
One finding from the Landor study is that there is a high correlation
between awareness and esteem. Of course, this correlation is in part caused
because people are aware of and like brands they use. However, it may also in
part reflect the fact that familiar brands do tend to be liked. There are

exceptions, of course. Some brands such as Greyhound, Playboy, and Warner
Bros, have their relatively high recognition but not-so-high esteem. Others,
like Rolls-Royce, Hilton, Harley-Davidson, Windex, and Rolex, are in the
opposite situation, having the intriguing opportunity to capitalize upon their
esteem by building awareness.
Using the same technique in Japan and Europe, Landor has utilized its
potential to identify the relative success that firms have had in creating world
brands. In fact, with data for all three areas combined, Coca-Cola is the
number one brand, followed by IBM, Sony, Porsche, and McDonald’s.
THE LIMITATIONS OF AWARENESS
Awareness, although a key brand asset, cannot by itself create sales,
especially for a new product. An unusual and controversial advertising
campaign introducing the Infiniti (by Nissan) illustrates.11 Using ads which
showed scenes involving birds, fields, and lakes (but not the car), the
campaign created a recognition level of 90%, and some unique associations.
However, sales were disappointing during the early months of the product,
and critics were claiming that the absence of a “reason-to-buy” in the ads was
a contributing factor. One comic suggested that the advertising was working
fine: Sales of rocks and trees were up 300%!

THE POWER OF OLD BRAND NAMES
Certainly there is a decay factor over time, especially when top-of-mind
recognition is involved. However, a remarkable phenomenon is that when a
brand becomes really well established, with high recognition created as a
result of many exposures and usage experiences, recognition tends to stay
high over a long time-period even if advertising support is dropped.
In the mid-1980s, for example, an awareness study was conducted on
blenders. When test subjects were asked to recall all the brand names of
blenders they could, GE scored as number two, even though they had not
made blenders for 20 years. Also, Unilever’s Lux Beauty Bar, a brand which
has not been advertised for more than 15 years, still generates sales of $25
million, half of which may be gross profit.12
One study of brand-name familiarity asked 100 housewives in four cities
to name as many brands as they could. They were paid for each name.13 On
average they came up with 28, and 15% named more than 40. Half of the
brands were food names. The age of the brands named was most remarkable:
As Table 3-3 shows, over 85% were over 25 years old, and 36% were over 75

years old!
Another remarkable study, this one by The Boston Consulting Group,
compared the leading brands of 1925 with those of 1985 in 22 product
categories.14 In 19 categories the leader was the same. In the other three, the
prior leader was still a factor. Table 3-4 summarizes the results. Of course,
there are categories (such as frozen dinners, and granola bars) that did not
exist in 1925, and so the marketplace is more dynamic than the table suggests.
However, the power of the old brand names still is incredible. In part, this is
certainly based upon their recognition levels— which in turn are based upon
exposures that probably were in the thousands for some.
What are the implications? One is that the establishment of a strong name
anchored by high recognition creates an enormous asset. Further, the asset
gets stronger over the years as the number of exposures and experiences
grows. As a result, a challenging brand—even with an enormous advertising
budget and superior product or service—finds it difficult to fight its way into
the memory of the customer.
TABLE 3-3 Ages of Best-Known Brand Names
Age of Brand
Percentage of 4,923 Brands Mentioned
Over 100 years
10
75 to 99 years
26
50 to 74 years
28
25 to 49 years
4
15 to 24 years
4
Under 14 years
3
SOURCE: Adapted from Leo Bogart and Charles Lehman, “What Makes a
Brand Name Familiar?” Journal of Marketing Research, February 1973, pp.
17-22.
TABLE 3-4 The Leading Brands: 1925 and 1985
Product
Bacon
Batteries
Biscuits
Breakfast cereal
Cameras
Canned fruit

Leading Brand 1925
Swift
Eveready
Nabisco
Kellogg
Kodak
Del Monte

Current Position 1985
Leader
Leader
Leader
Leader
Leader
Leader

Chewing gum
Wrigley
Leader
Chocolates
Hershey
No. 2
Flour
Gold Medal
Leader
Mint candies
Life Savers
Leader
Paint
Sherwin-Williams
Leader
Pipe tobacco
Prince Albert
Leader
Razors
Gillette
Leader
Sewing machines
Singer
Leader
Shirts
Manhattan
No.5
Shortening
Cristo
Leader
Soap
Ivory
Leader
Soft drinks
Coca-Cola
Leader
Soup
Campbell
Leader
Tea
Lipton
Leader
Tires
Goodyear
Leader
Toothpaste
Colgate
Leader
SOURCE: Thomas S. Wurster, “The Leading Brands: 1925-1985,”
Perspectives, The Boston Consulting Group, 1987.
There is widespread belief, especially among lay people, that with enough
advertising and a good enough product, a new brand will win, even in a
mature-product class. It is just not that easy: Consider all the unsuccessful
challenges to those brands that led the 22 product categories in the 60-year
period of the study. In some mature-product classes the only way to become
the leading brand is to have been born that way.
To challenge in a mature product class, it is usually best to revitalize an
existing, established brand in the product class than to attempt a new entry. If
a new entry is attempted, one route is to extend a brand name established in a
related product class. The revitalization and extension options will be
discussed in later chapters.

HOW TO ACHIEVE AWARENESS
Achieving awareness, both recognition and recall, involves two tasks;
gaining brand name identity and linking it to the product class. For a new
brand, both tasks are required. However, in other contexts one is already

accomplished, and the assignment becomes different. For example, a brand
name such as Pizzaplace implies the product class and the need is only to
establish the brand name. When Roto-Rooter, an established name, went into
plumbing, the need was to link the established name to a product class.
How should awareness be achieved, maintained, or improved? The best
approach will depend upon the context, but there are several helpful
guidelines that are based upon formal studies from both psychology and
advertising and upon observing brands that have done well in creating and
maintaining awareness levels.
BE DIFFERENT, MEMORABLE
An awareness message should provide a reason to be noticed and it should
be memorable. There are many tacks that work but one key is simply to be
different, unusual. Consider, for example, the talking Parkay margarine box. It
provides a humorous approach to linking the Parkay name to margarine and is
very different from the communication of other brands.
Too many product classes have brands with very similar communication
approaches, making it difficult to break out of the clutter. For example, most
ads for perfume, sports cars, menthol cigarettes, and soft drinks have a
sameness that inhibits the task of achieving recognition. One advertiser
switched the sound track from a Coca-Cola television commercial with one
for 7-UP—and the effect was barely noticeable.
Of course, it is necessary to create a link between the brand and the
product class. Putting a car on the top of an isolated mountain, for example,
may be memorable but the audience may have trouble recalling which car
was placed on the mountain top.
INVOLVE A SLOGAN OR JINGLE
A slogan or jingle can make a big difference. The slogans “It Floats” or
“You Deserve a Break Today” can help recall. When a product class such as
soap is the stimulus, it might be easier to come up with “It Floats and then
Ivory, rather than to name Ivory directly. The link to the slogan might be
stronger because it involves a product characteristic that can be visualized.
Thus, it can pay to create and establish a slogan with strong links to brand and
the product class.
A jingle can be a powerful awareness-creating device. One new-product
model that was designed to predict awareness levels, achieved 13 weeks after
launch, was tested on 58 new product introductions.15 One finding was that a
catchy jingle was extremely important in explaining why some new products
gained higher levels of recall than others. One of the high recall brands used
the jingle “Oh O, Spaghettios.”
SYMBOL EXPOSURE

If a symbol is available or can be developed, such as Colonel Sanders, the
Transamerica pyramid, or the Travelers umbrella, which can be closely linked
to a brand, it can play a major role in creating and maintaining awareness. A
symbol involves a visual image which is much easier to learn and to recall
than a word or phrase. Further, there are often creative ways to gain symbol
exposure besides using advertising—for example, Betty Crocker baking
contests, exhibitions of Budweiser’s Clydesdale horse team, and apples in
various forms at computer shows.
Consider the Goodyear blimp, one of which is shown in Figure 3-7, which
has been used by Goodyear for public relations since 1925. The current fleet
of three airships have contributed substantially to the name recognition of
Goodyear. They provide exposure to a 116-foot-long logo consisting of the
Goodyear name plus its winged foot, supplemented by a lighted sign
consisting of 7,560 programmed lights. The major exposure occurs from the
80-plus TV performances each year in many telecast outdoor events, such as
the Super Bowl and the World Series. One journalist wrote, “An event isn’t an
event unless you’ve got the Goodyear blimp.” The symbol is so strong that
competitor Goodrich once ran a series of ads showing a blue sky with white
clouds, to emphasize the point that they are the company without the blimp.
PUBLICITY
Advertising is well-suited to generating awareness because it allows the
message and audience to be tailored to the job at hand and because it is
generally an efficient way to gain exposures. However, publicity should
usually play a role and can sometimes carry the ball. It can be not only much
less expensive than media advertising but also effective. People are more
often interested in learning about a news story than in reading advertising.
The Goodyear blimp, for example, gets several thousand press clippings each
year. The problem is to generate events or issues associated with the brand
that are newsworthy.

FIGURE 3-7 A Goodyear Blimp
Courtesy of The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company.
The ideal situation occurs when the product is inherently interesting, such
as a new-car concept—the two seat Mazda Miata sports car—or a new
computer chip. However, if the product is not newsworthy, an event, symbol,
or other device needs to be created. For example, Ben and Jerry s
“cowmobile,” a mobile ice cream shop that dispensed free Ben and Jerry’s ice
cream as it crossed the country, was newsworthy at least in the small towns it
visited.
EVENT SPONSORSHIP
The primary role of most event sponsorship is to create or maintain
awareness. Thus the Volvo tennis circuit, the Virginia Slims women’s tour,
and the Transamerica tennis tournament all generate exposure from
spectators, who view them either live or on television, and from others who
read about them either before or after their occurrence. Beer brands long ago
discovered the value of promotions, and Budweiser, Miller, Coors, and other
brands have become prominently associated with hundreds of events.
CONSIDER BRAND EXTENSIONS
One way to gain brand recall, to make the brand name more salient, is to
put the name on other products. Coca-Cola, Heinz, Weight Watchers, and
Sunkist all get name exposure when their names are attached to additional
products which are advertised, displayed, and used.
At an extreme, many prominent Japanese firms such as SONY, Honda,
Mazda, Mitsubishi, and Yamaha use their names on all their products. In fact,
the name SONY was deliberately selected so that it could be widely used and
thus benefit from multiple promotion efforts. The ubiquitous Mitsubishi name
and three diamond symbol appear on more than 25,000 products including
automobiles, financial products, and mushrooms.
Of course, there is always a trade-off. Although brand recall is often
enhanced by the broad use of a brand name, different names provide the
opportunity to develop different associations for each name. Chapter 9 will
elaborate on the issues involved in brand extensions.
USING CUES
An awareness campaign often can be aided by cues of either the product
class, the brand, or both. One brand cue that is particularly useful is the
package, since the package is the actual stimulus with which the shopper is
confronted. The Morton Salt or Lean Cuisine package will cue a product. A
person like Andre Agassi, e.g., can cue a product class such as tennis rackets.

Sometimes cues can be used to remind people of the link developed in the
advertising.16 The Life cereal Mikey ads, in which a cute boy named Mikey
enjoys Life cereal to the disbelief of his brother, are leveraged by a small
picture of Mikey printed on the package in order to cue the ads.
RECALL REQUIRES REPETITION
Developing recall is more difficult than developing recognition. The brand
name needs to be made more salient, and the link from the brand to the
product class needs to be stronger. While recognition, even based on only a
few exposures, persists, recall decays through time. It is a bit like the fact that
we recognize the face but cannot recall the name. Recall is difficult, requiring
either an in-depth learning experience or many repetitions. Top-of-mind recall
is, of course, even more demanding. For a brand like Budweiser to maintain
high levels of top-of-mind recall, relatively high levels of repetition may be
needed indefinitely.
THE RECALL BONUS
Maintaining a strong top-of-mind awareness through constant exposure
can create not only brand awareness, but also brand salience that can inhibit
the recall of other brands. A series of studies have found that when people
were given a brand name, or set of brand names, and asked to generate names
of competitive products, their effort was inhibited— they came up with fewer
names. In one such experiment, respondents who were asked to evaluate a
Dristan TV ad could think of fewer names of cold remedies than those not
exposed to the Dristan ad.17 The salient brand, Dristan, got in the way of the
memory retrieval task.
1. What is the role of recognition and recall for your brand? Exactly how
does each affect purchase decisions?
2. What is your level of recognition and recall by segment? Is there any
problem with achieving recognition among new customers? Is the brand
name salient enough to the key segments—is recall being maintained?
3. Evaluate your communication program designed to generate recognition
or recall and its various components. What is working? What areas merit
an extensive review? What about packaging? Are the programs
consistent with the brand associations?
4. What promotions and other communication devices designed to generate
recognition or recall have worked well for competitors? Are all avenues
of public relations being exploited?

4
Perceived Quality

·
Quality is the only patent protection we’ve got.
James Robinson CEO, American Express
It pays to give most products an image of quality—a First Class
ticket.
David Ogilvy
Quality is free.
Phil Crosby

THE SCHLITZ STORY
The Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company started in 1850 as a small brewhouse supplying a Milwaukee restaurant. It received a growth impetus when
the 1871 Chicago fire destroyed many of that city’s breweries.1 In 1872 the
slogan “The beer that made Milwaukee famous” was born. By the turn of the
century, Schlitz was the third-largest beer, trailing only Pabst and AnheuserBusch. The firm remained healthy during the first 50 years of the twentieth
century, surviving Prohibition during the 1920s by producing malt and yeast
syrups. In 1947 it became the leading beer in the U.S. Although it lost its lead
to Budweiser in 1957, it remained a strong No. 2 brand through the early
1970s.

FIGURE 4-1 A Schlitz Gusto Ad
Courtesy of The Stroh Brewery Company.
The 1960s saw the Leo Burnett Company create the well-regarded “Real
gusto in a great light beer” and “when you’re out of Schlitz, you’re out of
beer” ad themes. Figure 4-1 shows one of the “gusto” ads of the 1960s. Also
in the 1960s, Schlitz successfully introduced both Schlitz Malt Liquor and the
trademarked “pop top” can. In the early 1970s a lifestyle approach featured
“men of the sea,” providing a heavy-beer drinker as hero while retaining the
gusto theme. The slogan was “You only go around once in life—so grab all
the gusto you can.”
SCHLITZ TUMBLES
As late as 1976 the Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company, producing the
popularly priced Old Milwaukee plus a newly introduced Schlitz Light in
addition to the flagship Schlitz brand, still held 16.1% of the market, as
compared to 19.5% for Anheuser-Busch and 12.2% for Miller. However, in
1977 the Schlitz firm lost the No. 2 position to Miller, and thereafter its
fortunes tumbled. The Schlitz firm’s market share went from 15.8 in 1976 to
13.9 in 1977, and from there to 11.8 in 1978. The profits fell steadily, from
$48 million in 1974 to a negative $50 million in 1979.
Figure 4-2 shows the sales decline of the Schlitz brand (excluding malt
light beers). It dropped from 17.8 million barrels per year in 1974 to 16.6
million in 1976 (when it benefited from a major strike at Anheuser-Busch) to
7.5 million in 1980, and under 1 million in 1986—when it had all but

disappeared. In the mid-eighties its role was that of a price brand—it had
dropped from the premium category.
The Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company was publicly traded until it was
bought by Stroh in 1982. Thus, there is a record of how much the firm has
been worth over time. We assume that the percent of that value which should
be assigned to the Schlitz name is equal to the percent of the Joseph Schlitz
Brewing Company sales associated with the products carrying the Schlitz
brand. Table 4-1 summarizes. By this logic, the value of the brand name (the
brand equity) fell from over $1 billion in 1974 to $75 million only six years
later. Over 93% of the brand equity was lost.
MANAGING QUALITY AT SCHLITZ
Why? What happened? The story starts with the first signs of disaster,
which appeared in 1974.
In Schlitz’s Milwaukee plant in 1974 the “accelerated batch fermentation”
(ABF) process was finally put into production after a 10-year development.
The revolutionary, yeast-centered brewing process, which changed the
fermentation process from 12 days to four, both reduced cost and improved
the uniformity of the product. Although there apparently was a reduction in
shelf life, the taste was otherwise unaffected. However, on the street the word
was that Schlitz was making “green beer.” One employee noted that in the
brewing business, people think it is good to use the same process your
ancestors used to make beer in 1700, but would question your sanity if you
say you use the same transportation your ancestors used in 1700.

FIGURE 4-2 Schlitz Sales (Millions of Barrels)
Note: Excludes Schlitz Malt and Schlitz Light.
SOURCE: R. S. Weinberg & Associates.

The new production process was not the only attempt by Schlitz to gain a
sustainable competitive cost advantage. For some time they had reduced costs
by substituting corn syrup for barley malt. Although internally the belief (or
hope) was that the average beer drinker could not tell the difference between
the taste of the new, cheaper beer and the original version, in fact the new
beer did have a lighter taste.
TABLE 4-1 The Brand Equity of Schlitz
Total Market
Percentage of

Total
Market
Year

Schlitz

Value

Value—
Less Debt

Year
Revenues

Value

Brand Market
Year
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982

High
(in $
millions)
1,670
875
698
530
487
388
287
495
465

High
(in $
millions)
1,374
596
426
300
311
231
150
345
318

from
Schlitz
71
68
65
62
60
56
45
36
28

(in $
millions)
1,082
447
307
207
207
145
75
138
98

The fact that Schlitz was attempting to save money by going to lessexpensive ingredients and processes was difficult to keep quiet and defend,
especially since Anheuser-Busch had made the explicit decision to retain the
more expensive ingredients. In early 1975, Anheuser-Busch president, August
Busch said: “Our competition has changed their ingredients and processes in a
quest for higher profits and a greater return on investment. But when it comes
to quality you can only fool the consumer for a short time. Consequently, we
chose to let our earnings decline rather than lessen our quality. After all, we
are in the business for the long term.”
The image problem was compounded when Schlitz used its cost savings
in part to aggressively discount and use promotions to build sales. This effort
was consistent with a strategy of achieving cost advantage through lower
production costs, and volume-based economies of scale. The belief was that
cost would be a decisive market factor. However, the discounts and
promotions were inconsistent with the premium beer category that Schlitz had
always occupied.
In 1975 a serious quality-image problem emerged, fanned by whispering
campaigns of competitors. The advertising attempted to respond by
emphasizing a quality theme. The “gusto” line was dropped for “There’s just
one word for beer: Schlitz! And you know it!” and “When it’s right, you
know it.” However, this campaign, like ones to come, could not correct the
deteriorating situation.
In 1976 the worst happened. On January 1, Schlitz changed the foam
stabilizer used to give the beer shelf life. The motivation was to avoid having
to add an ingredient to the label in order to comply with a new labeling law.
The new stabilizer would be filtered out during the brewing process, and thus

would not become a part of the final product. However, the new stabilizer
reacted with some other components to form tiny flakes in the product. The
result was described as either flaky or cloud beer—but for months the
problem was ignored. In early summer one attempted fix (removing the
stabilizer) caused the beer to go flat when it sat for a time on a shelf. In the
fall of 1976, some 10 million bottles and cans of Schlitz were “secretly”
recalled and destroyed. Subsequently, the secret got out, and Schlitz became
something of a joke.
ATTEMPTING TO RECOVER
In 1977, in yet another attempt to counter the image problem, an
advertising campaign was run showing burly men growling at individuals
who tried to get them to switch brands. The slogan was “You want to take
away my Schlitz? My gusto?” The aggressive ads became known in the
industry as the “Drink Schlitz or I’ll kill you” campaign. There was a rather
widespread belief within the advertising industry that the short-lived
campaign was a disaster. Schlitz never really recovered.
In 1978 Schlitz hired the brewmaster from Anheuser-Busch, who changed
the production process and ingredients so that the beer was again the same
premium product it had been in the 1960s. He became the spokesperson for
an advertising campaign with the tag line “Beer makes it good, Schlitz makes
it great.” In 1979 the slogan “Go for it!” was used, to be followed by a return
to the “Gusto” theme. But sales still declined.
In 1980, in desperation, Schlitz even spent $4 million on five live taste
tests, in which they had 100 drinkers of a competing brand (either Budweiser,
Miller, or Michelob) involved in a blind taste test on live television. One such
test, which took place at the 1981 Super Bowl, featured a prominent football
referee—to generate as much excitement as possible. As their best result,
Schlitz got 50% of the Michelob drinkers to say they preferred the unmarked
Schlitz beer. However, nothing would convince customers that Schlitz was
back, even though the physical product had, since 1978, used the old formula
and process.
ASSESSING THE BLAME
Of course, a lot happened in the beer industry during the 1970s that
affected Schlitz. Phillip Morris acquired Miller in 1970 and repositioned “The
champagne of bottled beer” to the blue-collar working man who enjoys
“Miller time,” using dramatically increased advertising budgets. They also
introduced 7-ounce cans, and improved the product quality by instituting a
policy of removing beer that had been on shelves for 120 days. Further, in
1975 they launched Miller Lite and targeted “real” beer drinkers who wanted
a “less filling” beer. One of the most successful new products ever introduced,

its sales passed Schlitz in 1979 and in 1983 became the No. 2 brand behind
Bud.
In the late 1970s, Anheuser-Busch reacted to Miller by substantially
increasing advertising expenditures and aggressively sponsoring sports events
(they sponsored over 400 in 1982, as opposed to 20 in 1976). They also
expanded capacity and introduced Natural Light and Michelob Light. As a
result, the beer-industry environment was a lot less attractive to competitors
during the late 1970s and 1980s than it had been.
The efforts of Miller and Anheuser-Busch came primarily at the expense
of regional brands and Schlitz. Including light brands, the sales patterns for
Schlitz looked very different from those of comparable brands, Pabst and
Coors. While Schlitz fell from 13 million barrels in 1978 to 1.8 million in
1984, Pabst also fell (from 12.7 to 6.8) but Coors actually grew (from 12.1 to
12.6). The stock market value of Coors fell from $809 million in 1975, when
it went public, to 46% of this level in 1980. In contrast, in 1980, Schlitz had
fallen to 17% of its 1975 value, which was less than half of its 1974 value.
Schlitz had problems in addition to the quality fiasco. A management void
was created when a CEO died in 1977. This loss was compounded by some
legal problems in 1978 which led to the loss of four top marketing people.
However, it seems clear that the collapse of the Schlitz brand equity was
caused largely by the loss of the perceived quality of the product.
A retired Schlitz ad manager during the glory days summarized it well:
“Schlitz sacrificed its reputation in its pursuit of bigger profits. In the beer
business, if a company loses its resources and money, but retains its
reputation, it can always be rebuilt. But if it loses its reputation, no amount of
money and resources will bring it back.”
SOME OBSERVATIONS
A remarkable aspect of this story is that the loss of perceived quality
turned out to be irreversible. Correcting the product was not enough to affect
the changed perceptions, despite the spending of enormous sums on
advertising developed by competent agencies. Some consumers were simply
impossible to convince. An effort to make a small improvement in margins
cost $1 billion in brand equity!
Note also that the decay of the brand did not happen immediately but
occurred over a period of 10 years. There are several possible explanations:
First, the effort to “correct” the quality problem resulted in an annual (and
sometimes semiannual) advertising campaign. The result was an ineffective
hodgepodge reaching the consumer. Further, it replaced the successful
“Gusto” thrust that had been consistently run for 15 years. Second, the
“word” about Schlitz probably took years to diffuse through the population.

Third, people are reluctant to change; there is a lot of inertia in the
marketplace. What really happened is that the brand was weakened and made
vulnerable to the efforts of competing brands. Over time it just could not
survive.

WHAT IS PERCEIVED QUALITY?
Perceived quality can be defined as the customer’s perception of the
overall quality or superiority of a product or service with respect to its
intended purpose, relative to alternatives.2 Perceived quality is, first, a
perception by customers. It thus differs from several related concepts, such as:
Actual or objective quality—the extent to which the product or service
delivers superior service
Product-based quality—the nature and quantity of ingredients, features,
or services included
Manufacturing quality—conformance to specification, the “zero defect”
goal
Perceived quality cannot necessarily be objectively determined, in part
because it is a perception and also because judgments about what is important
to customers are involved. An evaluation of washing machines by a
Consumer Report expert may be competent and unbiased, but it must make
judgments about the relative importance of features, cleaning action, types of
clothes to be washed, and so on that may not match those of all customers.
After all, customers differ sharply in their personalities, needs, and
preferences.
Perceived quality is defined relative to an intended purpose and a set of
alternatives. Thus, it is very different for Target stores than for Nordstrom or
Bloomingdale’s. Because Target does not deliver the same level of personal
service, the same quality merchandise, and the same store ambience as
Nordstrom does not mean that it will have lower perceived quality. It will
simply be judged by a different set of criteria—perhaps ease of parking,
waiting time at check-outs, courtesy of the checkout people, and whether
desired items are in stock.
Perceived quality differs from satisfaction. A customer can be satisfied
because he or she had low expectations about the performance level. High
perceived quality is not consistent with low expectations. It also differs from

attitude: A positive attitude could be generated because a product of inferior
quality is very inexpensive. Conversely, a person could have a negative
attitude toward a high-quality product that is overpriced.
Perceived quality is an intangible, overall feeling about a brand. However,
it usually will be based on underlying dimensions which include
characteristics of the products to which the brand is attached such as
reliability and performance. To understand perceived quality, the
identification and measurement of the underlying dimensions will be useful,
but the perceived quality itself is a summary, global construct.

HOW PERCEIVED
QUALITY GENERATES VALUE
As Figure 4-3 suggests, perceived quality provides value in several ways.

FIGURE 4-3 The Value of Perceived Quality
REASON-TO-BUY
The Schlitz story, which vividly illustrates the role that perceived quality
can play, is not such an isolated example. In many contexts, perceived quality
of a brand provides a pivotal reason-to-buy, influencing which brands are
included and excluded from consideration, and the brand that is to be
selected.
A customer often will lack the motivation to obtain and sort out the
information that might lead to an objective determination of quality in a given
application. Or the information may simply be unavailable. Or the customer
may not have the ability or resources to obtain or process it. In any case,
perceived quality becomes central.
Because the perceived quality is linked to purchase decisions, it can make
all elements of the marketing program more effective. If the perceived quality
is high, the job of advertising and promotion is more likely to be effective. By

contrast, a perceived quality problem such as the one discussed in the Schlitz
case is difficult to overcome.
DIFFERENTIATE/POSITION
A principal positioning characteristic of a brand—whether a car, a
computer, or a cheese—is its position on the perceived quality dimension. Is it
a super premium, premium, value, or economy entry? Further, with respect to
a perceived quality category, is the brand the best, or is it only competitive
with others in the class? The discussion in Chapter 5 will elaborate.
A PRICE PREMIUM
A perceived quality advantage provides the option of charging a premium
price. The price premium can increase profits, and/or provide resources with
which to reinvest in the brand. These resources can be used in such brandbuilding activities as enhancing awareness or associations, or in R&D
activities to improve the product. A price premium not only provides
resources, but can also reinforce the perceived quality. The “you get what you
pay for” belief is especially important in the case of goods and services for
which objective information is not readily available.
Instead of a price premium, the customer may be offered a superior value
at a competitive price. This added value should result in a larger customer
base, higher brand loyalty, and more effective and efficient marketing
programs.
CHANNEL MEMBER INTEREST
Perceived quality can also be meaningful to retailers, distributors, and
other channel members, and thus aid in gaining distribution. We know that the
image of a channel member is affected by the products or services included in
its line—stocking “quality products” can matter. In addition, a retailer or
other channel member can offer a high perceived quality product at an
attractive price, to draw traffic. In any case, the channel members are
motivated to carry brands that are well-regarded, that customers want.
BRAND EXTENSIONS
In addition, the perceived quality can be exploited by introducing brand
extensions, using the brand name to enter new product categories. A strong
brand with respect to perceived quality will be able to extend further, and will
find a higher success probability than a weaker brand. A study of 18 proposed
extensions of six brand names, including Vuarnet and Crest, found that
perceived quality of the brand name was a significant predictor of the
evaluation of the extensions.3 The material in Chapter 9 will elaborate.
THE PIMS FINDINGS
The PIMS database includes information on dozens of variables such as
ROI, perceived quality, market share, and relative price for over 3,000

businesses, some of which have supplied information since 1970. Hundreds
of studies, most trying to find clues to strategic success have used this
database. Perhaps the most definitive finding from this research is the role of
product quality. Robert Buzzell and Bradley Gale, in their book The PIMS
Principles, conclude: “In the long run, the most important single factor
affecting a business unit’s performance is the [relative perceived] quality of
its products and service, relative to those of competitors.”4
Figure 4-4 summarizes the overall effect of relative perceived quality by
showing the ROI and ROS (return on sales) as a function of the quality
position. Thus the lowest-20-percentile businesses had around a 17% ROI,
whereas those in the top-20-percentile earned nearly twice as much.
A detailed examination of the relationship of perceived quality and other
key strategic variables in addition to ROI, by Jacobson and Aaker, provides
insights on how perceived quality does create profitability:5
1. Perceived quality affects market share. After controlling for other
factors, products of higher quality are favored and will receive a higher
share of the market.
2. Perceived quality affects price. Higher perceived quality allows a
business to charge a higher price. The higher price can directly improve
profitability or allow the business to improve quality further to create
higher competitive barriers. Further, a higher price tends to enhance
perceived quality by acting as a quality cue.
3. Perceived quality has a direct impact on profitability in addition to its
effect on market share and price. Improved perceived quality will, on
average, increase profitability even when price and market share are not
affected. Perhaps the cost of retaining existing customers declines less
with higher quality, or competitive pressures are reduced when quality is
improved. In any case, there is a direct link between quality and ROI.
4. Perceived quality does not affect cost negatively. In fact, it doesn’t affect
costs at all. The image that there is a natural association between a
quality/prestige niche strategy and high cost is not reflected in the data.
The concept that “quality is free” may be in part the reason—enhanced
quality leads to reduced defects and lowered manufacturing costs.

FIGURE 4-4 Relative Perceived Quality and ROI
Relative Quality (percentile)
SOURCE: From The PIMS Principles: Linking Strategy to Performance by
Robert D. Buzzell and Bradley T. Gale, p. 107. Copyright © 1987 by The
Free Press, a Division of Macmillan, Inc. Reproduced by permission of the
publisher.
As the search for alternatives to short-term financials proceeds, there is a
need to make alternative measures credible by quantifying their value. The
PIMS database is important because it is a vehicle with which to show the
value of an important brand equity dimension, relative perceived quality.
PERCEIVED QUALITY AND BUSINESS PERFORMANCE
Another perspective on the importance of perceived quality in the
competitive area emerged from a study of 248 different businesses. A key
manager from each business was asked to identify the sustainable competitive
advantage (SCA) of the business.6 The resulting list of SCAs was topped by a
“reputation for high quality,” named by 105 (over 40%) of the managers. The
next most mentioned SCA, “customer service/ product support,” received
only 78 mentions. When the sample was divided into 68 high-tech firms, 113
service firms, and 67 manufacturing firms, perceived quality was the most
frequently mentioned SCA in each set. Clearly, perceived quality is regarded
as important to long-run business success.
A side note: The third most frequently mentioned sustainable competitive
advantage was another dimension of brand equity, name recognition/high
profile. And the tenth most mentioned was the installed customer base—still
another dimension of brand equity.

WHAT INFLUENCES PERCEIVED QUALITY?

If perceived quality is to be understood and managed, it is necessary to
consider what influences it. Why do some customers believe that the quality
is high or low? How could perceived quality be improved? What attributes do
customers use to make overall quality judgements?
The dimensions that underlie a perceived quality judgment will depend
upon the context. For a lawn mower it might include cutting quality,
reliability, availability of maintenance, and cost of maintenance. To learn
relevant dimensions in a given context, it is usually useful to conduct some
exploratory research. For example, customers can be asked why some brands
have higher quality than others, and why pairs of brands differ in quality.
Then the relative importance of the emerging dimensions needs to be
assessed.
FIGURE 4-5 Quality Dimensions
1. Performance: How well does a washing machine clean clothes?
2. Features: Does a toothpaste have a convenient dispenser?
3. Conformance with specifications: What is the incidence of defects?
4. Reliability: Will the lawn mower work properly each time it is used?
5. Durability: How long will the lawn mower last?
6. Serviceability: Is the service system efficient, competent, and
convenient?
7. Fit and finish: Does the product look and feel like a quality product?
1. Tangibles: Do the physical facilities, equipment, and appearance of
personnel imply quality?
2. Reliability: Will the accounting work be performed dependably and
accurately?
3. Competence: Does the repair shop staff have the knowledge and skill to
get the job done right? Do they convey trust and confidence?
4. Responsiveness: Is the sales staff willing to help customers and provide
prompt service?
5. Empathy: Does the bank provide caring, individualized attention to its
customers?
Two efforts to generate a set of dimensions which will apply across
several product classes illustrate the complexity of the “perceived quality”
concept and provide a useful point of departure when developing scales in a
given context.
DIMENSIONS OF PERCEIVED QUALITY:

THE PRODUCT CONTEXT
With respect to product quality, Harvard’s David A. Garvin suggests
seven product-quality dimensions, as summarized in Figure 4-5.7 The first,
performance, involves the primary operating characteristics of the product.
For an automobile, these could include acceleration, handling, cruising speed,
and comfort. Thus, there are dimensions within dimensions. Further,
customers often will differ in their attitude toward performance attributes.
Fast acceleration would be highly valued by some, but considered irrelevant
(or even a liability) by others more concerned with economy and comfort.
The second, features, are secondary elements of products, such as the type
of VCR remote control, or the inclusion of a map light in an automobile. In
addition to being important tie-breakers when two products seem similar,
features can also provide signals that the firm understands the needs of
product users.
The third, conformance with specifications (the absence of defects), is a
traditional, manufacturing-oriented view of quality. Reducing the percentage
of defects, especially at the customer site, has been one of the reasons for the
success of Japanese automakers in the past.
The fourth, reliability, is the consistency of performance from each
purchase to the next, and the “up time”—the percentage of time that the
product delivers an acceptable performance. Tandem Computers developed
the concept of several computers working in tandem so that if one failed, the
only impact would be the slowing of low-priority tasks. Tandem enjoyed
having a unique product because IBM was committed to an operating system
which could not be easily adapted to the Tandem concept. Tandem’s
marketing effort focuses on large-scale users of computers for which system
down time is particularly undesirable, such as on-line banking terminals,
stock exchanges, and retail on-line computer operations.
Redefining Quality in Automobiles
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s the primary quality objective was to be
defect free—the J. D. Power rating based upon customer experience provided
a credible measure.8 By this measure the Japanese cars were far superior to
competitors. However, in the late 1980s, U.S. cars begin to catch up—to the
point that the differences were of reduced consequence. The problem for U.S.
car makers is that the Japanese car makers changed the quality game.
The new quality concept is called miryokuteki hinshitsu (literally meaning
“things gone right”)—it now takes for granted defect-free manufacturing and
changes the focus to making cars that fascinate and delight. The idea is to
engineer extraordinary levels of look, sound, and feel into cars, the

cumulative effect of which will alter the personality of the car. The whole
concept is implemented with the kaisen (continuous improvement)
philosophy, a research-based concern with customer desires and strong
conceptualizations of what a car’s personality should be.
Examples of refinements and improvements intended to affect quality are not
hard to find. Nissan developed the first computer-driven “active suspension”
to smooth the ride of the Infiniti without compromising handling and placed a
counterbalanced lid on its Maxima to help people juggling groceries. Lexus
developed its soft, comfortable feel based upon extensive human engineering.
The Miata was designed to have the look and feel of classic sports cars.
Honda developed the same feel for all the buttons and a system to reduce
vibration. Of course, by themselves each of these innovations are modest.
However, together with many other improvements, they can really change the
totality of the product.
The fifth characteristic, durability, reflects the economic life of the
product: How long will it last? Volvo has long positioned its cars as durable—
it once showed pictures of 10-year-old Volvos still running well.
Garvin’s sixth characteristic, serviceability, reflects the ability to service
the product. Caterpillar Tractor created a strong point of differentiation with
its parts-and-service organization, together with a service culture. The firm’s
goal was “24-hour parts service anywhere in the world.” Its competitive
advantage in service was sustainable in that competitors had neither the dealer
network nor the scale (total sales volume), even if they did invest to create the
systems technology and organizational culture.
The seventh characteristic is fit and finish, which refers to the appearance
or feel of quality. For automobiles it might be reflected by the paint job and fit
of the doors. “Fit and finish” is important because it is a dimension which
customers can judge. The assumption usually is that if the business cannot
produce good “fit and finish” products, the products probably will not have
the other, more important, quality attributes.
DIMENSIONS OF PERCEIVED QUALITY:
THE SERVICE CONTEXT
Different dimensions emerge in service businesses. One series of studies
of customer perceptions of service quality by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and
Berry, involving industries such as appliance repair, retail banking, longdistance telephone, securities brokerage, and credit cards resulted in the
identification of several service dimensions which included the eight shown
in Figure 4-5.9
Several of the dimensions are similar to those in the product context. The

competence of the service people roughly corresponds to the performance
dimensions in product quality, as it concerns the delivery of the basic function
being sought by the customer. The tangibles dimension is similar to fit and
finish in product quality, in that their importance is in large part their role in
acting as signals of competence/performance.
Reliability takes on a different flavor in a service context because of the
people involved. The service necessarily changes with the specific service
person, customer, or day involved. Standardizing a service operation provides
an effective approach to achieving reliability that often is easily
communicated to customers. Consider the operations of fast-food and hotel
chains. The most successful ones have relied upon a very standardized facility
and operating system.
The other five dimensions relate to the personal interface between the
service firm and the customer. Including responsiveness, empathy, credibility,
trustworthiness, and courtesy, they center mainly around the nature of the
interaction between the customer and the service people. Was the customer
treated with respect? Did the firm show that it really cared about the
customer?
DELIVERING HIGH QUALITY
The first step toward improving perceived quality is to develop the
capability of delivering high-quality levels. It usually is wasteful to attempt to
convince customers that quality is high when it is not. Unless the use
experience of customers is consistent with the quality position, the image
cannot be maintained.
Of course, the delivery of high quality will depend upon the context. The
key at Xerox when they turned around the quality of their firm in the late
1970s was product design—designing products which were inherently more
reliable (even if turbo speed was sacrificed). In contrast, a bank improved
quality by focusing upon the interaction of its people with the customers. In
studies done on achieving quality, the following seem constantly to appear.
Commitment to Quality. Achieving and maintaining quality over time is
difficult. If quality is not elevated to a top priority for the organization, it is
impossible to achieve. The mission of Nordstrom, Federal Express, and
Honda, as reflected in what they say and what they do, is to deliver quality. It
is not just given lip service. They do not compromise.
A Quality Culture. The quality commitment needs to be reflected in the
culture of the organization, its norms of behavior, its symbols, and its values.
When there is a trade-off to be made between quality and cost, quality wins. It
is an easy decision. There are plenty of role models in the organization and its
heritage to show the way.

Quality at Sheraton
A team of two dozen people developed a service-improvement program at
Sheraton labeled The Sheraton Guest Satisfaction System.10 The system
involves:
Employee Goals: Be friendly, acknowledge guests’ presence, answer
guests’ questions, and anticipate guests’ problems and needs.
Hiring: Responses to videos of incidents help select people who really
empathize with others.
Training: A series of training programs include role-playing to help
trainees learn to handle situations of various sorts.
Measurement: Quarterly reports are based on guest questionnaires
which rate factors (such as bed comfort and lighting) as well as
interactions with employees.
Ongoing meetings: Performance is assessed, problems are corrected,
and improvements are developed.
Rewards: Ten percent of the top-performing and most-improved hotels
each quarter become members of the Sheraton’s Chairman’s Club and
are eligible for prizes. In addition, each hotel has its own employeerecognition programs.
Sheraton continued its advertising theme “Little things mean a lot” while
the program was taking hold. Only when it feels that the service quality
has achieved a sufficient level of performance and reliability will it go
ahead with plans to announce the “new” Sheraton.
Customer Input. Customers ultimately define quality. Managers too often
are mistaken in their assumptions about what customers believe is important.
At General Electric, appliance division managers overestimated the
importance of workmanship and features to consumers, and underestimated
the importance of the ease of cleaning and appearance. And credit-card
customers were much more concerned with security features and liability for
lost cards than managers thought.
The need is to obtain accurate and current customer input. The exposure
of managers to customers on a regular basis is one approach. IBM assigns top
managers to accounts, Radio Shack has an “adopt a store” policy which
requires that executives spend time in a retail outlet, and Disneyland has it
managers go on stage in the park on a regular basis.

Another approach is to employ focus groups, surveys, and experiments. L.
L. Bean, the famous mail-order purveyor of outdoor apparel and equipment,
conducts regular customer-satisfaction surveys, and holds group interviews,
to track customer perceptions of the quality of its own and its competitors’
products and services. The company also tracks all customer complaints, and
asks customers to fill out a short, coded questionnaire to explain reasons for
returning merchandise. Too, a major Japanese bank has a person with the
responsibility of providing a summary each day of problems that customers
encountered and complained about.
Measurement/Goals/Standards. The difference between paying lip service
to quality and actually achieving it is often to have goals which are
measureable and tied into the reward system. If the quality goal is too general,
it can too easily become ineffectual. The resulting goals and standards should
be understandable and prioritized. Too many goals without a set of priorities
can be as self-defeating as no goals at all.
Allow Employee Initiative. The Japanese have shown that employees,
working in teams, provide a very effective approach to quality improvement.
Employee groups not only are sensitive to problems, but also are in a position
to implement and support solutions.
Another perspective comes from the Zeithaml et al. research stream.11 A
key finding of theirs was that service quality problems often were caused by
employees’ lack of control over the delivery of service quality. Some felt, for
example, that they lacked flexibility in dealing with customers, and thus
blamed problems on the system rather than on themselves. Firms would
attempt to regulate quality via a “by-the-book” approach rather than through a
“by-the-customer” approach.
Customer Expectations. Perceived quality can also be deficient because
expectations are too high. Holiday Inn developed a “No surprises” advertising
campaign after learning that customers really valued consistent quality with
no unpleasant surprises. The problem was that (as operations managers
correctly predicted) a zero-defect operation simply is unattainable. The
campaign served to raise customer expectations above those delivered.
SIGNALS OF HIGH QUALITY
Achieving high quality is not enough; actual quality must be translated
into perceived quality. In most situations the dimensions of quality that are
most critical also are the most difficult to judge. A car buyer may feel that
durability is a key attribute, but will not have a good way to judge durability.
With effort, information might be garnered from Consumer Reports, or from
users, about experience with the firm’s product in prior years. But for many
the time and effort required might be a barrier, and the value of knowing

about last year’s model may not prove relevant. The solution is to look for
some signal or indicator of that dimension. For example, if a model has
offered a longer warranty, the customer can reason that the firm must have
such confidence in the product that they are willing to stand behind it.
In the service-quality set of dimensions the most important to a customer
usually will be the competence of the service provider. A surgeon, automobile
mechanic, loan officer, lawyer, carpet layer, or check-out person should first
be competent. Mistakes in judgment or in execution can cause inconvenience,
or even injury. However, the customer lacks the ability to judge competence.
As a result, seemingly trivial but observable characteristics are relied on. The
neatness of the waiting room and number of patients might suggest the quality
of a physician. Likewise, the appearance of service personnel can be an
indicator of their professionalism. Note the advertisement for Bekins shown
in Figure 4-6. Who would you select as your mover?
A consumer products company developed a “better” window cleaner
which was essentially colorless. However, in use tests this “improved”
product did not do well against the established cleaner—until the new product
was tinted blue. Its evaluation then increased markedly, and the firm had a
winner. The color of the product made the difference: A colorless product
lacked credibility.
Research has shown that in many product classes a key dimension which
is visible can be pivotable in affecting perceptions about more “important”
dimensions which are difficult, if not impossible to judge. For example:
Stereo speakers: Larger size means better sound.
Detergents: Suds mean cleaning effectiveness.
Tomato juice: Thickness means quality (though not in fruit-flavored
children’s drinks).
Cleaners: A scent such as lemon can signal cleaning power.
Supermarkets: Produce freshness means overall quality.
Cars: A solid door-closure sound implies good workmanship and a solid,
safe body.
Orange juice: Fresh is better than refrigerated, which is better than
bottled. Bottled is followed by frozen, canned, and (finally) dry product
forms.

FIGURE 4-6 Signaling Quality
Courtesy of Bekins, High Technology Division.
In addition to information about a brand’s product features (termed
intrinsic cues) there are a host of other brand associations—such as the
amount of advertising used, the brand name, or the price (termed extrinsic
cues)—that can influence perceived quality.
The amount of advertising supporting a brand can signal that the firm is
backing the brand, which logically implies it must be a superior product. One
laboratory study of athletic shoes and refrigerated entrees found that the
perceived quality of newly introduced brands was influenced by a knowledge
that heavy advertising was supporting the new entry.12
Another signal is the brand name. The discussion here has focused on the
impact of perceived quality upon the brand name. However, there also is a

link in the reverse direction: Customers have been shown to develop
perceptions of quality based on the brand name. Brand-extension research
clearly shows that a brand name can affect quality perceptions when that
brand name is attached to a different product class.
The Radisson Hotel found that pizza, offered as part of room service, was
not a popular room-service item. However, it observed a large quantity of
pizza boxes in the trash, indicating that their guests were going outside for
pizza. When they put a card in the rooms indicating that guests could order
“Neapolitan” pizza, and gave a telephone number different from room
service, sales took off. Hotel room service obviously was a signal for inferior
pizza, whereas an Italian name, which distanced it from the hotel, made a big
difference even though (or maybe because) it was not an established pizza
name.
PRICE AS A QUALITY CUE
One variable that can be an important quality cue is price. An analysis of
36 studies, most of which involved frequently purchased, relatively lowpriced consumer products, showed that price was consistently found to be a
strong quality cue, nearly as strong as the brand name.13 The classic story is
that Chivas Regal was a struggling brand until it decided to raise its price to
be dramatically higher than competitors’. Its sales then took off. Price clearly
became a quality cue, as the product itself was not changed.
The relevance of price as a quality cue will depend on other cues
available, the individual, and the product involved. Price will tend to be relied
on as a quality cue when other cues are not available. When intrinsic cues
(such as speaker size or a car-door slam) are available, or extrinsic cues (such
as a brand name), people will be less likely to rely on price.
Individuals differ in their reliance on price as a quality cue. If a person
lacks the ability or motivation to evaluate the quality of a product, price will
be more relevant. Consider a raincoat, for example. Some will be
knowledgeable enough to detect differences in material and tailoring. Others
will tend to rely upon other cues, including price. Individuals also differ with
respect to their value of quality. Some will consider the prestige or worth of a
high-priced brand to be of value, and others will not.
The use of price as a quality cue will differ across product classes. Product
classes which are difficult to evaluate are more likely to have price as a
quality cue. For example, research has shown that price tends to signal quality
in wine, perfume, and durables. Further, product classes with little price
variation provide correspondingly few quality signals. A customer will not
attribute much quality difference from a few cents’ difference in price.
Price will be more relevant as a quality cue when there are more

differences in perceived quality across product classes. In a classic study,
Leavitt asked respondents to select between pairs of brands in four low-priced
consumer product categories when the only information was the price.14 Two
involved product classes, cooking sherry and moth flakes, were considered to
have far fewer quality differences between brands than razor blades and floor
wax. The percentage of respondents that selected the higher-priced brand was
related to the perceived difference in quality. It was 57% and 30% for the two
heterogeneous product classes, and 24% and 21% for the others.
PIMS research shows that the relationship between relative perceived
quality and relative price association is a two-way street.15 A higher price, on
average, leads to higher relative perceived quality. This relationship is
consistent with the notion that, in the absence of complete information, price
is used as a signal of quality. Another explanation, however, is that firms able
to charge a higher price are more willing and/or able to take the steps to
improve product quality—be they costly, risky, or involving high initial
expenditures.
MAKING PERCEPTIONS MATCH ACTUAL QUALITY
It can be frustrating to realize that achieving high levels of quality is not
enough. Customer perceptions must be created or changed—but how? How
can enhanced quality be communicated? One way is to manage signals of
quality, such as price levels, or the presentability of employees or facilities.
Each one of these can provide cues to customers.
Another way is to simply communicate a quality message. The problem in
this case is that customers are used to hearing people say “We are the best.” In
fact, in most cases this claim is considered by the law and customers alike as
harmless puffery. It takes, for example, five years in the automobile industry
for quality changes to be so perceived as to be reflected in purchases. The
challenge is how to add credibility by, say, explaining why quality is superior;
by offering guarantees; or by using external measures.
A quality claim will be more credible if customers know on what it is
based. Thus, an insurance firm can explain how a computer system enables
them to respond faster and more accurately to customer needs. A machine tool
firm can explain how a new plant enables them to generate equipment with
higher tolerances, and how a testing program clearly makes sure that the
process will generate good quality. But the argument must be understandable
and persuasive.
A meaningful guarantee can provide convincing support for a quality
claim. Thus, a restaurant serves lunch within 10 minutes, or the meal is free.
The “Bugs” Burger Bug Killers will refund the fee if there is dissatisfaction
(or a recurrence) during a 12-month period. Further, in the case of hotel

clients, if a guest spots a pest, the firm will pay the guest’s current bill, and a
future one. An effective guarantee should be:
Unconditional: Nordstrom department stores are legendary for taking
back items that they never carried.
Easy to understand: It should be clear.
Easy to invoke: The Procedure should be simple and require a minimum
of effort.
Meaningful: It is of little help to get a small postage fee back if an
important piece of mail gets lost.

FIGURE 4-7 Exploiting an Independent Survey
An effective guarantee not only provides customer credibility, but can set
clear standards to employees and encourage a customer-focus culture. It can

also provide feedback: At least a small percentage of customers inevitably
will be dissatisfied and invoke the guarantee. Thus, a meaningful measure
over time can be obtained of not only the quantity of complaints but their
nature.
An outside, unbiased confirmation of quality claims also can provide
needed credibility. Hewlett-Packard advertised its No. 1 standing in the
Datapro customer independent surveys over five years. The survey measures
customer perceptions of computer manufacturers regarding six key service
and support categories, including maintenance effectiveness, maintenance
responsiveness, troubleshooting, documentation, education, and software
support.
An influential measure in the automobile industry is the J. D. Power
survey of automobile buyers one year after they have taken delivery. The
incidence of repair is determined. Admittedly this is only one dimension of
quality, but, because the statistics are comparable across models, it becomes
very influential—and (as Figure 4-7 illustrates) firms that score well are quick
to advertise that fact.
1. Is perceived quality measured? How has it changed over time? Why?
How does it compare to competition? How might it be strengthened.
2. Upon what is perceived quality based in your organization? What are the
dimensions that are important to the customer?
3. What are the important cues that signal quality to customers? Are they
managed so that they deliver the right signal? Could other cues be
created?
4. Is the delivered quality adequate? If so, how can that fact be credibly
communicated?

5
Brand Associations
The Positioning Decision

·
Apple produced a good computer, the Apple II, but created a great
distinction. It made using a computer a “friendly,” unintimidating
process. Everything at Apple, from its logo to its down-to-earth founders,
underscores its uniqueness.
Tom Peters

THE WEIGHT WATCHERS STORY
In 1978 the H. J. Heinz Company bought the Weight Watchers
International for $71 million, and Foodways National, which made and
marketed Weight Watchers frozen entrees, for $50 million.1 Two years later
they purchased Camargo Foods, a Weight Watchers licensee for nonfrozen
foods. In 1989 the Weight Watchers division of Heinz had revenues of $1.3
billion and its operating income was over $100 million, close to the total
acquisition price of the three companies. Further, Heinz called the Weight
Watchers line its “growth engine for the 1990s.”
The acquisition of the Weight Watchers name was an effort to capitalize
upon a heightened concern with health and fitness by obtaining a strong
association with weight control. The health-and-fitness trend turned out to be
a good bet, as it was one of the growth areas of the eighties. Close to 60
million people in the U.S. try to lose weight each year. Further, as the
population gets older, the concern for weight control increases.
The Weight Watchers program, founded in 1963, provided a core group of

people who attended and/or now attend Weight Watchers classes. In 1988, an
average of a million people attended Weight Watchers classes each week in
some 24 countries. They spent $500 million in fees and bought nearly onethird of Weight Watchers’ frozen-food entrees. Over 850,000 people subscribe
to the Weight Watchers magazine. A large percentage of Americans have
general knowledge of the system, which includes weekly meetings wherein
participants weigh-in and hear lectures on cooking, shopping, and exercise.
Most American nonmembers know someone who has been through the
Weight Watchers program.
Of interest to Heinz was not only the program but the weight-control
associations that went with the name, along with the health and nutrition links
created by the weight-control dietary program. During the 1980s, Heinz
exploited these associations by extending the name relentlessly to new
products.
They successfully introduced lines of Weight Watchers frozen novelties
which grew out of the Chocolate Treat Bar introduced in 1982. The brand was
then extended to salad dressings, spaghetti sauces, turkey-based meat
products, yogurt, frozen desserts, breads, and snack packets made from
dehydrated fruit. Even pizza, ice cream, and Mexican food were not offlimits. By 1989 they had 60 frozen-food items and over 150 non-frozen-food
items. Each extension not only took advantage of the Weight Watchers name
and associations but reinforced its associations and name awareness as well.
In most of the food categories, notably frozen entrees, the two salient
dimensions in the low calorie/health segment in which Weight Watchers was
competing were taste and weight control. Gaining a strong, convincing
position on either dimension was difficult. Weight Watchers had a lock on the
top position of the weight-control dimension against rivals such as Stouffer’s
Lean Cuisine, Campbell Soup’s Le Menu, Armour Food’s Classic Lites, and
Banquet Foods’ Light & Elegant. In the words of Anthony O’Reilly, the CEO
of Heinz since 1979: “You can say light and you can say very light and you
can say extra light and trimline or slimline, but at the end of the day, Weight
Watchers has an authority about it, and a cogency and a simplicity in that if
the product is good and tastes good, the consumer will take it.”2
The problem was that, in the early 1980s, Weight Watchers also had a lock
on the bottom of the taste dimension—in part because of its association with
hard-core dieting and also because its products were of inferior taste. Further,
since taste was (as ever) subjective, it was difficult to convince buyers that
Weight Watchers had improved, especially in the face of a competitor
(Stouffer’s Lean Cuisine), which had both “Stouffer’s” and the upscale term
“cuisine” embedded in its name. In contrast, a competitor could attack Weight

Watchers with the more objective claim of a “below 300 calorie dinner.”

FIGURE 5-1 A “Feeling Guilty” Ad
Courtesy of Weight Watchers International, Inc.
Weight Watchers addressed the perceived taste problem in several stages.
First, they improved the product dramatically over the first half of the 1980s
by investing in R&D and product testing. As a result, the entire product line
gradually became broader and more interesting and, more importantly, of
better quality. The quality difference between it and Lean Cuisine shrank
noticeably.
Second, the original advertising (illustrated in Figure 5-1) poked fun at
dieters who “cheated,” and emphasized guilt and failure. It was neither
positive nor compatible with a quality food product. A new campaign (see

Figure 5-2) proved uplifting and positive. Lynn Redgrave, who had
successfully lost weight through Weight Watchers, was featured. The tag line
“This is Living” was added.
Third, they changed the package several times, striving to achieve a more
high-quality/classy package while still retaining enough of the familiar to
maintain the Weight Watchers association. The package that emerged had a
red banner with a Weight Watchers signature, and a picture of a food dish on a
clean white background. It had a more upscale tone to it and worked better in
displays. The old and new packages are shown in the two figures.
Fourth, the successful introduction of frozen desserts in 1983, and other
“splurge” products later, helped to neutralize the “hard-core dieter” image of
Weight Watchers. It showed that Weight Watchers was not above having fun
and enjoying desserts.
The efforts paid off. In 1988, Weight Watchers passed Lean Cuisine, to
become the top-selling low-calorie frozen-entree line. A remarkable
achievement! Weight Watchers may have benefited from Stouffer’s decision
to attach the Stouffer name to Lean Cuisine. Lean Cuisine might have been a
more credible low-calorie entry without the maker’s name—which is
associated with the Stouffer “red box” line featuring heavier food, often with
creamy sauces.
Interestingly, in 1986, Weight Watchers introduced a new line of frozen
entrees positioned as the best-quality low-calorie frozen food. It was
introduced under the Candle Lite Dinners name, with the Weight Watchers
name present on the front of the box but clearly de-emphasized. That line,
with entrees like Cordon Bleu, was priced higher than Le Menu, previously
the highest priced low-calorie frozen dinner. Thus the name, the price, and the
entree selection all signaled top quality. The theory was that the Weight
Watchers name would still provide low-calorie credibility.

FIGURE 5-2 A “This Is Living” Ad
Courtesy of Weight Watchers International, Inc.
The Candle Lite line did not succeed and was withdrawn. The
hypothesized reason was that the price was too high for frozen dinners.
However, it may be that going that far upscale with the Weight Watchers line
was too much of a stretch. Customers were willing to buy into a good-quality,
competitively priced entry from Weight Watchers, but perhaps not one so
upscale.
Weight Watchers is an example of a brand with strong associations—
weight control plus health and nutrition—which were dominant dimensions of
a growing, crowded market. Heinz had a vision in 1978 that these
associations could be the basis of a sustainable competitive advantage not
only in the core frozen-entrees area but in numerous extensions as well. In

fact, Heinz plans to triple Weight Watchers’ business in the first half of the
1990s, in part by “bringing the Weight Watchers brand to every nutritional
event from breakfast to bedtime, both here and abroad.”3

ASSOCIATIONS, IMAGE, AND POSITIONING
A brand association is anything “linked” in memory to a brand. Thus,
McDonald’s could be linked to a character such as Ronald McDonald, a
consumer segment such as kids, a feeling such as having fun, a product
characteristic such as service, a symbol such as the Golden Arches, a lifestyle such as harried, an object such as a car, or an activity such as going to a
movie theater next to a McDonald’s. Recall Figure 3-5 showing the
McDonald’s anchor attached to its associations.
The association not only exists but has a level of strength. A link to a
brand will be stronger when it is based on many experiences or exposures to
communications, rather than few. It will also be stronger when it is supported
by a network of other links. Thus, if the link between kids and McDonald’s
were based only on some ads showing kids at McDonald’s, it would be much
weaker than if the link involved a complex mental network involving
birthday-party experiences at McDonald’s, Ronald McDonald, McDonald’s
games, and McDonald’s dolls and toys. Again recall Figure 3-5 and imagine
links connecting the boats that were chained to the anchor.
A brand image is a set of associations, usually organized in some
meaningful way. Thus, McDonald’s is not just a set of 20 strong associations
and 30 weaker ones. Rather, the associations are organized into groups that
have meaning. There might be a kids’ cluster, a service cluster, and a type of
food cluster. There might also be one or more visual images, mental pictures
that come to mind when McDonald’s is mentioned, such as the Golden
Arches, Ronald McDonald, or (inevitably) hamburgers and fries.
An association and an image both represent perceptions which may or
may not reflect objective reality. Whereas the stage coach often is associated
with Wells Fargo, that does not necessarily mean that Wells Fargo is logically
or physically any more western than is the Bank of America. An image of
competence may be based upon the appearance of a doctor’s office and the
manner of the staff rather than on an objective measure of the health of former
patients.
Positioning is closely related to the association and image concepts except
that it implies a frame of reference, the reference point usually being

competition. Thus, the Bank of California is positioned as being smaller and
friendlier than the Bank of America. The focus is thus on an association or
image defined in the context of an attribute (friendliness) and a competitor
(Bank of America).
A well-positioned brand will have a competitively attractive position
supported by strong associations. It will rate high on a desirable attribute like
friendly service, or occupy a position distinct from that of competitors—such
as being the only store that offers home delivery.
A “brand position” does reflect how people perceive a brand. However,
“positioning” or a “positioning strategy” can also be used to reflect how a
firm is trying to be perceived. Thus, “Cadillac is positioned as an upscale car
competitive to Mercedes” could mean that Cadillac is trying to be so
perceived, and not necessarily that it has succeeded.

HOW BRAND ASSOCIATIONS CREATE VALUE
The underlying value of a brand name often is its set of associations—its
meaning to people. Associations represent bases for purchase decisions and
for brand loyalty. There are a host of possible associations, and a variety of
ways they can provide value. Among the ways in which associations create
value to the firm and its customers are: helping to process/retrieve
information, differentiating the brand, generating a reason to buy, creating
positive attitudes/feelings, and providing a basis for extensions (see Figure 53).

FIGURE 5-3 The Value of Brand Associations
HELP PROCESS/RETRIEVE INFORMATION
Associations can serve to summarize a set of facts and specifications that
otherwise would be difficult for the customer to process and access, and
expensive for the firm to communicate. An association can create a compact
information chunk for the customer which provides a way to cope. A set of

hundreds of facts and incidents about Nordstrom can be summarized by a
strong position relative to competitors of Nordstrom on a service dimension,
for example.
Associations can also influence the interpretation of facts. A visual image
such as the Benedictine monk used to introduce a Xerox copier (“It’s a
miracle!”) provides a context that helps ensure that the desired interpretation
is achieved. A high-technology position (HP products are technically
advanced) can influence the interpretation of a long list of specifications.
Further, associations can influence the recall of information, especially
during decision-making. For example, a symbol such as the Travelers
umbrella or the Wells Fargo stage coach will trigger thoughts about the brand
or experiences with it that would not be precipitated in its absence.
DIFFERENTIATE
An association can provide an important basis for differentiation. In some
product classes such as wines, perfumes, and clothes the various brands are
not distinguishable by most consumers. Associations of the brand name can
then play a critical role in separating one brand from another. The personality
of Cher, for example, provides a point of differentiation for her line of
perfumes. Because the personality of Cher is unique, so ostensibly is the
brand that bears her name.
A differentiating association can be a key competitive advantage. If a
brand is well positioned (with respect to competitors) upon a key attribute in
the product class, such as Nordstrom on service, or upon an application, such
as Gatorade and athletics, competitors will find it hard to attack. If a frontal
assault is attempted by claiming superiority upon that dimension, there will be
a credibility issue. For instance, it would be difficult for a competing
department store to make credible a claim that it has surpassed, or even
matched, Nordstrom on service. A competitor to Gatorade, for all practical
purposes, may have to find an application other than athletic competition.
Thus, an association can be a formidable barrier to competitors.
REASON-TO-BUY
Many brand associations involve product attributes or customer benefits
that provide a specific reason to buy and use the brand. They represent a basis
for purchase decisions and brand loyalty. Thus, Crest is a cavity-prevention
toothpaste; Colgate provides clean, white teeth; and Close-Up generates fresh
breath as well as serving its more pedestrian purpose. “Miller time” provides
a reason-to-buy for Miller beer: a well-deserved reward. Bloomingdale’s is
fun, and sells high-fashion goods. Mercedes and the American Express Gold
card add status to the user.
Some associations influence purchase decisions by providing credibility

and confidence in the brand. If a Wimbledon champion uses a certain tennis
racket, or a professional hair stylist uses a particular hair-coloring product,
consumers will feel more comfortable with those brands. An Italian name and
the accompanying Italian associations will lend credence to a pizza maker.
CREATE POSITIVE ATTITUDES/FEELINGS
Some associations are liked and stimulate positive feelings that get
transferred to the brand. Celebrities like Bill Cosby, symbols such as the Jolly
Green Giant, or slogans such as “Reach out and touch someone” can all, in
the right context, be likable and stimulate feelings. The associations and their
companion feelings then become linked to the brand. One of the roles of the
Charlie Brown characters, now used as the spokespersons for Metropolitan
Life, is to soften an otherwise large, impersonal organization and a serious
message by linking Metropolitan with Charles Schultz’s well-liked characters
and the warm, positive feelings that go along with them.
Likeable symbols can also serve to reduce the incidence of counterarguing where the audience argues against the logic of an advertisement. For
example, Chevron, during the oil crises of the seventies, successfully battled
the resentment against oil companies only when they told their story using
cute cartoon dinosaurs accompanied by cheerful, fun music. It’s hard to get
mad at cute, funky symbols of the firm and its message.
Some associations create positive feelings during the use experience,
serving to transform it into something different than it would otherwise be.
Advertising, for one thing, can make the experience of drinking Pepsi seem
more fun and driving a Bronco more adventuresome than it would be without
the advertising.
BASIS FOR EXTENSIONS
An association can provide the basis for an extension by creating a sense
of fit between the brand name and a new product, or by providing a reason to
buy the extension. Thus, Honda’s experience in small motors makes
extensions from motorcycles to outboard motors and lawn mowers plausible.
Similarly, Sunkist has an association with healthy outdoor activities as well as
oranges that has helped make the brand name fit a variety of products—
including fruit bars, soft drinks, and vitamin C tablets. The Weight Watchers
story provides another example. In Chapter 9, extensions will be discussed in
more detail.

TYPES OF ASSOCIATIONS

What does Sears mean to you? Or IBM? Or the Bank of America? Or
Levi Strauss? A considerable number of associations could be relevant to just
about anyone. For one person, Sears might mean a trip to the store with
Grandfather in an old Chevrolet with a rattling hood. To another, Sears may
be associated with a first bicycle and the sense of freedom it generated. To yet
another, Sears usually means tires and auto parts and a place that delivers
value.
Of course, the manager of a brand will not be equally interested in all
associations. Rather, he or she will be primarily interested in those
associations that directly or indirectly affect buying behavior. Management’s
interest is in not only the identity of brand associations but also whether they
are strong and shared by many, or weak and differ from person to person. A
diffuse image involves a very different context from that of a firm image
consistent across people.
In the Weight Watchers story, taste and weight control, which could be
labeled either product attributes or customer benefits, were the dominant
perceptual dimensions. How brands were positioned on these two dimensions
became pivotal to brand choice. Developing the associations that drove those
positions was the management challenge. Product attributes or customer
benefits are an important class of associations, but there are others that can
also be important in some contexts. Some will reflect the fact that products
are used to express life-styles, social positions, and professional roles. Still
others will reflect associations involving product applications, types of people
who might use the product, stores that carry the product, or salespeople who
handle it. The name, symbol, and slogan are indicators of the brand but also
can be important associations as well. They are discussed in Chapter 8.
Eleven types of associations, shown in Figure 5-4, will be discussed in the
balance of this chapter: (1) product attributes, (2) intangibles, (3) customer
benefits, (4) relative price, (5) use/application, (6) user/customer, (7)
celebrity/person, (8) life-style/personality, (9) product class, (10) competitors,
and (12) country/geographic area.
PRODUCT ATTRIBUTES
Probably the most used positioning strategy is to associate an object with
a product attribute or characteristic. Developing such associations is effective
because when the attribute is meaningful, the association can directly translate
into reasons to buy or not buy a brand. Crest became the leader in toothpaste
by obtaining a strong association with cavity control in part created by an
endorsement by the American Dental Association. This association directly
drove a market position which hovered around 40% for years.
In many product classes different brands will be associated with different

attributes. For example, Volvo has stressed durability, showing “crash tests,”
and telling how long their cars last. (A discovery that a crash test was rigged
was damaging as it went to the core of their association.) BMW, in contrast,
talks of performance and handling with the tag line: “The ultimate driving
machine.” Jaguar, “A blending of art and machine,” offers performance and
an elegant style. Mercedes, “The ultimate engineered car,” emphasizes
engineering excellence in a luxury car. Hyundai, “Cars that make sense,”
provides the price advantage. Thus, all have selected a different
attribute/benefit on which to base their positioning.

FIGURE 5-4 Brand Associations
The positioning problem is usually to find an attribute important to a
major segment and not already claimed by a competitor. The identification of
an unmet customer problem can sometimes lead to an attribute previously
ignored by competitors. Brands of paper towels had emphasized absorbency
until Viva was successfully introduced stressing durability, customers were
irritated with towels that disintegrated when wet. Viva’s demonstrations
showed their product’s durability and supported the claim that Viva “Keeps
on working.”
It is always tempting to try to associate a brand with several attributes, so
that no selling argument or market segment is ignored. However, a
positioning strategy which involves too many product attributes can result in a
fuzzy, and sometimes contradictory, confused image. In part, the problem is

that the motivation and ability of the audience to process a message involving
multiple attributes is limited.
The use of several attributes can work well when they support each other.
Saratoga Water is blessed with tiny bubbles that consumers early on said
made the brand easier to drink. Saratoga packaged these unique globules in a
light plastic bottle, to help position the water as a light drink: “Tiny bubbles
make Saratoga light. The new plastic bottle makes it even lighter.” When the
attributes are inconsistent such as Weight Watchers faced in dealing with taste
as well as weight control, the task can be especially difficult.
INTANGIBLES
Companies love to make brand comparisons. Brands engage in shouting
matches, attempting to convince others of the superiority of their brand along
a key dimension or two. Bayer is faster-acting. Texas Instruments has a faster
chip. Lean Cuisine has fewer calories. Volvo has a longer life. Bran One has
more fiber than other cereals. A word processor compares its capabilities
against competitors’ along a list of 30 attributes.
There are several problems with such specmanship. First, a position based
upon a specification is vulnerable to innovation. There will always be a
competitor suddenly a bit faster, or having more fiber or less calories, or
whatever.
Second, when firms start a specification shouting match, they all
eventually lose credibility. After a while nobody believes an aspirin firm that
claims to be the most effective or the fastest-acting. There have been so many
conflicting claims that eventually all have become discounted.
Third, people do not always make decisions based upon a particular
specfication anyway. They may feel that small differences on some attribute
are not important. Or they may simply lack the motivation or ability to
attempt to process information at a detailed level.
Regis McKenna, an advisor to Silicon Valley firms, points out that
intangible factors are more effective associations to develop than specific
attributes. An intangible factor is a general attribute, such as perceived quality
(the subject of Chapter 4), technological leadership, perceived value, or
healthy food, which serves to summarize sets of more-objective attributes.4
Consider, for example, technological leadership. Zeiss sunglasses sell for a
large price premium because of the reputation of the firm as a leader in optics
technology. This reputation is based upon the activities and opinions of its
management, its product line, and its product development over a long time
period. Customers perceived Zeiss as a technological leader without knowing
the specs of specific models or exactly in what way they are superior.
A laboratory study of cameras demonstrated the power of an intangible

attribute.5 Customers were shown two camera brands. One was positioned as
being more technically sophisticated, and the other as easier to use. Detailed
specifications of each brand, also given, clearly showed that the easier-to-use
brand had the superior technology. When subjects were shown both brands
together, the easier-to-use brand was rated superior on technology by 94% of
the subjects. However, when the easy-to-use brand was shown two days after
the other was exposed to the subjects, only 36% felt that the easier-to-use
brand had the best technology. With the actual specifications blurring after
two days, most subjects relied upon the high technology positioning to make
their judgment.
General Motors Returns to Its Roots
Alfred Sloan had a segmentation vision for General Motors nearly 70
years ago: Five brand names would each focus upon a different segment with
a distinct product offering.6 In the last few decades, this vision has become
blurred. Each one of the models has tried to cover all segments. Thus
Chevrolet has offered upscale cars, and Cadillac the small, lower-priced
Cimmaron. In fact, during the mid-1980s, the five brands were accused of
being virtually identical. This lack of differentiation was blamed by some for
the loss of market share.
General Motors brought in advertising executive Shirley Young in 1988, in
part to lead a return to the basic concept of Sloan. Her prescription was to
identify the historical associations of the brand, the heritage, and then create
products and advertising which represent contemporary but consistent
versions of that heritage. According to Young a brand is a friend, and you
don’t tamper with what it means to people. Rather than throwing away the
established associations, you simply update them.
Each GM brand searched its history to rediscover what it stood for—what
differentiated it. Thus, simply put, Chevrolet is to build lower-priced quality
cars; Pontiac is to concentrate on performance and a younger market;
Oldsmobile should excel in innovative technology; Buick should focus on
highway comfort; and Cadillac is to be the standard of luxury worldwide.
The new focus has influenced the GM offering—there is evidence that the
strategies of the brands are more distinct. The Chevrolet “Heartbeat of
America” campaign is consistent with the heritage of Chevrolet. Buick is
focusing upon older customers and emphasizing “distinctive, substantial,
powerful, and mature” cars with the theme “Premium American motorcars.”
Pontiac is offering all-wheel drive, and features excitement. Oldsmobile will
offer a new engineering development that projects dashboard readings onto
the lower windshield. Cadillac is more consistently upscale, aimed for the

older driver.
Unlike more concrete attributes, an “intangible attribute” such as
technology, health, or nutrition is more difficult to counter. If Life cereal is
well-positioned on nutrition, it is not as vulnerable as a competitor that
provides 10% of daily vitamin needs (who can be upstaged by another
providing 20%). Further, a consumer is not burdened with learning and
processing detailed information about calories, fiber, and vitamins. The
perception that Life cereal is “healthy” is all that he or she wants to know
about it, unless something happens to stimulate a review of that perception.
A company name like GE, SONY, H-P, IBM, or Ford is used to cover a
wide variety of products and thus does not gain product-specific associations.
However, it still can develop such intangible associations as innovation or
perceived quality, which can help products (and even brands) under its
umbrella. The development of such associations can be tricky, given the
product-level associations over which the firm may have limited control.
CUSTOMER BENEFITS
Because most product attributes provide customer benefits, there usually
is a one-to-one correspondence between the two. Thus, cavity control is both
a product characteristic of Crest, and a customer benefit. Likewise, BMW is
good-handling (a product characteristic) providing the customer driving
satisfaction (a customer benefit). However, whether the dominant association
is a product attribute or a customer benefit can sometimes be pivotal. When
Crest comes to mind, does the customer think of an ingredient like fluoride
and how it works, or is the dominant thought a happy dentist finding no
cavities after a child’s checkup? When BMW is mentioned, is the visual
image that of a car or of a satisfied driver? The difference is important in the
development of associations.
It is useful to distinguish between a rational benefit and a psychological
benefit. A rational benefit is closely linked to a product attribute and would be
part of a “rational” decision process. A psychological benefit, often extremely
consequential in the attitude-formation process, relates to what feelings are
engendered when buying and/or using the brand.
Snickers is an example of a brand which extended its associations from a
candy bar with caramel, nuts, and chocolate to reward at the end of the day, a
psychological benefit. Similarly, “Miller time” has been used to associate
Miller’s beer with a well-deserved break after a day on a construction (or
similar) job. Thus, the association of a product class with all its links to
calories, sugar, or alcohol is replaced by the concept of a reward for work
well done which is linked to positive activities and people.

Table 5-1 shows several examples of how psychological benefits follow
from rational benefits but are very different. A research study used the table’s
examples to test the power of psychological associations.7 A new-product
concept was put forth to respondents with either two rational benefits, two
psycholgoical benefits, or one rational and one psychological benefit. The
experiment was repeated for computers, banking, and shampoos. For
example, a shampoo concept using both benefits was presented as:
When it comes to shampoo, a man’s needs are different than a
woman’s. That’s why now there’s Avanti—the first shampoo designed
specially for men. Avanti is made with a blend of three essential proteins
a man’s hair needs most. And its unique formulation has conditioners
that are built right in. So now with Avanti:
Your hair will be thick, full of body [the rational benefit].
You’ll look and feel terrific [the psychological benefit].
In all three tests the brand concepts were evaluated in terms of the
percentage of users who named the brand concept as one of the top three
brands. In all cases the pure rational appeal was better than the pure
psychological, but also in all cases the combination of one rational and one
psychological benefit was significantly and meaningfully superior (average
rating of 81% versus 64% and 55%).
In a follow-on study, 168 television commercials were obtained for which
a standardized commercial laboratory test had been conducted, and
persuasion or effectiveness scores were available. All 168 commercials were
judged to incorporate a rational benefit, but only 47 were judged to also
contain a psychological benefit. These 47, providing both benefits, had a
higher effectiveness index (136 versus 86) than those that relied only on
rational appeals.
A conclusion from these studies is that a psychological benefit can be a
powerful type of association, even for products like computers. Further, a
psychological benefit will be more effective if it is accompanied by a rational
benefit.
TABLE 5-1 Psychological Benefits
Product

Feature
Bubble

Rational
Benefit
Can’t lose

Psychological Benefit

Computer memory

your work

Job safety/security

TouchEasy to use
Feeling professional
screen entry
High-yield
Make high
Financial security/
Banking
IRA
return
independence
Personal
Personal
Confidence/self-image
Banking
banker
service
enhancement
Built-in
Full, thick
Shampoo
Confidence about looks
conditioner
hair
Natural
Safe to use
Shampoo
Exciting/sexy
protein
every day
SOURCE: Stuart Agres, Emotion in Advertising: An Agency’s View, The
Marschalk Company, 1986.
Computer

RELATIVE PRICE
One product attribute, relative price, is so useful and pervasive that it is
appropriate to consider it separately. In some product classes there are five
well-developed price levels. The evaluation of a brand in these product
classes will start by determining where it stands with respect to one or two of
these price levels.
For example, in the beer market there are mainstream premium beers such
as Budweiser, Coors, and Miller, The super-premium category, which
includes Michelob, Lowenbrau, and Coors Gold, is intended to be perceived
as being of higher quality, meriting a higher price. The highest category
would include such prestige beers as Henry Weinhard, Herman Joseph,
Anchor Steam, Samuel Adams, and some imports, and would have a still
higher expected price and quality level. The economy or “price brand”
category, including Anheuser—Busch’s Busch Bavarian, Stroh’s Old
Milwaukee, and Miller’s Milwaukee’s Best, have a substantially lower price,
and lack the advertising support of the other brands. At the lowest end are the
store brands, such as Brown Derby.
Among general-merchandise stores, the premium ones would be Saks
Fifth Avenue, Neiman Marcus, and Bloomingdale’s, followed by department
stores such as Macy’s, Robinson’s, Bullocks, Rich’s, Filene’s, Dayton’s,
Hudson’s, and so on. Stores like Sears, Montgomery Ward, and J. C. Penney
are positioned below the department stores but above such discount stores as
K-Mart. Table 5-2 shows a profile of the market entrees in the hospitality
industry.

Positioning with respect to relative price can be complex. The brand
usually needs to be clearly in only one of the price categories. The job then is
to position its offering away from others at the same price point. One way is
to relate its offering to a higher price level. For example, Suave is a line of
“economy” shampoos which Helene Curtis has successfully marketed at a
price substantially lower than competitors’. It attempts to position its quality
with the premium shampoos by showing a model saying “When Suave makes
my hair look this good, paying more just doesn’t make sense.” Budget
Gourmet shows an attractive entree on a gold plate with the tag line “If price
is no object, why not spend a little less?” And Isuzu claims it offers an
economy car which performs like a racing car, demonstrating this on a skid
pad much as does Porsche with its 944. The positioning is thus against
another price point.
TABLE 5-2 Hotels Segmented by Price/Quality
Quality
Segment

Competitors Typical Bath Amenities

Motel 6
Budget Econolodge
McSleep
Days Inn
Economy Hampton
Comfort
Courtyard
Midrange Ramada
Holiday Inn

Two small bars of soap, plastic or paper
cups, two towels
Medium bars of soap, plastic cups,
shampoo
Plush towels, some individual toilets

Baskets with bath gel, body gel, body
cream, mouthwash, shoe and sewing
Luxury
equipment, shower caps; oversize towels;
some hair dryers
Four
Fresh flowers, potpourri, designer soap,
Super
Seasons Hyatt glass tumblers, lighted makeup mirrors, terry
Luxury
Regency
robes, retractable clothesline, telephone and
Westin Hotels TV, marble fixtures, heating lamps
Clarion
Luxury Suites Embassy
Additional sink and vanity in bedroom;
Suites
Suites Guest
suite accommodations
Quarters
SOURCE: In part drawn from Faye Rice, “Hotels Fight for Business
Guests,” Fortune, April 23, 1990, pp. 265-274.
Marriott
Renaissance
Clarion

Positioning against brands with a higher relative price by upgrading a
brand can be tricky. Sears, for example, periodically has attempted to offer
more upbeat fashion clothing featuring designer labels. But advertising
upscale fashions invariably adversely affects their core-value image:
Customers wonder whether they are still the value store. Attempting to offer
merchandise competitive with a department store’s runs the risk that
customers will suspect that Sears has become a department store. Worse, the
conclusion may be that Sears is an inferior department store, rather than the
desired conclusion that Sears remains (as usual) a superior-value store.
The premium segment is enticing in many markets because it often
represents an area with high growth and high margins somewhat protected
from the murderous cost-price squeeze from offshore firms. To be a part of
the premium category, a brand has to offer a credible case either that it is
superior with respect to quality, or that it indeed can deliver status worth a
price premium. One vehicle to help accomplish that positioning is a brand
name having “premium” connotations. Thus, the makers of Old Spice
licensed the right to use the Pierre Cardin name in order to provide a premium
line of fragrances.
Attempts to elevate an existing brand name, such as the Reserve Cellars of
Ernest & Julio Gallo, Coors Gold, Maxwell Master Blends, or Candle Lite by
Weight Watchers, is difficult. The name itself means a lower relative price.
Thus, the case that suddenly there also is premium quality or status is just that
much harder to make. It is much easier to move a brand down than up.
Moving down, however, creates the risk of damaging the existing quality
association.
USE/APPLICATION
Another approach is to associate the brand with a use or application.
Campbell’s soup for many years positioned itself as a lunchtime product and
used noontime radio extensively. More recently it has been repositioned as a
complete meal. The Bell Telephone Company has associated long-distance
calling with communicating with loved ones, in its “Reach out and touch
someone” campaign. Coors Beer associates its product with the outdoors,
mountains, and hiking, whereas Lowenbrau associates its beer with good
friends in a warm social setting.
A study of the coffee market revealed that there were nine relevant use
contexts for coffee:8
1. To start the day
2. Between meals alone

3. Between meals with others
4. With lunch
5. With supper
6. At dinner with guests
7. In the evening
8. To keep awake in the evening
9. On weekends
In this study there were sharp differences in brand profiles across use
occasion (Hills Brothers had a 7% share of breakfast use but only a 1.5%
share of the remainder of the day). The major differences were found between
AM and PM coffee drinkers.
Products can, of course, have multiple positioning strategies, although
increasing the number involves obvious difficulties and risks. Often a
positioning-by-use strategy represents a second or third position for the brand,
a position that deliberately attempts to expand the brand’s market. Thus,
Gatorade (a beverage for athletes who, particularly in the summer, need to
replace body fluids) has attempted to develop a positioning strategy for the
winter months. The concept is to use Gatorade when flu attacks and the
doctor says “Drink plenty of fluids.” Similarly, Quaker Oats has attempted to
position their hot cereal product as a natural wholegrain ingredient for
recipes, in addition to its accustomed breakfast-food role.
USER/CUSTOMER
Another positioning approach is to associate a brand with a type of
product user or customer. When it works, a user positioning strategy is
effective because it can match positioning with a segmentation strategy.
Identifying a brand with its target segment often is a good way to appeal to
that segment.
The role of a user position can be illustrated by the cosmetics industry in
the late 1980s.9 The dominant firm featured Noxell’s Cover Girl line, which,
with just over 20% of the market, had a sharply defined image as the makeup
for the girl next door. Cover Girl was firmly established as the product for
wholesome, healthy (and usually blonde) women. Revlon garnered around
15% of the market by being associated with presumably more-sophisticated
women. In contrast, Schering—Plough’s Maybelline held just under 20% of
the market, but was slipping in part because it lacked a strong image. It had
relied upon mass marketing—drug stores and discount chains, low price,
trade promotion, and new-product innovation in order to maintain their
market position. To firm up the brand, it was repositioned as the cosmetic line
for the “style leader,” putting forth an image of a fashion-forward company

with a host of products for chic women. Using the theme “Smart, beautiful,
Maybelline,” ads showed fashionable women, suggesting what sort of assets
their cosmetics truly are—a far cry from the old ads describing the bright
colors and chemical composition of its eyeshadow.
Another example of a firm which attempts to find neglected users is
Cadbury, with its Canada Dry ginger ale, soda, and seltzer products, and its
Schweppes line.10 Cadbury has targeted the adult soft-drink market, leaving
the teen-age market to Coke and Pepsi. Canada Dry ginger ale got a new,
cleaner green-and-gold package and the advertising tag line “For when your
tastes grow up.” The logic is that as people mature, they begin to want a drink
that is less sweet—like ginger ale. A raspberry ginger ale was added, to
provide an alternative to fruit-flavored seltzers. And Schweppes tonic water
benefited from those who might want a nonalcoholic cocktail.
A classic example of a successful user association was the decision by
Miller’s to position Miller Lite as a beer for the “heavy” beer drinker—the
one who wants to drink a lot but dislikes that filled-up feeling. In contrast,
previous efforts by others to introduce low-calorie beers were dismal failures,
partly because they emphasized the low-calorie aspect. One even claimed its
beer had fewer calories than skim milk, and another featured a thin light-beer
personality.
A problem with a strong association, particularly a strong user association,
is that it limits the ability of a brand to expand its market. For example, Club
Med caters to couples—in fact, the average age of its guests is 37.11 Further,
six Club Med villages are oriented to kids and even have baby clubs. Yet the
Club Med image is of a resort for physically fit singles wanting to meet other
young singles. The task of expanding the customer base requires convincing
those intimidated from exploring that type of resort that it is an appropriate
destination for people with children. Thus, their strong image is both a
strength and a limitation.
CELEBRITY/PERSON
A celebrity often has strong associations. Linking a celebrity with a brand
can transfer those associations to the brand. One characteristic important for a
brand to develop is technological competence, the ability to design and
manufacture a product. In tennis rackets, for example, a key element of
marketing strategy is to obtain endorsements from leading tournament
players. Especially in the case of a new racket, the endorsement of a name
player is crucial. Prince, now the leading racket company, started with an
unusually oversized racket in 1975. The racket did not really become a viable
mainstream competitor until Pam Shriver, a prominent touring pro, started
using it.

It is most difficult to convince people that your product, whether it be
Prince rackets or Nike basketball shoes, is superior in design and manufacture
to those of your competitors. The challenge is not only to create a credible
argument, but also to get people to listen to it and believe it in the face of
similar competitive claims. By contrast, it is relatively easy for people to
believe that Pam Shriver uses Prince. She says she does, and in fact since she
plays in public the word would get out if she did not do what she claims.
Further, since so much is riding on her performance, it is obvious that she
would not use Prince unless it was superior in her eyes. Of course, the more
successful Pam Shriver is, the greater will be her credibility.
In the mid-eighties, Nike faced a challenge from Reebok, who had
exploited the aerobics craze to take over first place in the athletic-shoe
market.12 Nike came back with Air Jordans, basketball shoes using aircushioning technology featuring patented pressurized-gas pockets in the soles
(“Pump it up!”). The shoe was a smash success, with first-year sales of over
$100 million. Its key was the endorsement of the apparently gravity-defying
basketball player Michael Jordan bolstered by his electrifying demonstrations
in the Nike advertising.
A person attached to the brand need not be a celebrity. The fabled man in
the Hathaway shirt wearing an eyepatch, Betty Crocker, Juan Valdez
(Colombian coffee), Mrs. Paul, Mr. Whipple, Mr. Goodwrench, the Maytag
repair man, and the Marlboro man have strong identities and characteristics
that have become important brand associations. The person need not even be
real. It can be a cartoon symbol such as Mr. Clean, the Pillsbury Doughboy,
the Keebler elves, or the Michelin tire giant.
There is more control over the associations of a fictional character like
Betty Crocker than a real person who will age and change over time. It is
much more feasible to have the Marlboro man retain the same associations
over a long time period than someone like Bill Cosby, M. C. Hammer, or Jane
Fonda. Of course, some symbols like Sara Lee, Colonel Sanders, Laura
Scudder, and Famous Amos have become detached from the real people they
represent.
LIFE-STYLES/PERSONALITY
If your car were suddenly to become a human being, what kind of person
would you expect it to be? Great to have around? Hard to live with? Every
person, of course, possesses a personality and a life-style that is rich,
complex, and vivid and distinctive as well. But a brand—even a machine such
as a car—can be imbued by customers with a number of very similar
personality and life-style characteristics.
A study of Betty Crocker illustrates.13 Research, involving more than

3,000 women, focused not only upon the Betty Crocker image but also upon
women’s feelings about desserts in general. They found that 90% of the
women polled were familiar with the Betty Crocker name. In general, Betty
Crocker was viewed as a company that was:
Honest and dependable
Friendly and concerned about consumers
A specialist in baked goods
—but also:
Out-of-date
Old and traditional
A manufacturer of “old standby” products
Not particularly contemporary or innovative
The conclusion was that the Betty Crocker image needed to be
strengthened to become more modern and innovative, and less old and stodgy.
Research by Pepsi reported by Pepsi’s president Rodger Enrico, involving
17 groups of loyal drinkers of either Pepsi or Coke, provided insights into the
personalities of the two brands.14 Generally, Coke projected a Norman
Rockwell-type image of family and flag, and a solid, rural America. Pepsi, by
contrast, was considered exciting, innovative, and fast-growing—albeit
somewhat brash and pushy. Building on this research, Pepsi decided to exploit
and reinforce its image. It therefore moved away from the Pepsi challenge
taste-test and returned to the Pepsi generation with a campaign featuring
Michael Jackson.
PRODUCT CLASS
Some brands need to make critical positioning decisions that involve
product-class associations. For example, Maxim freeze-dried coffee needed to
position itself with respect to both regular and instant coffees. Some
margarines position themselves with respect to butter. Dried-milk makers
came out with instant breakfast positioned as a breakfast substitute, and a
virtually identical product positioned as a dietary meal substitute. The hand
soap Caress by Lever Brothers positioned itself apart from the soap category,
toward a bath-oil product.
Wasa Crispbread was positioned as a high-fiber, low-calorie alternative to
rice cakes, Ry-Crisp, and similar products. In order to expand their business,
they repositioned as an alternative to bread. Ad campaigns showed the
product being used as an open-faced sandwich with attractive toppings.
The soft drink 7-Up was for a long time perceived as a mixer beverage,

despite efforts to emphasize its “fresh, clean taste” and “thirst-quenching”
properties. An effort was made to reposition the brand as a soft drink, as a
logical alternative to the “colas” but with a better taste. The successful Uncola
campaign was the result.
COMPETITORS
In most positioning strategies, the frame of reference, whether explicit or
implicit, is one or more competitor(s). In some cases the reference
competitor(s) can be the dominant aspect of the positioning strategy. It is
useful to consider positioning with respect to a competitor for two reasons.
First, the competitor may have a firm, well-crystallized image, developed
over many years, which can be used as a bridge to help communicate another
image referenced to it. If someone wants to know where a particular address
is, it is easier to say it is next to the Bank of America building than to describe
the various streets to take to get there. Second, sometimes it is not important
how good customers think you are; it is just important that they believe you
are better than (or perhaps as good as) a given competitor.
Perhaps the most famous positioning strategy of this second type was the
Avis “We’re number two, we try harder” campaign. The message was that the
Hertz company was so big that they did not need to work hard. The strategy
was to position Avis with Hertz as major car-rental options, and therefore to
position Avis away from National, which at the time was a close third to Avis.
Positioning with respect to a competitor can be an excellent way to create
a position with respect to a product characteristic, especially price—quality.
Thus, products that are difficult to evaluate, such as liquor products, often will
use an established competitor to help the position task. For example, Sabroso
(a coffee liqueur) positioned itself with the established brand, Kahlua, with
respect to both quality and the type of liqueur. Its print advertisement showed
the two bottles side-by-side and used the heading “Two great imported coffee
liqueurs. One with a great price.”
Positioning with respect to a competitor can be accomplished by
comparative advertising—advertising in which a competitior is explicitly
named and compared on one or more product characteristics. Pontiac has used
this approach to position some of their domestically produced cars as being
comparable in gas mileage and price to leading imported cars. Pontiac could
attempt to position itself as having improved gas mileage without mentioning
the competition, but it would be a more difficult task. By comparing Pontiac
to a competitor which has a well-defined economy image, like a Volkswagen
Rabbit, and using factual information such as EPA gas ratings, the
communication task becomes easier.
COUNTRY OR GEOGRAPHIC AREA

A country can be a strong symbol, as it has close connections with
products, materials, and capabilities. Thus, Germany is associated with beer
and upscale automobiles, Italy with shoes and leather goods, and France with
fashions and perfume. These associations can be exploited by associating a
brand with a country.
The fastest-growing segment of the liquor market, imported vodka, is
largely driven by country connections. The leading brand, Stolichnaya, has a
Russia association. Other competitors have an association with Finland
(Finlandia), Sweden (Absolut), and Iceland (Icy). The connection with such
countries provides a fresh, crisp, frosty image. The Icy product was
embarrassed when word got out that some of the ingredients came from the
corn fields of the Midwest.
There can be sharp differences between countries with respect to people’s
perceptions. A study of TV sets and automobiles conducted in a mid-America
city in the mid-1980s illustrates.15 Respondents were asked to rate models
described as being made in one of four countries. For both products, Japan
was rated highest on economy, workmanship, and technology, while the U.S.
was highest on service, and Germany on prestige. There were differences
among the products. U.S. products were higher than German with respect to
technology in TV sets, but the reverse was true in automobiles. The U. S.
service edge over Germany was much higher in TV sets than in automobiles.
Another study involving 13 products, 21 perceptual dimensions, and 5
countries suggests that the impact of a country will vary sharply, depending
upon the context.16 For example, the French were much more sensitive to
country of origin than were Canadians. The French regarded products from
France, Japan, and the U.S. as generally superior to those from Canada and
Sweden. U.S. products were held in higher regard in Canada and France than
in Britain. The impact of the country of origin receded among those who had
visited there and thus had firsthand experience. Issues about country
associations can get both complex and important as countries attempt to
develop global strategies.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. Who are the major competitors for your brand, by segment? How is
each actually perceived? Identify the two most important competitive
dimensions—i.e., taste and weight control for frozen dinners. Graphically
place each competitive brand in a two-dimensional chart. Where is each brand
attempting to be positioned? Note on the chart differences between
positioning strategies and actual positions.
2. Does your brand have any associations that should be exploited, either
by solidifying a position in the current product class or by extending into a

new product class? Weight Watchers started with weight control and added
health and nutrition associations. Are there any associations that should be
added to your brand? Consider the 12 types of associations discussed as a
starting point.
3. Some associations like the Wells Fargo stage coach serve as a link to
other, more useful, associations like reliability and independence. Does your
brand now have, or does it need to obtain, such linking associations?

6
The Measurement of Brand Associations

·
Far better an approximate answer to the right question, which is
often vague, than an exact answer to the wrong question, which can
always be made precise.
John Tukey [Statistician]

THE FORD TAURUS STORY
In December of 1985, Ford launched its Taurus automobile.1 As shown in
Figure 6-1, it had a rounded, aerodynamic look and “feel.” This design was a
radical departure from the norm, and thus a major risk for Ford.
The car was a smashing success in the upper-middle car segment, which
included the Chevrolet Celebrity, the Oldsmobile Ciera, the Pontiac 6000, the
Chrysler LeBaron, the Audi 4000, the Nissan Maxima, the Toyota Cressida,
and the car that the Taurus replaced, the Ford LTD. During its second year,
Taurus’s sales hovered around 100,000 units per quarter. In contrast, its prime
competitor, the Chevrolet Celebrity, saw its sales, which had been over
100,000 per quarter, fall to 60,000-70,000 per quarter. Clearly, the risk had
paid off.
During the early life of Taurus, Ford conducted extensive periodic
research on the associations of the model. A description of this research
provides insights into how the Taurus won the day. It also suggests how
association research can work.

FIGURE 6-1 A Ford Taurus Ad
Courtesy of Ford Motor Co.
A marketing research firm, Allison-Fisher, maintains a panel of 200,000
nationally representative homes whose occupants are compensated for filling
out questionnaires periodically. A subsample of this panel who are both
planning to purchase a car in the next six months and are familiar with the
cars in the segment are contacted. The perceptions of each car in the segment
are obtained from each sample member. For each of the segment cars, the
respondent is asked to check those attributes which are descriptive of that car.
Figure 6-2 shows the resulting profile for the Ford LTD in June of 1985,
the Taurus six months later, just after it was introduced, and the Taurus again
in December of 1987. Clearly, the image of the Taurus was sharply different
from that of the LTD from the outset. In contrast to the LTD, the Taurus was

regarded as being technologically advanced, sporty, likely to get excellent gas
mileage, and designed with young people in mind. However, the Taurus also
clearly had major problems. It was regarded less favorably with respect to
being a family car, quality, interior room (int room) being a car that will last a
long time (lastlong) and handling. Clearly these perceived liabilities needed to
be addressed.

FIGURE 6-2 Ford LTD and Taurus Image Profiles
During its first two years, the Taurus advertising stressed quality and
workmanship, and attempted to provide facts to demonstrate that the car did
have interior room and was suitable for families. Notice how the disparity
between the Taurus and the old LTD position changed during those two years.
The Taurus image on “for families,” “interior room,” “workmanship,” “ride
quality,” “long lasting,” and notably “good-looking” increased dramatically.
On the other hand, the car was perceived as being less “technologically
advanced” as it had been at the outset—probably a good omen for Ford.
The Figure 6-2 data are somewhat hard to process as-is, and would be
more so were numbers from seven other cars to be added. A solution, termed
multidimensional scaling, is to position the cars and the attributes in a two- or
three-dimensional space (termed a perceptual map) providing a representation
with the following two characteristics: (1) Cars that have similar profiles are
positioned close together, and cars that have dissimilar profiles are positioned
far apart. (2) Cars that rate high on an attribute are placed close to that
attribute, and cars that are rated low on an attribute are placed far away from

that attribute.
Obviously the result is not as complete or accurate a portrayal as the
profile shown in Figure 6-2. However, especially when several of the
attributes are closely related (excellent gas mileage, economical to operate,
and good value), a two- or three-dimensional representation can be helpful.
Figure 6-3 shows a three-dimensional portrayal of the market prior to the
introduction of the Taurus. Each car is represented and located via a triangle,
on the floor of the space, attached by a vertical line to a floating name-plate,
or “balloon,” showing its height. The locations of the cars and their attributes
suggest the dimension labels: Prestige/Economy, Import/Domestic, and
Unproven/Dependable. Note that the imports, which are all high on
workmanship, are clustered together near the Workmanship attribute. They
differ, however, on Prestige, which displays a distinct ordering of first Audi,
then Maxima, and then Cressida. Note also that the LTD has an extreme
position on the Family, Roominess, Domestic side of the space.
Figure 6-4 shows graphically where the Taurus was positioned both in
1985 and two years later. As was said earlier, when the Taurus entered the
market it occupied a very distinct position. After two years it became more of
a domestic Family car that was Good-looking but still was considered Sporty
and Technologically advanced.
Of interest is the relationship of the Taurus to its competitors. In fact, the
imports were largely unaffected by the Taurus; they maintained Workmanship
and Younger images. However, the new Ford had a substantial impact on the
images of the GM cars. Prior to the Taurus’s arrival the Celebrity, the Ciera,
and the Pontiac 6000 were spread out comfortably throughout the space.
Thus, they avoided head-on competition with each other, and appealed
collectively to a broad portion of the segment. The Taurus, however, pushed
the GM cars closer together, toward the Family and Roominess position. The
Pontiac 6000 was particularly hurt.

FIGURE 6-3 The Upper Middle Segment Before Taurus
June 1985
The Ford Taurus example demonstrates the role of association research, as
illustrated by Figures 6-2, 6-3, and 6-4, in developing and implementing
positioning strategies. Of course, Ford can afford to spend much more on
association research than most firms, because the market in which it is
engaged is so huge. However, many of the basic issues of association
measurement appear in the Ford example, and thus it should be instructive to
others as well. Attributes need to be identified. The perceptions of brands and
their competitors need to be obtained. And the position of the brands with
respect to attributes and competitors needs to be analyzed.

FIGURE 6-4 The Impact of the Taurus upon GM
DEC. 1985 → 1987

WHAT DOES THIS BRAND MEAN TO YOU?
The Ford example illustrates the structured scaling approach to
determining perceptions of a brand and its competitors. Issues concerning,
and techniques for implementing, scaling approaches will be considered
shortly. However, first we shall consider less-structured approaches useful for
providing a rich, insightful picture of how a brand is perceived.
An obviously direct way to find out what a brand means to people is to
ask them. An in-depth discussion of a brand, either with individual customers
or with focus groups of up to 10 participants, can be quite helpful. Among
questions to be pursued are: What brands are used? Why? What brand
associations exist? What feelings are associated with the brand use? What
people?
INDIRECT APPROACHES
Although direct approaches toward learning perceptions can be useful,

often it is worthwhile to consider more-indirect methods—even some that
might appear a bit offbeat. The indirect approaches often are motivated by the
assumption that respondents may be either unwilling or unable to reveal
feelings, thoughts, and attitudes when asked direct questions.
Respondents may be unwilling because they feel the information is
embarrassing or private. For example, they may realize that their reason for
using designer jeans is that the jeans make them feel socially accepted—“in
style.” They may cope either by not answering or (more frequently) by
providing rationalizations that appear logical: They might focus upon quality
of workmanship, fit, price, and/or style, even though such considerations are
in fact secondary.
Alternatively, respondents may simply be unable to provide information
as to why they buy certain items because they don’t know the real reasons.
For example, they simply may not be consciously aware that a feeling of
social acceptance was a dominant feeling and motivation. The actual feelings
may have been suppressed via a defense mechanism, or might never have
arisen—simply because there has never before been a reason to think the
matter through.
Many of the approaches to be presented are termed projective methods.
They address the two aforementioned problems, in part by allowing the
respondent to project him- or herself into a context which bypasses the
inhibitions or limitations of more-direct questioning. In projection research
the goal usually is disguised. Thus, instead of focusing on the brand, the
discussion centers upon the use experience, the decision process, the brand
user, or off-the-wall perspectives such as considering the brand to be a person
or an animal. Another characteristic of projection research is the use of
ambiguous stimuli, wherewith there is freedom to project experiences,
attitudes, and perceptions. The questions and procedures used tend not to be
confining.
Anyone responsible for a brand should seriously consider employing
indirect approaches to help understand what a brand means to people. In
many cases they should be replicated through time, and across segments as
well and should be followed by more structured scaling approaches. It is
inexcusable to have to guess at people’s perception of a brand. There are
many indirect approaches to understanding brand associations. Figure 6-5
shows nine we will here discuss.
FREE ASSOCIATION
Word association is an effort to bypass the inhibiting thinking process of
the respondent. The procedure is to have a list of objects consisting of, or
including, brand names. The respondent is asked to provide the first set of

words that come to mind. The key is to avoid thinking or evaluating but rather
to generate words and thoughts as fast as they arrive. Although these can be
written down by the respondent, an oral response is often better at capturing
spontaneous thoughts. The word association task can be followed with a
discussion of why a certain association emerged.

FIGURE 6-5 Determining Brand Meanings
This technique is particularly good for getting reactions to potential brand
names and slogans. For example, Bell Telephone found that “The System Is
the Solution” triggered negative “Big Brother is watching you” reactions
among some people.
The result of a word association task often is hundreds of words and ideas.
To evaluate quantitatively the relative importance of each, a representative set
of the target segment can be asked to rate on a five-point scale how well the
word fits the brand, from “fits extremely well” to “fits not well at all.”
For perspective, it is useful to conduct the same associative research on
competitive brands. When such a scaling task was performed on words
generated from a word association task for McDonald’s, the strongest
associations were with the words Big Macs, Golden Arches, Ronald, Chicken
McNugget, Egg McMuffin, everywhere, familiar, greasy, clean, food, cheap,
kids, well-known, French fries, fast, hamburgers, and fat. In the same study,
Jack-in-the-Box had much-lower associations with the words everywhere,
familiar, greasy, and clean, and much-higher associations with tacos, variety,

fun, and nutritious.
A variant of word association is sentence completion. The respondent is
asked to complete a partial sentence such as:
“People like the Mazda Miata because….”
“Burger King is symbolized by….”
• “A friend of yours has just bought his first car. He asks you what he
should do about getting insurance for it. You reply—“You should….”2
Here again the respondent is encouraged to respond with the first thought
that comes to mind.
PICTURE INTERPRETATION
Another approach is to have respondents interpret a scene presented in
which the product or brand is playing a role. For example, in one study
respondents were shown the view of a highway from the driver’s perspective
behind the wheel of a particular car, and asked to put themselves in the scene.
Other respondents did the same for another brand. In both cases the picture
had the capacity to elicit feelings associated with driving, such as showing
assertiveness, power, or social status. In yet another study, a sketch was
shown of a man reading a particular catalog, his wife standing nearby and
making a remark. The respondent was asked to indicate what comment the
wife was making.
Still another study gave respondents two scenarios.3 One involved a break
after a daytime hike on a mountain, while the other was during a small
evening barbecue with close friends. During the scene the beer served was
either Coors or Lowenbrau. Respondents were asked to project themselves
into the scene and indicate on a five-point scale the extent to which they
would feel “warm,” “friendly,” “healthy,” and “wholesome.” The study was
designed to test whether the advertising of Coors and Lowenbrau had
established associations with their use contexts—Coors with hiking,
wholesomeness, and health, and Lowenbrau with a barbecue-type setting,
friends, and warmth. The results showed that Coors was evaluated higher in
the mountain setting and Lowenbrau in the barbecue setting, as expected, but
that the other (word) associations were not sensitive (related) to the setting.
Coors, for example, in the hiking context was higher on the “warm” and
“friendly” dimensions, as well as on “healthy” and “wholesome.”
The use of a picture is one way to allow respondents to express how they
really feel by using the characters in the scene as vehicles to communicate
their own attitudes and feelings. It might be awkward to admit feeling a sense
of power or prestige when driving a BMW, but there is no problem in

attributing these feelings and attitudes to an ambiguous, unnamed character.
Further, attitudes and feelings might emerge of which a respondent was not
consciously aware.
IF THIS BRAND WERE A PERSON
Joseph Plummer, a former research director of Young & Rubicam,
indicates that there are three components to a brand image: product attributes
(Tang is an orange-flavored powder, containing vitamin C, that comes in a
jar), consumer benefits (“lemon-fresh” Pledge polishes furniture and repels
dust), and brand personality.4 A brand might be characterized as being
modern or old-fashioned, lively or dull, conventional or exotic. He argues that
for many product classes brand personality is a key element in understanding
brand choice.
In one study conducted by Y&R, respondents were asked to select from a
set of 50 “personality related” words and phrases those they would use to
describe each of a set of brands. One test of this technique demonstrated that
various brands were perceived very differently. A total of 39% said that
Holiday Inn was “cheerful,” whereas only 6% said that Birds Eye was. Fortytwo percent applied the “youthful” descriptor to Atari; only 3% applied it to
Holiday Inn. Thirty-nine percent described Oil of Olay as “gentle,” while no
one applied it to Miller High Life. In profile, Holiday Inn was described as
cheerful, friendly, ordinary, practical, modern, reliable, and honest, whereas
Oil of Olay was described as gentle, sophisticated, mature, exotic, mysterious,
and down to earth.
Using research, Y&R developed a campaign for a Swedish insurance
company, whose product has associations with accidents and injuries—
outcomes to be avoided. A series of humorous commercials showed that most
accidents could happen to anyone, and actually are humorous, or at least not
really so tragic, if looked at from the “right” perspective. The advertising
created a personality of a firm that was approachable, warm, and (most of all)
human. Somewhat similarly, Dr. Pepper made great sales progress during the
1970s by creating for itself the personality of an original, fun, offbeat
underdog.
Ernest Dichter, the father of qualitative research, routinely used a
psychodrama wherein he asked people to act out a product: “You are Ivory
soap. How old are you? Are you masculine or feminine? What type of
personality do you have? What magazines do you read?”5 The result can be a
rich picture of a brand’s associations.
McCann-Erickson has respondents draw figures of typical brand users.6 In
one case, they asked 50 people to draw figures which would represent two
brands of cake mix, Pillsbury and Duncan Hines. Pillsbury users were

consistently portrayed as apron-clad, grandmotherly types. By contrast,
Duncan Hines’s purchasers were shown as slender, contemporary women. In
another study, McCann asked consumers to write obituaries for two
competing food companies. One firm, perceived as female, elicited warm
responses: “She’ll be missed and can never be replaced.” The other was
depicted as colder, less accessible, and male: “If we only knew him better.”
ANIMALS, ACTIVITIES, AND MAGAZINES
Sometimes, when discussing a brand, people have difficulty in articulating
their perceptions. They tend to use obvious, mundane descriptors because that
is what they are accustomed to using. A Ford Taurus might be described in
terms of obvious characteristics—having an aerodynamic shape and driven by
families with young children. But the challenge is to enhance the richness of
the responses.
A useful approach is to ask customers to relate brands to other kinds of
objects—such as animals, cars, magazines, trees, movies, or books. Questions
might be used, such as:
If Clorox bleach or Tide detergent were animals, what kind of animals
would they be? Why? What characteristics of the animals reminds you of
the brands?
If CitiBank and Bank of America were cars, what models would they be?
If United Airlines, American Airlines, and Delta were magazines, what
would they be?
Y&R is an advertising agency which has productively used this indirect
approach.7 In one study, Y&R gave respondents a list of 29 animals and said:
“If each of these brands was an animal, what one animal would it be?” They
asked similar questions for 25 different activities, 17 fabrics, 35 occupations,
20 nationalities, and 21 magazines. The goal was to obtain customer-created
symbols of brands.
The average symbols that emerged were instructive. Oil of Olay was
associated with mink, France, secretaries, silk, swimming, and Vogue.
Kentucky Fried Chicken, by contrast, was associated with Puerto Rico, a
zebra (recall the stripes on a Kentucky Fried Chicken bucket), a housewife
dressed in denim, camping, and reading TV Guide. The result was a rich
description of the brand that suggested some associations to be developed and
others to be avoided.
THE USE EXPERIENCE
Instead of asking which brand respondents are using, and why, the
discussion might focus on the use experience. A discussion of specific past-

use experiences can allow respondents to open up, to recall and communicate
feelings and contexts that were part of their use experiences. A picture of a
brand can thus emerge which is not filtered or summarized.
Ernest Dichter tells about the first assignment that he conducted for Ivory
soap decades ago.8 Instead of asking why they were using a particular brand
of soap, he engaged 100 customers in depth interviews, letting them talk in a
free associative way about their bathing habits. One finding was that young
women would take an unusually thorough bath before going out on a date.
This observation and others led him to believe that the pre-date bath had a
rituralistic kind of meaning and was associated, in an anthropological sense,
with cleansing oneself of past attitudes and feelings. These insights resulted in
the theme: “Be smart, get a fresh start with Ivory soap.”
Another classic example of insights obtained from a focus upon the use
context is the study of people’s attitudes toward Saran Wrap, a plastic foodwrap. When Saran Wrap was first introduced in the mid-fifties it was very
thin and clingy, which meant it was extremely effective at sealing but also
difficult and frustrating to use. The product, which often would stick to itself,
engendered a dislike from some so intense that it could not be explained by
any rational reaction to the frustration associated with the use difficulty.
A series of depth interviews focusing upon the brand and its use suggested
that a segment of the homemaker population hated the role of keeping house
and cooking. At that time, prior to the emergence of the women’s movement,
it was not acceptable to verbalize this intense dislike—indeed, women were
even inhibited from admitting it to themselves. Lacking an outlet for
expressing themselves, women transferred these feelings onto Saran Wrap.
The frustrations with the product came to symbolize their frustrations with
their role and life-style. As a result of this study, the product was made thicker
and less clingy.
THE DECISION PROCESS
Another approach could be to track a person’s decision process. When a
decision process is dissected, the influence of brand associations often
emerges that may not be a part of someone’s summary picture of a brand. The
associations might be subtle, such as the use experience of a grandfather, or
indirect, such as the nature of who recommended the brand.
Consider the search for a second personal computer for use at home by a
user of an IBM personal computer. It starts by finding which clone would be
cheapest. A concern with service and back-up leads to mail-order brands
(such as Dell) that offer on-site service. An article about the convenience of a
portable stimulates the consideration of Toshiba and Zenith. A friend has a
Toshiba, while the Zenith is used extensively by the U.S. government. A

concern for product obsolescence leads to considering buying a new IBM or
Compaq and using the existing computer as a back-up. However, if the
primary computer is to be upgraded, then maybe an Apple should be
considered, since its graphics capability and ease of use match the application.
This process can lead to some deep insights into the perceptions of Dell,
Toshiba, Zenith, IBM, Compaq, and Apple.
WHAT IS THE BRAND USER LIKE?
Joel Axelrod, a prominent market researcher who has been involved in
many hundreds of brand-research studies, has said that his experience and
experiments have shown that only two questions need to be asked in order to
understand customer preference.9 One, focusing on the brand user, asks how
the user of one brand or product differs from the user of another. In particular,
how do the needs and motivations of the users of the two brands differ? When
the brand user (rather than the brand) is spotlighted, respondents are more
likely to provide responses that go beyond a logical rationale for their brand
choice. (The second question will be discussed shortly).
The basic question can be framed in many ways, and can involve both
open-ended and scaled measures. Respondents can be given a shopping list
(including the brand of interest), or a description of activities of a person
(including the use of the brand), and asked to describe the person in more
detail than provided. The shopping list for one set of people could include one
brand or product, and another set of people would get the same list but with
another brand. The differences in the profile of the person can be very
revealing.
A classic study, conducted when instant coffee was somewhat new and not
entirely acceptable, involved a seven-item shopping list.10 For one group,
Maxwell House drip-grind coffee appeared while Nescafé instant coffee was
on the companion list. The profiles of the two women were very different.
The instant-coffee buyer was perceived as being lazy, a bad homemaker, and
slovenly, whereas the woman buying the drip-grind coffee was industrious, a
good homemaker, and orderly.
Sometimes richer insight can be obtained by a study of the use of product
type rather than brand. In one such study people were shown a crude picture
of two women shopping in a supermarket (see Figure 6-6), each pushing a
shopping cart.11 Told that one woman is purchasing a dry soup mix, they were
asked to tell a story about her and to describe what she is saying to the second
woman (who has never tried a dry soup). They were also asked to tell what
the second woman is like. Projected into the stories by the respondents were
four main-user profiles or types:
1.The creative woman: “The dry-soup user is the good cook, what you call

a creative cook, and she creates miracles with these package soups. By adding
it to hamburger you can create meat loaf that is extraordinary. The other one
just doesn’t know the magic some dry soups can create in your cooking.”

FIGURE 6-6 Two Women Shopping
SOURCE: From “Dreams, Fairy Tales, Animals and Cars,” by Sidney J.
Levy, in Psychology and Marketing, 2, Summer 1985, pp. 67-81, copyright ©
1985 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2.The practical, modern woman: “This one is a young mother with small
children who likes the convenience of dry soup to make easy meals. It’s easier
to store than cans because she can buy more of it and it offers greater variety
in flavors…. She is younger, more apt to try new products and experiment.”
3.The lazy or indifferent woman: “The one on the outside is looking at dry
soups because they are easy to reach, easier to carry home from the store than
canned. She feels they are easier to fix. She is lazy and bored and takes the
easy way out when she is cooking. She likes to shop and get away from the
kids. She has five or six that get on her nerves. She is just going to get
envelopes and fix a big batch for them.”

4.The underprivileged woman: “She has to buy it because she has a very
large family and these are more economical—the dried are lower in price,
three to four cents a serving. The dry-soup buyer says the dry soup is just as
good in taste and nutritional value.”
WHAT DISTINGUISHES BRANDS
FROM ONE ANOTHER?
Recall that Joel Axelrod claimed that two questions provide the key to
understanding preference—the first being how brand users differ.12 The
second question involved learning how a brand or product differed from other
brands or products. It could be that a perceived difference between brands is
the color of the package. Few respondents would say that the package is
important to their purchasing decisions. However, it may be a factor
nevertheless, and focusing upon the differences between brands allows the
respondent to talk about such seemingly irrelevant elements.
One approach is to give the respondent pairs of brands, and ask how they
differ. Another approach that is particularly good at generating customerdriven vocabulary is to give the respondent three brand names from a set of
brands familiar to him or her. The respondent is asked to identify the two
brands that are most similar, and to describe why those two brands are both
similar to and different from the third. The exercise could be applied to a
second and third group of three brands. The more direct approach would be to
ask which brand of a set of two or three is preferred, and why.
FROM PRODUCT ATTRIBUTES TO BENEFITS TO PERSONAL VALUES
The means—end chain model suggests that it is useful to push
respondents beyond product attributes and toward consumer benefits and
personal values.13 The concept is that personal values represent the desired
end state and should be included. Personal values can be externally oriented
(“feeling important” or “feeling accepted”), or can relate to how one views
oneself (“self-esteem,” “happiness,” “security,” “neatness”). Product
attributes such as “miles per gallon” or “strong flavor,” and consumer benefits
such as “saves money” or “don’t have to wash hair so frequently” represent
the means that can be used to achieve the desired ends.
One approach to eliciting a means—end chain can be illustrated by using
an airline example. The process begins with a exercise in which consumers
are asked to state why one airline is preferred. Consumers are then asked why
an attribute such as “wide-body” is preferred. One response might be
“physical comfort.” The consumer is then asked why “physical comfort” is
desired. The answer could be “to get more done.” Another “why” question
yields a value, “feel better about self.” Similarly, the “ground service”
attribute leads to “save time,” “reduce tension,” “in control,” and “feeling

secure.”
An advertising campaign based on the ground-service attribute would then
address the consequences (“save time,” “reduce tension,” and “in control”)
and value (“feeling secure”) dimensions. A mother traveling with children and
needing personal service might be presented. The theme is “in control,” being
able to cope with the situation. The result is a feeling of security that would
become a key brand association.
INTERPRETING QUALITATIVE MARKETING RESEARCH
Much of what has thus far been described is qualitative research, often
involving projective techniques and small samples. Because it is fast,
relatively cheap, and involving to the respondent, it can put managers in close
contact with customers vividly and efficiently. Most of all, it provides the
possibility of obtaining nonintuitive insights which can lead to improved
brand strategy. The key is the interpretation of the research. The following
can help guide the interpretation process:
Be thinking of the bottom line all the time: What is the essence of the
brand? Try to find what Dichter calls the soul of the product: What really
drives decisions to buy and rebuy?
Do not constrain the responses. Let them flow. Use ambiguous stimuli.
Look for what the brand signals. Some foods, for example, signal
sophistication, and others blue-collar.
Look for symbols: What symbolizes the brand? What visual image does
the brand generate?
Look for contrasts. For example, one brand is associated with older men
and another with younger women.
Look at connections. One useful outcome of qualitative research is that
one thought can lead to another, sometimes uncovering links which
stimulate hypotheses about how preferences are formed.
As association/positioning ideas emerge, test them by getting reactions
from respondents.

SCALING BRAND PERCEPTIONS
A more direct way to measure associations is to scale the brands upon a
set of dimensions, as was done in the Ford Taurus example. Scaling
approaches are more objective and reliable than qualitative approaches. Less
vulnerable to subjective interpretation, they can be based upon a

representative sample of customers; the incidence of associations and the
relationships among them can thus be quantified.14
As the Ford example illustrated, scaling perceptions involves determining
perceptual dimensions, identifying the target segment, specifying the
competitive set, presenting and interpreting the brand profiles, and presenting
and (finally) interpreting a two- or three-dimensional spatial representation of
the perceptions. The example also illustrated the value of monitoring the
perceptions over time, and of looking at the dynamics—especially when a
new brand has been introduced.
There are some additional considerations that go into providing
quantitative pictures of a brand image. Several of these issues, assumptions,
considerations, and caveats will now be considered.
BEYOND ATTRIBUTES AND BENEFITS
Of course, perceptual dimensions need not be limited to attributes and
benefits. Suppose a respondent was asked to express his or her agreement or
disagreement on a seven-point scale with statements regarding the attributes
of the American Express travel card. For example:
I would consider the American Express card to be:
Widely accepted at top retail outlets
Widely accepted in Europe
Prestigious
The scale could also be applied to obtain profiles of the user of the brand,
or for use situations:
I would expect the typical American Express card user to be:
Over 50
Wealthy
Independent
Intelligent
The American Express card is very appropriate for:
Traveling in Europe
Travel-related transactions
Shopping
Dining
WHO ARE THE RELEVANT COMPETITORS?
A basic input to most scaling tasks is a list of relevant competitors.15 How
many should be included? Which ones should be considered beyond the set of
clearly identified, close competitors? The answers to two questions often help
address this issue.
First, which competitors are considered by customers making purchase
decisions? For example, a sample of Mazda convertible buyers could be

asked which other cars they considered, and perhaps which other showrooms
they actually visited. A Diet Pepsi buyer might be asked to recall his or her
last purchase of Diet Pepsi, and whether any alternatives went through his or
her mind. Alternatively, the respondent could be asked which brand would
have been purchased had Diet Pepsi been out of stock. The resulting analysis
would identify the primary and secondary groups of competitive products.
Second, which competitors are associated with the major use situations? A
large set of products and use contexts can be obtained by asking respondents
to recall the use contexts for Pepsi, for example. One might be with an
afternoon snack. The respondent could then be asked to name beverages
appropriate to drink with an afternoon snack. For each beverage so identified,
the respondent could be asked to identify appropriate use contexts so that the
list of them would be more complete. This process would continue for
perhaps 20 or 30 respondents, until a large list of use contexts and beverages
was generated.
Another group of respondents would then be asked to make a judgment,
perhaps on a seven-point scale, as to how appropriate each beverage would be
for each use situation. Then, groups of beverages could be clustered, based on
their similarity in terms of appropriate use situations. Thus, if Pepsi was
regarded as appropriate with snacks, it would compete primarily with other
beverages similarly regarded. The same approach would work with an
industrial product such as computers, which might be used in several rather
distinct applications.
REMOVING REDUNDANCY: IDENTIFYING UNDERLYING DIMENSIONS
A very large set of relevant scales can emerge from qualitative research. A
technique such as factor analysis is used to reduce this set to a few underlying
factors or dimensions by combining the words or phrases whose meanings are
similar: A brand that is scaled high on one of the “redundant” scales will tend
to be rated high on the others as well.
For example, a car dealership might be perceived to differ by the
efficiency of repair, the cleanliness of the shop, the friendliness of the service
contact person, and the ease of making appointments. When a shop is
perceived to be high on one of those four attributes, it will tend also to be high
on the others. In that sense, they are redundant and might be combined by a
summary construct that might be labeled as “repair service quality.”
IDENTIFYING THE IMPORTANT
PERCEPTUAL DIMENSIONS
Of concern in any scaling study is identifying the most important
perceptual dimensions. One direct way of obtaining this information is asking
respondents how important each attribute or benefit is to their choice of

brands. The problem here is that many respondents claim that all dimensions
are important to them.
A second approach is identifying which attributes discriminate between
buyers and nonbuyers. One study of snack food found that although nutrition
and convenience were the attributes rated most important by mothers, “taste”
and “kids like it” were better predictors of purchase.
A third way (discussed in Chapter 1 in the context of placing a value upon
a brand name) is asking trade-off questions: If you had to sacrifice a low
price, high reliability, or a particular feature, which would you give up?
Termed trade-off (or conjoint) analysis, this technique provides a sensitive
measure of dimension importance to a customer.
A consideration is whether the perceptual dimensions discriminate
between brands. If an attribute really discriminates, sets one brand off against
another, it might be worth retaining even though it does not seem important
according to other measures. There may be something hidden that makes it
more influential than it appears it should be. Conversely, if an attribute or
benefit patently appears to be important (such as airline safety) but does not
discriminate between brands, then it may be of only marginal usefulness.
Natural Groupings
Research International, a major international marketing-research
firm, uses a technique (termed “natural grouping”) which combines
elements of both quantitative and qualitative research. They start with a
set of brands or products. Respondents are asked to divide the set
successively into subsets. At each split the respondent is asked to
describe the subgroups in his or her own words.
Suppose that five insurance firms were to be evaluated by a
respondent. (See Figure 6-7.) The group is first divided into two subsets,
and reasons are given as to the rationale therefor. Each subset is divided
further, until there is no reason to make additional divisions.

FIGURE 6-7 Grouping Insurance Firms
A two- or three-dimensional perceptual map of the population can be
obtained from the data: Brands most often grouped together will be close
to one another in the space, and brands not frequently in the same group
will be relatively far apart. The technique is called correspondence
analysis. Further, the associations with each brand can be obtained, and
positioned in the space with the pertinent brand (as in Figure 6-3).
THE SCALING TASK
There is always a concern with the validity of the scaling task. Can a
respondent actually position beers on an “aged a long time” dimension? There
could be several problems. One, a possible unfamiliarity with one or more of
the brands, can be handled by asking the respondent to evaluate only familiar
brands (although even the degree to which a respondent is familiar with a
brand might still be an issue). Another potential problem is the respondent’s
ability to understand operationally what “aged” means, or how to evaluate a
brand on this dimension. Any ambiguity in the scale, or inability of a
respondent to use the scale, will affect the validity and reliability of the
results.
Yet another concern is with the nature of the scale used. Customers can be
asked to simply check whether a certain item is associated with a brand. A
relatively easy task, this can lend itself to a large number of dimensions and
telephone interviewing. Rank-order data (which brand is the highest on this
dimension, the second highest, etc.) generates very sensitive information, but
also can exaggerate small differences. A five-or seven-point scale is an
alternative that taps the information of the respondent most completely.
DETERMINING PERCEPTIONS BY SEGMENT
Perceptual measurement needs to be done with respect to a specified
segment within the context of a competitive set of brands. In the Ford Taurus
case the upper middle market segment defined both the set of competitors and
the segment.
Much of the time the scaling task should be done for multiple segments.
Any relevant segment defined by age, life-style, attitude, or usage may well
have different perceptions from others’. For example, the user and nonuser
groups quite often differ in their brand perceptions. And these are the very
differences that often drive preference and purchase. Thus, in the Ford Taurus
case it might be worthwhile to look at the differences between those who are
considering or have bought the Taurus and those who have not.

BEYOND PERCEPTIONS
Interest is not only in the associations with the brand, and the position of
the brand on the perceptual dimensions, but also on:
1. Association strength. How confident are customers about the
associations with the brand?
2. Clarity of the image. Do customers agree upon the associations with a
brand (a clear, sharp image often means a strong, differentiated brand)?
Or does the image differ across people? The task of sharpening a
diffused image is quite different from the task of changing a very tight,
established one. Sometimes, of course, a brand like Pepsi will want
ambiguity on some attributes—such as the type of people who drink the
product. If the Pepsi drinker were too tightly defined, some segments
might be alienated.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. What does your brand mean to each major segment? What are the word
associations? If your brand were an animal, what animal would it be?
Similarly, which magazine, car, tree, person, or book? What is really going on
in the use experience? What is the soul of your brand—its inner meaning?
Which types of people are thought to use your brand? Which ages, gender,
and life-styles? How do perceptions of your brand differ from competitors’
brands? What values are influenced by your brand (i.e., security, control, selfassurance, etc.)?
2. Who are the competitors of your brand? What is the profile of your
brand on the most relevant perceptual dimensions, and how does it differ from
the profile of competitor brands? Using what you feel are the two most
important perceptual dimensions, position the major competitors in a twodimensional space. Would it be useful to conduct a quantitative study to
confirm that the space is actually as you have drawn it?

7
Selecting, Creating, and
Maintaining Associations

·
A man is known by the company he keeps.
Anonymous
I think of advertising as the engine pulling a train. If you take away
the engine the train will roll along for a while, but eventually the train
will slow.
Pierre Ferrari Coca-Cola Foods

THE DOVE STORY
A by-product of World War II was the discovery of a soap-like product,
later named the Dove “beauty bar” by Lever Brothers. The product, made
from a soap-like molecule without the potentially irritating alkaline element,
is a ph-neutral, mild cleansing product. It generates a noticeably different
“feel” to the skin when used regularly.
Dove was introduced nationally in 1957. It was positioned as a beauty bar
(not a soap) with one-fourth cleansing cream that “creams” skin while
washing. The cleansing cream was shown being poured into the beauty bar.
The message was that whereas soap dries your skin, Dove creams your skin
while you wash. This original positioning with the association of cream is still
being used, virtually unchanged since 1957. The claim has been buttressed by
a face-test testimonial approach (introduced in 1969), by a seven-day test

(1979), and by the replacement of the word “cleansing cream” with
“moisturizer cream” (also 1979). However, the basic position remains.
One measure of the strength of the Dove equity is the relative price that it
maintains. In 1987 its market share was 9%, but its dollar share was 13.8%,
reflecting the premium price that it commanded.
A common belief is that a strong association can be developed in people’s
minds within a period of years, or even months, especially if a healthy
advertising campaign is available. The Dove story illustrates the power of
sustained, consistent communication efforts. Dove enjoyed over three decades
of advertising showing moisturizing cream being poured into the beauty bar,
and testimonials affirming its moisturizer potency. There are many customers
who have seen a Dove ad 600 times over 30 years and have had those
exposures reinforced through product usage by themselves and others familiar
to them. Think of the difficulty of a competitor product trying to take over the
moisturizer position: It would be very difficult, even with a breakthrough
product.
Dove did introduce a brand extension in the 1960s, a dishwasher detergent
to compete with Ivory. The extension has survived, but may have been a
mistake. The creamy association of Dove did not help the dishwasher product.
Further, although the detergent did provide name recognition over the years, it
could not have been helpful to the associations important to the beauty bar.

THE HONEYWELL STORY1
Honeywell is a $7 billion firm which has long been a leader in providing
solutions to control and automation problems for buildings, industrial process
applications, aircraft, and other settings. In most areas it is considered the
premium high-quality option.
Honeywell developed an image problem caused by its attempt to be “The
Other Computer Company.” A commitment was made to computers in the
1960s, in part because computer technology was believed to be important to a
core part of their control and automation businesses, and in part because it
looked attractive. The effort failed: They could not develop a presence with a
critical mass in computers, and in 1986 they began to divest themselves of the
business.
The highly visible computer and information systems dominated the
image of Honeywell, clouding their association with control and automation.
Rather than as a leader in control and automation, they were perceived as

emphasizing computers, and computer applications such as information
systems and office automation. Further, their computer operation was at best
always in the shadow of IBM, and at worst an organization struggling to stay
alive. The image of a struggling firm nibbled at the traditional concept of
being the premium supplier of control and automation solutions.
By 1982 Honey well had decided to de-emphasize computers. The
advertising campaign that ran from 1982 to 1987 stressed problem solving:
“Together we can find the answers.” Although not emphasizing computers,
this new approach did little to weaken the associations created by the
computer business.
In 1988 a campaign was launched to return to the firm’s associations with
its core—controls. The new slogan, used in a worldwide campaign was
“Helping you control your world.” A key means for reasserting the control
associations was bringing them alive using interesting, vivid applications such
as the use of Honeywell control systems to:
Protect the historic “Treasures of Tutankhamen” exhibits.
Provide reliable performance, even in space: Four Honeywell
components of a control-system module operating in a space satellite for
six years were operating perfectly.
Make airplane cockpits better, safer, and more efficient.
Control environments from penguins in a zoo to an operating room.
Control an elevator system.
The thrust toward controls was very different from that of the computer
business. The hope was that the link of the Honeywell name with the
unsuccessful computer business would be weakened.
For Honeywell France, the implementation of the 1988 “back to basics”
positioning effort involved a considerable publicity effort. Honeywell had
received a contract to provide the advanced and innovative control systems
for the Opera of the Bastille, a very visible and controversial project which
François Mitterrand proudly inaugurated on July 13, 1989. “Honeywell at the
Opera” was exploited with a technical press release aimed at the construction
and management press, a general-interest press release, and the entertaining
of 50 clients and/or prospects at a special event at the opera.
The Honeywell story illustrates how apparently useful associations with
computers and thus advanced technology backfired, resulting instead in
weakening the basic association with “top-of-the-line” controls. As we have
seen, the solution was to return to the basic associations of control. The use of
the opera assignment to gain publicity well illustrates that advertising is not

the only approach to managing associations.

WHICH ASSOCIATIONS?
In Chapter 5 a variety of associations which could provide the basis for a
brand position were described. In Chapter 6, methods of determining the
brand associations were developed. In this chapter, several issues will be
addressed: First, which associations? How should a brand be positioned?
Second, how can associates be created? Third, some guidelines on
maintaining associations are discussed followed by a section on managing
disasters.
The selection of the associations will drive all elements of the marketing
effort. The importance is particularly relevant in the context of a new product
or service. Let us assume that we have a new service concept, a video store
which will deliver and pick up videos from a special mailbox attached to the
customers’ home. Among the possible associations are such attributes as
home-delivery convenience, speed, movie selection, catalogue selection, and
friendly operators. Which should be the primary and which the secondary
associations? Answers are needed to generate the name and symbol, and to
design the details of the operations.
Such positioning decisions will likely determine not only short-term
success but also long-term viability, because associations need to support
competitive advantages which will be sustainable and convincing. For
example, in the long run a “friendly, funky” culture may be more difficult to
duplicate than home delivery.
The positioning decision for an established brand is complicated by the set
of associations already in place. As a result, consideration needs to be given
as to which associations should be weakened or eliminated, as well as which
should be created or enhanced.
The selection is based upon an economic decision involving the market
response to the associations, and the investment and marginal cost associated
with them. Basically, a position is needed that will attract a worthwhile
market—which could mean either a small part of a large market or a large
part of a small market—at a cost that will result in attractive returns over an
appropriate time frame. The problem is, of course, that it is not easy to
forecast the sales and cost streams that will be associated with any specific
positioning decision.
There are guidelines that can help, however: Figure 7-1 summarizes three

considerations that can be helpful in analyzing the positioning decision.

FIGURE 7-1 The Positioning Decision
SELF-ANALYSIS
Don’t try to be something you are not. Before positioning a brand, it is
important to conduct in-home blind-taste tests or in-office use tests which
ensure both that the brand can deliver what it promises and that it is
compatible with a proposed image. To create a position different from that
which the brand delivers is extremely wasteful. It is also strategically
damaging, as it will undermine the basic equity of the brand: Consumers will
be skeptical about future claims.
Brand perceptions can in fact be more important than the physical product
itself, especially if they are strong because of a name, or past advertising. It is
thus important to make sure that the nature and strength of existing
associations are known. Altering existing associations, especially strong ones,
usually is very difficult. In general, it is best to build upon existing
associations, or even to create new ones, rather than to change or neutralize
existing ones.
Hamburger Helper, introduced in the 1970s as an add-to-meat product
which would generate a good-tasting, economical, skillet-type dinner,
illustrates. It did well early in the decade, when meat prices were high, but in
the mid-1970s homemakers switched back to more exotic, expensive foods.
Reacting to the resulting drop in sales, the manufacturer attempted to make
Hamburger Helper more exotic by positioning it as a base for casseroles.
However, the product—at least in consumers’ minds—could not deliver. They
continued to view it only as an economical, reliable convenience food.
Furthermore, making casseroles was not a problem area for which anyone’s

help was needed. In a personality test, in which women were asked to view
the product as though it were a person, the most prevalent complimentary
characteristic ascribed to the product was “helpful.”
If a repositioning task is involved, does the organization have the will and
ability to exert the effort to implement it? It is tempting but naive, and usually
fatal, to decide on a positioning strategy which exploits a market need or
opportunity but assumes that your brand is something it is not, or that your
organization can deliver on a difficult repositioning task.
COMPETITORS’ ASSOCIATIONS
Knowing the competitors’ associations is a second key to the positioning
decision. For most brands in most contexts, it is imperative to develop
associations that represent points of difference with competitors. If there is
nothing different about your brand, there is no reason for customers to select
it over another, or even to notice it. Studies of new-product introductions have
shown that the single best predictor of both new-product success and its
ability to gain awareness is having a point of difference. The fatal error is to
be a “me too” entry.
In the paint product class most brands are very similar; they generally
emphasize quality based upon the experience of the firm or some brand
attribute.2 Dutch Boy attempted to differentiate by focusing upon the look that
will result, and the associated feelings of pride and satisfaction with “The
Look that gets the Look” tag line. A New Age soundtrack added to the TV
appeal to the younger target audience—those who had not become “used” to a
given brand. The emphasis is thus on feelings rather than the product.
Sometimes it is useful to develop several common associations with only
one point of difference. An example would be IBM PC (personal computer)
clones which emphasize that they are identical to IBM models in all important
performance characteristics, but less expensive (or faster, or smaller). The coopting of the major associations of the competitors is necessary for two
reasons. First, these associations are critical to the user. Without them, the
customer would not consider a brand. Second, the communication of the
associations can be very easy. Instead of communicating the operating
systems, the specifications, the size, and so on, the only task is to say that the
product is identical to IBM, except….
An attribute can be so central that it needs to be emphasized even though
there is a competitor who has preempted it. An example is Caress soap by
Lever Brothers. It is positioned as a soap creating soft skin—very similar to
the creamy skin position of Dove. However, unlike Dove’s ¼ moisturizer and
testimonials, it has developed associations with soft skin, demonstrated by
means of elegant models and “soft light, soft colors, soft kisses.” Thus, it has

a point of difference, a different set of associations, even though they are
supporting a similar product attribute (soft skin) to that of Dove (creamy
skin).
When your brand is the dominant brand and has control of distribution
outlets, it is less important to be different. In fact, competitors perceived as
similar to you will likely lose out because they lack your recognition and
distribution. Salem menthol cigarettes, for example, developed associations
with refreshing greenery and streams. Competitor cigarettes using similar
associations saw their advertising registering as Salem exposures actually
reinforcing the Salem associations. There was no incentive for Salem to
worry about appearing different from their competitors.
There are successful brands, it should be noted, which have avoided
strong associations, relying instead upon recognition and strong customer
loyalty. The associations are deliberately made weak so as to avoid excluding
any customer group. Pictures of bottles of Coca-Cola with the words “It’s the
real thing,” or Budweiser’s claim that Bud is “the king of beers,” or
“Somebody still cares about quality” illustrate such a strategy.
TARGET MARKET
The third dimension of analysis involves the target market. The name of
the game is to develop associations that build or develop brand strengths and
attributes, that provide a point of difference, and to which the target market
will respond. Just being different will help recognition, but a much stronger
position will be one that provides a reason-to-buy or adds value to the
product.
An Association That Provides a Reason-to-Buy. One role of an association
is to provide a reason-to-buy the brand. Thus, associations with attributes
often provide an explicit reason-to-buy:
NutraSweet tastes better.
Maytag has reliability. The serviceman gets bored.
Sharp’s FAX machine is No. 1 in sales because they offer superior value.
The reason-to-buy needs to be influential enough to really be attractive to
buyers. Some associations, even attribute associations, do not work because
customers do not value them—or, worse, find the associations detracting or
even offensive.
The value to customers of an association providing a reason-to-buy can be
determined by talking to customers through focus groups, one-on-one
interviews, surveys, and/or market tests. A survey of 1,250 consumers
indicated that the initial thrust of 7-Up into the noncaffeine softdrink market

(which stimulated the introduction of noncaffeine colas) did tap a sizable
segment.3 A total of 28% of those sampled said that it makes a great deal of
difference to them if their soft drink has caffeine. In the same survey, over
40% mentioned 7-Up when asked which noncaffeine soft drink first comes to
mind—over four times greater than Pepsi Free.
The concept of a unique selling proposition (USP), developed and used by
Rosser Reeves, one of the creative giants of the advertising profession, had a
reason-to-buy focus. A USP involves a specific and unique product benefit
important enough to affect consumer purchases. Examples are “M&M’s melt
in your mouth, not in your hand,” “Colgate cleans your breath while it cleans
your teeth,” and “Better skin with Palmolive.” Reeves preferred a USP based
on experiments so that the proposition would be more believable, defensible,
and sustainable. “Better skin from Palmolive,” for example, was supported by
tests involving people washing their face regularly with test soaps.
Another tenet of Reeves’ was that when a good USP is found, it should be
retained indefinitely. One client, Anacin, spent over $85 million in a 10-year
period by repeatedly showing an original commercial which had cost $8,200
to produce. Reeves was once asked by a client what his 700 agency people
did while they kept running the same ad for a decade. He replied that they
were engaged in keeping the client from changing the advertising.
An Association That Adds Value. An association can “hit” indirectly, not
by explicitly providing a reason to buy but by creating an association that
adds value. The association does not necessarily have to generate a rational
reason to buy which could be easily verbalized. Rather, it can involve the
association of a feeling with the brand and its use experience. The association
might be created by advertising, by providing a vicarious use experience, or
by showing that others have that feeling during the use experience. In any
case the feeling, which may be subconscious in that a person may have
difficulty verbalizing it, provides added value.
Consider the gift of a Tiffany bracelet. For most, opening a Tiffany
package will feel different from opening a Macy’s package—the feeling will
be more intense, more special. Further, the wearing of a Tiffany bracelet may
even make the wearer feel more attractive and confident than if that same
bracelet had been purchased at a department store. The associations of
prestige and quality are hypothesized to actually change the use experience, to
add value to the brand.
The Tiffany associations that add value were generated over a long timeperiod. Involved were store location, store ambiance, type of store personnel,
product selection, and advertising. Figure 7-2 illustrates. Note the copy: “The
vision with which Tiffany opened its doors has not changed in 153 years….

Classic beauty. That’s what ties together everything Tiffany creates….”
Some advertising is designed to associate feelings with the brand and its
use experience. For example, advertising has been created that generates the
feelings of:
Being elegant and stylish. A perfume ad showed a sophisticated woman
preparing for a ball. A BMW ad showed a stylish, elegant woman slowly
entering a car.
Prestige, success, and being someone. American Express ads show
celebrities who have been card holders for years.
Excitement. An ad for a motorcycle shows a driver careening around and
over objects on a motorcycle in a risk-filled ride. A camera safari ad
shows a dangerous incident in which a photographer is experiencing
intense adventure.
Warmth. The telephone ad “Reach out and touch someone” shows very
warm, tender scenes of two friends or relatives having a special phone
conversation because one of them cared to make the effort to call.
Lowenbrau has run a “Something special” series of ads. In one, a happy
dinner scene involving a proud father and a son who just passed his bar
exam shows warmth, pride, and love.

FIGURE 7-2 Tiffany—Classic Beauty
Courtesy of Tiffany & Co.
Determining associations that add value can come from basic marketing
research about product use.4 A decision to reposition Betty Crocker desserts
around ideas of family bonds, love, and good times was based upon research
about people’s feelings about desserts. The research showed that desserts are
viewed as a way to show others you care, and are associated with happy
family moments. One respondent said that desserts are a “fun, social” event,
and another recalled experiencing closeness, and laughing. The result was the
“Bake someone happy” campaign.
Transformational Advertising. Advertising which creates brand
associations that change the use experience is termed “transformational
advertising” by William Wells of BBD Needham. Transformational
advertising transforms the use experience making the brand user feel (for
example) more elegant, adventuresome, or warm, thereby potentially adding
value to the customer. Thus, the “Reach out and touch someone” AT&T
campaign made some telephoning experiences different—it created an
enhanced feeling of warmth. Wells set forth several guidelines for successful
transformational advertising that shed light upon the task of creating
associations that add value.
Successful transformational advertising must be able to make and
maintain associations among the feelings (such as warmth), the brand (AT&T
long distance), and the use experience (calling a loved one). This means an
adequate advertising budget is required that will permit frequent exposures,
the discipline and patience to run advertising that is consistent (that continues
to develop the same feelings associated with the same use experience), and
the development of advertising that will clearly associate the brand with the
feelings and use experiences.
Transformational advertising works best when there is a positive product,
so that the advertising can make the experience richer, warmer, and more
enjoyable. However, transformational advertising has also been used to
mitigate unpleasant experiences. For example, some of the transformational
airline advertising has probably helped some face the anxieties of flying.
Also, the “People use our money to make the most out of life” campaign for
Household Finance Corporation (HFC) may have now and again reduced the
unpleasantness of applying for a loan.
Transformational advertising must be believable, or at least have the ring
of truth to it, so people do not consider it silly or even ridiculous. It will not

be effective if it is disconfirmed by real-life experiences with the product. No
amount of “Ride the friendly rails” would transform the experience of riding
the New York subway.
A Segmentation Commitment. Positioning usually implies a segmentation
commitment—an overt decision to ignore large parts of the market and
concentrate only on certain segments, namely those interested in the
associations selected for the brand. Such an approach requires commitment
and discipline, because it is not easy to turn your back on potential buyers.
Yet the effect of generating a distinct, meaningful position is to focus on the
target segments and not be constrained by the reaction of other segments.

CREATING ASSOCIATIONS
Associations are created by anything linked to the brand. Of course, the
features and benefits of the product or service, together with its package and
distribution channel, are central to a brand image. Further, the brand’s name,
symbol, and slogan are among the most important positioning tools (and will
be considered in more detail in the following chapter). Certainly the
advertising effort is a direct contributor. However, the wide variety of other
approaches to the generation of associations should also be considered. Some,
like promotion and publicity, are visible as well as important. Others, more
subtle and complex, require an understanding of what signals are used by
customers to form perceptions.
IDENTIFYING AND MANAGING SIGNALS
Customers often discount or disbelieve factual information. Worse, they
usually lack the interest and ability to process it, and, thus, never really even
get exposed to it. They cope by using signals or indicators— one attribute or
association can imply others.
A health-conscious consumer, for example, may not be willing or able to
digest the nutritional information on a cereal box. Instead, the consumer looks
for signals that allow the creation of perceptions without detailed processing
of information. A signal for a healthy cereal, for example, might be its oat
bran content, or 100% of average daily nutritional requirements, or the
absence of sugar. Thus, the inclusion of oat brand, for some consumers, may
not be important per se, but provides a signal that the manufacturer is
concerned about making the product healthier.
It is important to know which associations are to be created. However, it
is also necessary to address this question:

What are the key signals of the associations that are to be formed— how
can the perceptions be influenced?
In Chapter 3, signals of high quality were discussed. Consumers generally
lack the ability to evaluate the actual quality of many products. As a result,
signals of quality become important—the size of stereo speakers, the sound of
a car door, the thickness of tomato juice, the price of the product. Services are
particularly hard to evaluate. Here again consumers look for signals—the
appearance of furniture movers, the neatness of a doctor’s office, the
demeanor of a bank teller.
Perceived quality is not the only association influenced by signals. The
classical pianist at a Nordstrom signals a host of associations including a
relaxed, low-pressure shopping atmosphere and a store with a set of unique
and special extras. The 48-hour parts delivery guarantee of Caterpillar signals
a commitment to the customer, and a worldwide distribution network. The
pink cast added to Cherry 7-Up, which affected the acceptance of the product,
signals “refreshing” as well as “cherry taste.” Similarly, the cleanliness of the
cabin of an aircraft can affect perceptions of the safety of the plane. Tom
Peters tells of an airline that was convinced that a stain on the seat of a plane
is a strong erroneous signal of a poor safety record of the pilot and aircraft.
Providing Credibility in the High-Tech World. A new high-technology
product, especially from a firm without a track record, needs to develop
associations which will provide credibility both that the product is worthwhile
and that the firm will survive and remain committed to the product.5 The
backers of such a new firm can signal credibility: Venture capitalist Ben
Rosen brought instant credibility to both Compaq and Lotus. An alliance with
IBM brought the image of an established organization to both Sytek and
Microsoft. Obtaining a key customer can mean all the difference, too. If
Safeway has bought a computer system after analysis and comparison, a
buyer for another retail store will enjoy reduced uncertainty. And the print
media, especially via product reviews, can be a shot in the arm: An article in
PC Magazine can make more of an impact than 20 ads in the same
publication.
Categorizing Brands. Instead of making a detailed “piecemeal” evaluation
of a brand, customers often use signals to associate a brand with a certain
product category. The premise is that people often divide the world of objects
around them into categories as an efficient way to organize information.
Mita Sujan, a consumer behavior researcher, explored categorization
using a “110 camera” and a “35-mm single-lens reflex camera” as comparison
stimuli.6 Each camera was described in detail along five dimensions. For
example, the reflex camera had “great versatility—the range of shutter speeds

and aperture settings allowed for perfectly exposed pictures in very low light
or bright sunlight,” and the 110 camera was “very easy to load [and unload]—
the film cartridge only had to be dropped into the camera, thus eliminating
any chance of misloading.”
Respondents tended to evaluate the cameras based upon the name. The
35-mm single-lens reflex label signaled a high-quality camera, part of the 35mm category. In contrast, the 110 label signaled a lower-quality camera—part
of a lesser-quality category. This categorization occurred even when the
descriptions for the two cameras were reversed—when the 110 camera
description was attached to the 35-mm camera. This study showed that the
power of these labels to signal a product category even when the detailed
factual information was clear.
UNDERSTANDING UNANTICIPATED SIGNALS
Sometimes attributes that represent significant utility to the customer and
are emphasized as product advantages by the firm turn out to have negative
connotations which provide unanticipated signals of negative associations. It
is critical to understand sometimes-subtle interpretations of brand
associations. Thus, a second question is:
What unanticipated signals may be generated by brand associations?
For example, when Pringle’s was introduced in 1968, P&G was planning
to gain a major share (over 30%) of the fragmented U.S. potatochip industry.
They had what they considered a breakthrough product which had taste parity,
was consistent in shape and quality, never burned, would stack, and could be
packaged in a compact cylindrical container that would protect the chips from
damage. All of these elements represented real customer advantages. They
also provided the basis for P&G to engage in national advertising and
distribution, thereby generating enormous economies of scale.
However, these product elements in combination provided signals of
“artificial,” “made from inferior ingredients,” “processed,” and “having
inferior taste.” Taste is after all the key bottom-line attribute, and customers
thought that the product did not deliver even though in blind-taste tests, the
product was judged just as good as competitive products. Why then the taste
problem? Because in the market, the customers were not exposed to the
product “blind.” In the context of the other brand characteristics emphasized
in the chips’ introduction, the taste was deemed inferior. The brand’s
performance was very disappointing. The advertising support was eventually
withdrawn, and Pringle’s became a relatively small-niche player.
The Pringle’s case is reminiscent of the initial efforts to launch a certain

diet beer that failed because of perceived taste problems. When Miller Lite,
however, introduced the same product positioned as a beer for macho, heavy
beer drinkers interested in great-tasting beer that is less filling, it was an
enormous success. The associations with low calorie, diet products was
avoided.
THE ROLE OF PROMOTIONS
A sales promotion provides a short-term incentive to make a purchase
decision. As was discussed in Chapter 1, promotions often are effective at
impacting sales, but run the risk of increasing price sensitivity and reducing
brand loyalty. Promotions which simply offer a discount or rebate are the
most likely to cheapen the brand and thus adversely affect the brand image.
There are ways to engage in promotions to enhance rather than tarnish
brand equity. A key is to include in the criteria for developing promotions a
brand-equity component plus a constraint that no promotion will be allowed
which will damage equity in the brand. In contrast, the normal practice is to
assume that promotions have their own agenda—to stimulate sales, and thus
to select and evaluate them accordingly.
Strengthening Associations and Brand Awareness. One way that
promotions can enhance equity is to reinforce and strengthen key associations
and brand awareness. Consider the leather-strapped luggage tags that
American Express gives to its card members, the terrycloth robe Ralph
Lauren offers to buyers of its Polo cologne, the Western accessories offered
by Wells Fargo, or the Levi’s accessories (such as belts and handbags) offered
as promotional items by Levi’s retailers. In each case the promotional items
both reinforce associations and brand awareness.
Figure 7-3 shows an Ivory promotion in which $100,000 is given to the
consumer who finds one of the sinkable Ivory bars in circulation. This simple
idea reenforces the floating attribute of Ivory that is itself a signal for the
purity position.
This Ivory cash promotion has the potential of being far more effective
than a contest with (say) a Hawaiian trip as a prize. Here the Ivory user is
offered a potential reward just for using the product—participation in an
enjoyable contest with a sense of humor. The whole concept should engender
positive feelings that can only help the brand. Further, the Ivory user is
automatically involved in the contest; no extra effort (such as puzzles,
paperwork, mailing, etc.) is required. The Ivory nonuser or underuser thus has
an incentive to try the brand. Finally, the key attribute of the product is
reenforced in an unusual message that may well stimulate attention in the face
of considerable category-advertising clutter.

FIGURE 7-3 Ivory Floats!
© The Procter & Gamble Company. Used with permission.
Branding Promotions
Viewing the promotion as a brand is helpful. Like a brand, a promotion
needs to develop awareness and associations, including a link to the brand.
For example, consider a promotion to win a Hawaiian vacation for a product
with no link to Hawaii or travel. Only those who participate will be likely to
recall which brand is involved. Compare with the Pillsbury Bake-Off, which
has been run annually for over 30 years. This contest has high awareness, and
association with the Dough-Boy (Green Giant has recently been integrated
into the promotion). The promotion has brand-enhancing power, even for
those who do not participate. Further, promotion awareness and associationbuilding do not have to start from ground zero each year.
A promotion that is tightly linked to the brand and its symbol or primary
associations avoids the identity problem of a more generic promotion which

can be attributed to any brand. In effect, it is useful to brand a promotion so
that it will not be attributed to another brand.
The rash of auto rebates is a good example of equity-jeopardizing
activities.7 Instead of a dollar rebate, suppose that the Chrysler New Yorker
could offer an all-expenses-paid weekend in New York, including Broadway
shows. Or that the Sterling automobile would include a set of silverware with
a car purchase. Or Jeep Wagoneer would provide a package of outdoor gear
and two mountain bicycles with each purchase. In each case, the promotion
would potentially provide a powerful reinforcement of a key association.
Promotions to Enhance Loyalty. Promotions can be used to reward your
existing customers and thus increase loyalty. Look at promotions as a way to
strengthen the core customer as well as to attract new ones. A promotion that
gives a free ice-cream cone to someone who buys on 10 occasions will reward
the existing customer. VISA Gold ran a promotion in which users were
provided with the possibility that their next purchase could be free.
Promotions to Enhance Perceived Quality. Sometimes a relatively
inexpensive way to upgrade a brand’s image is to use an upscale promotion
that has strong associations compatible with a high perceived quality product.
A “quality” promotion presented in an appropriate manner will suggest a
quality product. By contrast, a quality brand is expected to avoid “cheap”
promotions.
One of the few studies relating promotions to the evaluation of the brand
provided evidence that the quality of the promotion can matter.8 The study
involved a video-tape premium for a VCR, and a calculator premium for a
typewriter. Subjects were asked to evaluate a product/ premium combination.
The quality of the VCR was either low ($200 Goldstar), medium ($250
Toshiba), or high ($350 JVC). Similarly, the quality of the three-tape
premiums was low ($6 K-Mart), medium ($12 Scotch), or high ($18 Maxell).
Remarkably, the premium quality was as important as the brand quality in
consumers’ evaluations of the promotional package, even though the
objective worth of the premium was a small fraction of the total package.
Add Value. Promotions offering premiums that add value to the product
are more likely to avoid damaging the brand than those that simply provide a
price discount. Thus BMW, instead of engaging in price rebates, might
include a telephone in the car. A bicycle manufacturer might include an air
pump or helmet with the bike. Given that the premium is of appropriate
quality, the image of the brand should be enhanced.
What type of premium should be selected? A study conducted by J. Walter
Thompson researchers in the early 1970s compared premiums related to the

product class to those that were unrelated.9 For soap products the related
premium (kitchen gloves) was more effective than the unrelated (a briar pipe).
The briar pipe would not often be used by the buyers, who were
predominantly female; and, in addition, it may have suggested stains.
However, milk-product and shampoo-related premiums (a drinking mug and a
hairbrush) were less effective than unrelated premiums (eyelashes and garden
seeds). In these cases the unrelated items might have been more desirable
because they were something of an extravagance (relative to mugs and
hairbrushes), while the related premiums may have been uninteresting. Thus,
the nature of the premiums that work best may be difficult to predict when
using simple rules like how related they are to the brand.
Obviously a specialized promotion designed to add value (such as
including a telephone with a new car purchase) will not always appeal to a
wide audience. One solution is to offer several choices, perhaps including a
dollar discount. If the promotion features the association-enhancing choices, it
should still serve to add value, and perhaps strengthen associations.
THE ROLE OF PUBLICITY
Creating associations and recognition need not be expensive. In fact, paid
advertising sometimes is extremely difficult and expensive because it lacks
both credibility and interest value. Well-conceived publicity can provide both.
Patagonia sportswear occasionally is worn by models on the covers of such
key magazines as Ski and Sports Illustrated. To reinforce photographers who
happen to select their product, they send them a thank-you note and a small
financial token. They also find ways to call attention to the coverÁby using
point-of-purchase material, for example.
For publicity to be most effective, there should be an event or action that
is newsworthy, perhaps because it is unusual. Ben and Jerry’s ice cream
sponsored a colorful, funky “cowmobile” which crossed the U.S. passing out
free ice cream. Local media found it irresistible. In addition to helping
recognition, it also helped reinforce the concept that this ice cream is made by
two real people who put their name on the product and stand behind it.
INVOLVING THE CUSTOMER
The strongest associations are those that can involve the customer to the
point of becoming interwoven with his or her life. For example, for many
small wineries, wine tours are the heart of their effort to build brands. Those
experiencing a tour and/or taste session not only gain firsthand exposure to
the product, together with credible information about what is behind it, but
also have an interesting, enjoyable experience which will become part of the
various associations.
CHANGING ASSOCIATIONS

Changing associations (repositioning a brand) often is a delicate job
because of the existing associations. The easiest case is where the change is
not inconsistent with existing associations. For example, annual tracking
studies indicated that All-Temperature Cheer was a product whose principal
attribute was gradually becoming obsolete as fewer customers changed water
temperature. They thus started a new campaign with the promise that
“Nothing goes better in cold.” The new claim was not inconsistent with the
old; there was just a different spin to it.
However, when an existing association is inconsistent with the
repositioning, two concerns arise. First, the existing associations can inhibit
the repositioning effort. Second, they may well be important to a worthwhile
segment who could be potentially alienated by the repositioning. Consider the
effort of J. C. Penney to move its image upscale, away from its traditional
Sears/Ward’s positioning.10 They have increased the use of national brands
like Van Heusen, stocked more-fashionable merchandise, used trendy blackand-white ads, emulated Bloomingdale’s with event days, reduced the number
of sale days, improved the location of changing-rooms, and installed fashion
consultants. Clearly a substantial, expensive effort involving all phases of the
operation was needed to counter the strong associations that Penney’s had
generated over the years.
The need by J. C. Penney to be sensitive to the traditional customer base
influenced the change effort. First, they learned that it was important not only
to continue to stock traditional lines, but to make sure that these got aisle
space so that they did not get lost in the store. Second, they doubled the use of
direct mail, an advertising medium that allowed them to treat the traditional
customer more properly. Third, they found that the catalogue needed to be
toned down so that it didn’t offend.

MAINTAINING ASSOCIATIONS
Often it is more difficult to maintain associations than to create them, in
the face of demands upon the marketing program and of external forces alike.
Among the guidelines are to: (1) be consistent over time, (2) be consistent
over the marketing program, and (3) manage disasters in order to minimize
their damage.
BE CONSISTENT OVER TIME
It is certainly possible, and indeed sometimes seems (and is) desirable, to
change associations. However, it should be recognized that such a task often

is wasteful as well as difficult and expensive.
Changing associations is wasteful when associations that have been
nurtured over a long time-period are allowed to dissipate when a new
association is emphasized. Consider the investment and value of the Dove
association with moisturizers. Suppose Dove decided that moisturizing was
insufficient and that another association (such as glamorous hands) was to be
the new message. The moisturizer association, a huge asset, would then be
gradually lost.
In many respects the set of associations is the result of all the accumulated
marketing efforts behind the brand. In particular if the advertising, promotion,
and packaging has supported a consistent positioning strategy over time, the
brand is likely to be strong. Consider the consistency of the message of such
brands as Dove, Marlboro, American Express Travelers Checks, Maytag, and
McDonald’s. Conversely, if the positioning changes, the advertising
investment that preceded the change loses much of its value.
If the advertising is working, stick with it. An advertiser often will get
tired of a positioning strategy and the advertising used to implement it, and
will consider making a change. However, the personality or image of a brand,
like that of a person, evolves over many years, and the value of consistency
through time cannot be overestimated. Some of the very successful, bigbudget campaigns have run for 10, 20, or even 30 years. Some of the most
ineffective have generated a new campaign annually.
A common mistake is to underestimate the task of creating a new set of
associations. Another is to believe that customers are bored with the current
advertising, and even the positioning, and that a change is needed to freshen it
all up.
BE CONSISTENT OVER ELEMENTS
OF THE MARKETING PROGRAM
One of the dangers of making alterations is that a change in the marketing
program or the product line that makes perfect sense in isolation can affect the
association. A good example is E. J. Korvette, a pioneer discounter.11
Eugene Ferfauf started Korvette’s in 1948 with a tiny luggage shop one
flight up on East 46th Street in Manhattan. Soon he was also selling
appliances at a $10 markup. Customers lined up to buy. By the end of 1951 he
had moved to the street level, and opened a second branch. During the next 15
years 27 stores were opened as far away as Chicago and St. Louis, credit was
offered, and the line was expanded to include soft goods and fashion
merchandise, furniture, carpets, and even food.
By 1965, Korvette’s had grown to over $700 million and Ferfauf was
named by a famous professor of retailing as one of the six greatest merchants

in U.S. history. But then the story changed dramatically. Sales fell, losses
mounted, and the firm began decades of futile efforts to find a profitable niche
in the retailing scene. There were many causes of Korvette’s rapid decline,
including the inability to manage a firm that was spread out geographically,
growing too rapidly, and moving into too many different types of
merchandise. However, a major problem was the impact of the changing firm
upon its image.
During the early fifties a clear image of Korvette’s was created by a host
of signals besides the dramatically low prices. The product line was focused,
there were few services, the store was bareboned, the location oozed of cheap,
and the customers clearly were bargain hunters. There was a definite Korvette
“feel.” But then the changes took away that feel— and more. Upgrading the
stores and adding services created inconsistencies with the old image. The
new products blurred the image of hard goods and demonstrable bargains.
The store became, and felt, very different from the original concept that was
so attractive to customers.
The message is: Be consistent. Changes at the margin can be tolerated, but
an image usually has difficulties in dealing with inconsistencies. The
customer will need to resolve them by adjusting perceptions.
USE THE ORGANIZATION
TO PROTECT BRAND EQUITY
Often there is enormous pressure on managers to generate short-term
results, even at the expense of firm assets such as brand equity. Promotional
activity and distribution alternatives are particular threats. Sharp short-term
improvements often can be obtained by engaging in very visible promotions,
such as a two-for-one offer for a hair cream, or a dinner discount with a
purchase of a symphony ticket. Levi Strauss once ran a promotion involving
the sponsorship of a rock group’s tour involving displays and T-shirts that tied
in. However, after this experience it was decided not to engage in a similar
promotion again, in part because of the nature of the rock group associations
that were involved.
Expanding distribution to broaden the sales base is another method used
to dramatically increase sales. Adding a large chain of convenience stores or
drug stores can dramatically add sales to a brand that has relied upon
department or specialty stores. However, the new channel also can create
associations that are damaging enough to weaken associations on which the
brand equity is based.
One approach to protecting equity is identifying certain activities that will
not be permissible. For example, Gatorade might have a policy that the brand
is to be a premium-priced entry and that no price program, including

promotions, should ever run counter to a premium-price position. They could
also specify types of promotions that would be permissible and those that
would not. Thus, they might decide that Gatorade is to have a macho image
and so should be associated with football and hockey, but not with golf or
baseball. Sunkist could have a policy that the only acceptable promotions
would be those that would reinforce associations of sun and health.
A procedure could be in place to supplement or to support such policies.
Thus, any new promotion should itself be tested to see what its associations
are by itself and, if possible, what impact it will have upon the brand
associations. Ideally, there would be a set of standard procedures to measure
the brand’s association on a regular basis. These same procedures could then
be applied to the promotion: Only if the promotion would have solely
desirable associations would it be considered.
There is, of course, a distinction between a set of associations of a
promotion and the transfer of some of these promotions to the brand. A rock
group may have some associations that are isolated from a sponsor, and thus
may do little harm or good. A judgment needs to be made if the transfer is
likely to occur. An association test of the brand in the context of a promotion
might not be sensitive enough because it cannot reflect the intensity of
exposure that the promotion might receive. A more sensitive test would be to
link a fictitious brand name to the promotion, and compare its associations to
that of another fictitious brand name not linked to the promotion.
Organizational Considerations. Many firms are set up so that the brand
manager is under intense pressure to generate short-term financial
performance. Such “fast track” managers often are promoted or moved after
only a few years if their brand’s financial performance is high. Thus their time
frame is only one or two years—and in some cases only months.
The mechanism used within most firms to protect brand-damaging shortterm pressures is oversight by top management. By regularly reviewing brand
plans, those initiatives that are risky for the long-term health of the brand can
be modified or killed. Such oversight presents two problems. First, the top
managers are often also pressing for short-term financial results, and thus an
aggressive brand-defense posture can undercut their motivational relationship
with the brand managers. It is (to say the least) awkward first to press for
improvements in sales, share, and profits, and then to kill a promotion on the
basis of a judgment that it might weaken some associations. Second, oversight
tends to be ad hoc: It offers no guarantee that all programs and plans will be
reviewed in a timely manner.
One partial solution, which has been implemented by several firms
including Colgate-Palmolive and Canada Dry, is to have a brand-equity

manager. Such a position could focus on protecting the brand equity. He or
she would have responsibility for measuring brand equity periodically, in
order both to detect signals that the equity was being eroded, and to approve
various programs, proposed by brand managers, that would have the potential
to affect the brand associations.

MANAGING DISASTERS
The most dramatic damage facing a brand is a disaster affecting its image,
and thus its equity. There is no shortage of examples. Consider the cases of
the Audi 5000, the Suzuki Samurai, Chrysler, Tylenol, Nestlē, and AT&T. In
each the approach used to control the damage is instructive.
AUDI 5000
Audi 5000 cars built after 1978 were alleged to have “sudden
acceleration” problems that resulted in adverse publicity culminating with a
feature on CBS’s “60 Minutes” in November of 1986. Audi’s response, which
was to blame American drivers, did little to defuse the situation, and Audi
sales plummeted from 74, 000 in 1985 to around 21, 000 in 1989. Audi did
redesign the car so the problem disappeared. However, the fact that they never
admitted that the original design was defective (indeed it may not have been
defective) made their fix less credible.
In 1989 there was some evidence that the sales decline was slowing, in
part due to two programs offered by Audi to reduce the risk of owning a
tainted car: the “three-year test drive,” involving a three-year lease structured
with low monthly payments; and the “guaranteed resale value,” in which a
two-year resale value was guaranteed to be the equal of comparable BMW,
Mercedes, and Volvo models. Both were expensive, reflecting the damage to
the brand caused by the “sudden acceleration” controversy.
SUZUKI SAMURAI
Suzuki’s successful sport-utility vehicle, the Samurai, was assailed at a
June 1986 press conference by Consumer Reports because of an alleged
tendency to tip over, even though its competitors had the same problem.12
Within days Samurai ran ads with testimonials from 10 auto magazines,
offered a $2,000 rebate, showed a tape of other vehicles tipping over in the
“Samurai test” done by Consumer Reports, and accused Consumer Reports of
grandstanding in order to advance their decade-long effort to promulgate
rollover standards. Two months later sales, which had slumped badly,
recovered—although the damage will certainly linger for years.

Working in Suzuki’s favor was the fact that its customers were (or wanted
to feel) young and fun-loving. Their ads under the theme “For drivers who
‘won’t grow up’” would show harried people getting away in a Samurai,
perhaps to a fishing hole. The background slogan asked: “Aren’t there enough
hours in the day when you have to be a grownup?”
CHRYSLER
Chrysler was caught setting back odometers on cars driven by company
executives. Lee Iacocca immediately pronounced in ads “We blew it,” and
that customers would be compensated and the practice discontinued.
TYLENOL
Someone injected some poison into containers of Tylenol capsules.
Johnson & Johnson immediately recalled all the product, and relaunched only
after redesigning the packages to make them tamper-resistant thereby
providing a visible fix to the problem. They also supported the relaunch with
aggressive advertising and promotions. Six months after the incident, they
had recovered 95% of their market share.
NESTL’
In 1975, complaints against Nestlē’s marketing of baby-food formula to
Third World counties culminated with a book, published in Germany, calling
Nestle “the baby killer.”13 Nestle won a law-suit battle against the publisher,
but lost the war despite an aggressive public-relations campaign to convince
people that they were doing good and not harm. The result was a widespread
boycott lasting some five years, until Nestle finally made major adjustments
in their marketing program.
Critics objected to Nestle associating their product with health by using
nurses to market it, by giving away free samples in hospitals, and by generally
associating the product with doctors and hospitals. They further believed that
Nestle discouraged breast feeding by ignoring or de-emphasizing it in all their
promotions, including their baby booklets. The sad reality was that a subset of
consumers used the product with bad water and unsterilized bottles, a
combination which sometimes was fatal to infants. Many of the affected
consumers could (and should) have used breast feeding. Of course, for many
others, the infant formula was entirely appropriate.
AT&T
AT&T, while competing with a quality-and-reliability theme under the
slogan “The right choice,” had a computer software breakdown. As a result
their customers failed to make half of their long-distance calls during a oneday period. AT&T admitted the problem, apologized to customers, explained
the problem and its fix, and provided a discount day for their customers.
Competitors, of course, were quick to capitalize—running such ads as “If you

have problems with your long-distance supplier….”
RESPONDING TO DISASTERS
Clearly, all firms are vulnerable both to accidents and to those who are
motivated to exploit bad luck. But there are ways to mitigate (if not avoid)
both disasters and the rapacity of business vultures. The best approach to
handling a disaster (besides being lucky) usually is to avoid it. Toward this
end, it is useful to create worst-case scenarios about what could happen if a
product were misused or a promotion misinterpreted. With scenarios in place,
action can be taken to reduce the probability of such occurrences. For
example, the instability of the Samurai is well-known. Better design could
have ensured that the car would be less vulnerable to mishaps than its
competition (in fact it was about the same). A mechanism such as a booklet
might have encouraged drivers to be aware of the risks, and drive more
appropriately.
A second line of defense is to detect the problem early and do something
about it before it blows up. Both Nestle and Audi had plenty of warning; the
disaster in each case simmered for years before it broke. If their ultimate
actions had been taken early on, they would have avoided the damage.
When adverse publicity does break, the goal is to reduce its duration. The
key is to admit the problem, then remedy it as convincingly and quickly as
possible. Tylenol is an excellent example of how prompt action can control a
real disaster. If the firm insists that it is right, as Audi and Nestle did, that
action inevitably precipitates a prolonged public argument even if they are
right. If, however, fault is immediately admitted (as Chrysler did), critics
simply have nothing to talk about.
In some cases the right approach is to take the critics on and attempt to
convince customers that the problem is phony, as was done in the Samurai
case. It is important to be quick and strong—Samurai responded in just days
with vivid evidence that competitors had the same problem even though
Consumer Reports implied otherwise. However, the “take them on” strategy
has grave risks. Somewhat peculiarly, if it is effective enough to reach and
impact upon people, there is more than an even chance that many will
remember (as with Samurai) only the problem, not the rejoinder.
Certainly Nestle, even though they had solid arguments, made a blunder
by fighting the issue against such opponents as the American Federation of
Teachers, and the American Federation of Churches. In fact, in the first six
months of 1981 The Washington Post published 91 articles critical of Nestle.
This torrent of criticism occurred after four years of sophisticated publicrelations and educational efforts by Nestle, but only token efforts to change
their marketing policies. The Nestle case shows that public-relations efforts

not only can be ineffective but can actually fan the flames.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. What are the primary and secondary associations that your brand
should develop? Are they consistent with each other, with the brand
attributes, and with the established perceptions of the brand? Do they
represent a point of differentiation? Do they provide a reason-to-buy for the
customer? Do they add value by transforming the use experience? Are all
really useful?
2. What signals are important for each of the desired associations? Do
unanticipated and undesired signals exist? What can be done to establish and
reinforce desired associations? What about publicity, image-reen-forcing
promotions, licensing, or linking to people, places, or events?
3. Are the programs that affect associations consistent over time? Over
elements of the marketing program?
4. What promotions would enhance brand equity? Is there anything
associated with the brand that is newsworthy and would support a publicity
effort?
5. Who in the organization is charged with developing and protecting
brand equity? Does that person have any conflicting goals? Are there systems
in place to protect brands against promotions or other activities which could
damage brand equity? Should a manager of brand equity be established?
6. What disaster scenarios can be created? What programs might reduce
their probability of occurring, or minimize their damage?

8
The Name, Symbol,
and Slogan

·
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose by any other name
would smell as sweet.
William Shakespeare
Shakespeare was wrong. A rose by any other name would not smell
as sweet … which is why the single most important decision in the
marketing of perfume is the name.
Al Ries and Jack Trout
An idea, in the highest sense of that word, cannot be conveyed but by
a symbol.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge

THE VOLKSWAGEN STORY
In 1968 the VW Beetle (or Bug) sold 423,000 units in the U.S.—more
than any other single automobile model had ever sold. That record, which still
stands, was to be the high-water mark for the remarkable little German
import, a car that sold more units than the Model-T Ford. The Beetle had
become perhaps the most successful symbol in U.S. business history. The
distinctive shape had persisted for nearly 20 years in advertising, in the

culture, and on the road. In contrast with virtually all other models that had
come and gone, it was easily recognizable and had a rich set of associations.1
THE BEETLE IMAGE
During the 1950s the Beetle became known as a tough, reliable,
economical car—in large part because it was a well-designed, well-made
automobile supported by an excellent service and parts system. The early
sales were stimulated by GIs who had experienced versions of the Beetle in
postwar Germany. By the late fifties annual sales passed 100,000, based in
large part on “Volkslore” stories, spread by word-of-mouth, of incredible
durability and/or performance. The unique ability of the car to float led to
water races/contests and more stories. Eventually two intrepid drivers
attempted to cross the English Channel in a Bug. This however proved a bit
too much of a challenge, practically mandating a tunnel-enclosed roadway
between Great Britain and the Continent.
The Beetle was perceived as a sharp counterpoint to the excesses of the
Detroit model of what a car should be—large, powerful, expensive to buy and
maintain, gas-guzzling, and either luxurious or macho. In sharp contrast, the
Beetle was small, simple, economical, reliable, and (except to VW addicts)
ugly.

FIGURE 8-1 A Pair of ClassicVW Ads

FIGURE 8-1 Continued
The advertisements have been copyrighted by, and are reproduced with
the permission of, Volkswagen of America, Inc.
In the 1960s the Beetle came to represent, especially to an owner, a type
of person and life-style. The Beetle owner was someone who was not into
materialism and status symbols. Rather, he or she was willing to make a
statement by driving an ugly, funky car, thereby demonstrating independence
—a willingness to go against the grain, irreverence for convention, being
young (or young in spirit), admitting to a sense of humor, and possessing a
logical, practical mind. At one point, VW car owners would honk at each
other, signaling their membership in their “club.”
The Beetle culture of the sixties was largely due to the remarkable
advertising created by Doyle Dane Bernbach (DDB). Their print ads, first run

in 1960, would typically show a large picture of the car above a provocative
headline. One advertisement showed steam coming out of a nonexistent
radiator (the Beetle has an air-cooled, rear-mounted engine) with the caption
“Impossible.” A headline under a picture of a flat tire read “Nobody’s
perfect.” Several advantages of the car were listed under the headline “Ugly is
only skin-deep.” The two real classics were “Think Small” and “Lemon.”
Two such ads are shown in Figure 8-1, including “Think Small.”
Many of the advertisements took the novel approach of directly
disparaging the product. “Lemon” was extreme, even for VW. The copy noted
that the car shown had a blemish (on the chrome strip on the glove
compartment) which was caught by one of the 3,389 inspectors at their
factory. The ad closed by explaining that inspection is one reason that a VW
lasts longer and requires less maintenance than other cars.
The campaign went into television with the same irreverent, humorous,
self-deprecating style. In one of the early television ads the camera looks
through the windshield of a car traveling on a dark, snow-covered country
road during a heavy snowstorm. The viewer asks: “Who is driving, and
where?” Finally the car stops, and the driver gets out, opens the door of a
large building, starts a huge snowplow. The announcer asks: “Have you ever
wondered how the man who drives the snowplow drives to the snowplow?
This one drives a Volkswagen.”
The Beetle culture had an active life outside of advertising. There were
bumper stickers (“Student Porsche Driver”), savings bonds given to babies
born in Beetles (about 20 per year), and student contests on how many bodies
could be transported by a Beetle (the record was 103). A “Concerto for
Yellow Volkswagen and Orchestra” (complete with door slams and engine
starts) was written. There were countless Beetle jokes. (One owner peers
under the front hood and exclaims that the motor is missing. His friend says:
“Are you in luck! They gave me a spare engine in my trunk.”) The movie The
Love Bug, which starred a Beetle, was the top-grossing movie in 1969.
THE SYMBOL
The car’s symbol was its distinctive shape. The symbol was, without
question, an important part of the Beetle phenomenon. First, it represented a
car design which was “ugly” in terms of the conventional wisdom of the day.
It thus captured the irreverence for convention that was a large part of the
image. The point was that no Beetle driver could possibly he concerned with
fashionable appearance—economy and reliability had to be the ownership
rationale. Second, it was distinctive. For two decades, no competitor was
willing to copy the shape. Third, the shape was the Beetle: Anyone could
identify the beetle (the bug) as the inspiration for the car’s shape. In fact,

several ads of the era focused solely on the shape. One had a line drawing of
the silhouette of the car over the caption: “How much longer can we hand you
this line?” Another ad (which became a popular poster) showed the rear end
of a Beetle penned onto an egg. The caption read: “Some shapes are hard to
improve on.”
An indicator of the power of the symbol is that it continues to have
enough meaning in the 1990s to be used in advertising. For example,
Northwest Airlines ran a 1990 ad in which a picture of a Bug is featured
under the claim that the Northwest “free travel program” gives you the best
mileage you’ve had in 25 years. And a word-processing program called the
Volkswriter is positioned as a low-cost, simple, easy-to-use program.
THE DECLINE
U.S. sales for the Beetle held fairly steady in the early 1970s—from 1971
to 1973 they were around 350,000. (In 1970 they were still over 400,000.) In
1974 the Beetle still sold 244,000 units, despite the fact that the lowest-price
Beetle sold for $500 more than the lowest-price Toyota (versus zero premium
in 1972). When the Rabbit was introduced the Beetle s sales fell to 92,000.
After 1975 the Beetle was no longer a major model in the United States
(although it is still made in South America).
There was a host of reasons for the Beetle’s decline and the move to the
Rabbit. Increased costs from design changes (some mandated by the
government) and a sharply weaker dollar caused the price to increase from
$1,839 in 1970 to nearly $3,000 in 1973—very damaging to a car positioned
as an economical alternative. Datsun and Toyota were aggressively and
successfully going after the subcompact market despite similar currency
problems. Also, the symbol as a counterestablishment statement had lost
much of its magic, since now there were so many Beetles around, and also
since the issues that had captured people’s imagination (and loyalty to VW)
had changed.
However, the symbol still had considerable strength, even in 1975. So you
have to wonder if VW was not too hasty in turning away from the Beetle.
Perhaps some more persistent publicity and advertising efforts, plus some
product refinements, could have slowed the decline. Perhaps, further, the cost
disadvantage might have disappeared over time with an effective global
manufacturing strategy: Manufacturing operations in Brazil and Mexico were
never exploited as a way to deal with the cost problems.
THE RABBIT
VW attempted to transfer the equity in the Beetle to the Rabbit, a roomy
car with a water-cooled, front-mounted engine which achieved a remarkable
second place in U.S. EPA mileage tests. The car, with yet another funky VW

name and a cute racing-rabbit symbol, was positioned as a leader in simplicity
and practicality—the Bug’s legitimate heir. It was supported by Doyle Dane
Bernbach ads that were in the Beetle tradition.
The equity transfer did not work as hoped. Rabbit sales in 1976, the first
year in which the Beetle was not a factor, were a disappointing 112,000. From
1977 to 1981, sales ranged from a low of 149,000 to a high of 215,000 (in
1979). In 1982, Rabbit sales fell to under 100,000 and VW had, at least for
the time, ceased to be a major player in the growing U.S. market for import
cars.
The Rabbit had a host of damaging mechanical problems, such as
troublesome fuel injectors and rattling air conditioners. These problems of
course caused the wrong kind of publicity, especially for a VW car. Loyal
owners who had supported the Beetle over the years, not only by buying cars
but also by recommending them to others, were disaffected.
There were other problems as well. The boxy Rabbit did not have the
counterestablishment élan. Nor was the styling distinctive—in fact it was
similar to that of cars from Japan. Further, the brand emphasized its advanced
technology in the introduction, which fuzzed up the basic “Bettle”
positioning. Moreover, it was introduced one or two years after the Beetle had
lost its strong position, was not priced aggressively, and lacked many of the
features of the Japanese models.
It is intriguing to speculate on whether the Beetle equity could have been
transferred onto the Rabbit if the quality problems could have been avoided.
Could VW have done anything else to capture the magic of the Beetle? Or,
could the life of the Beetle have been prolonged by managing costs and by
continuing product refinements?
Perhaps the Beetle magic of the sixties could not have been maintained or
repeated, but only envied and emulated. Whatever the case, it had a great run.

NAMES
The name is the basic core indicator of the brand, the basis for both
awareness and communication efforts. Often even more important is the fact
that it can generate associations which serve to describe the brand—what it is
and does. In other words, the name can actually form the essence of the brand
concept. One firm in Germany associated with the consultant Kroeber-Reil
developed a line of cookery based upon the name Black Steel. The name had
connotations of a clean, strong product which could engage in heavy-duty

jobs with style. Would Apple Computer have been able to establish its userfriendly image, in an era in which computers were formidable machines, with
another name, or under (say) the Model 700 signature? It is doubtful.
A name can serve as a substantial barrier to entry once it is established.
Consider the power of names like Velcro, Formica, and Kodak. In fact, a
name can be more useful than a patent, which can be difficult and costly to
defend. In contrast, a trademark or service mark can be enforced quickly by
the obtaining of a temporary injunction, and need not terminate in some
arbitrary time period. If the innovation is closely tied to the name, protection
of the name can be enough to protect the innovation.
An established brand can benefit from the establishment of a new
subname. A subname can identify a new model which has a particular
characteristic, such as the Mercury Sable. It can also identify a group of
models which have a common relevant attribute. Consider the Turbo series of
computer software products by Borland: Turbo Pascal, Turbo Basic, Turbo C,
and Turbo Assembly. The Turbo name has an association with an important
attribute, and thus has the potential to create real equity.
Name creation is too important to be relegated to a brainstorming session
among a few insiders around a kitchen table or in an executive lunchroom.
Excellent managers who would not dream of interjecting their opinions
during decision-making sessions involving creating products or ads are for
some reason tempted to take over during key name-creation decisions, often
in part because a working name is needed quickly, but also in part because
name creation seems like the prerogative of the entrepreneur. Yet a name is
much more permanent than most other elements of a marketing program. A
package, price, or advertising theme usually can be changed much more
easily than a name.
The process of both generating alternatives and selecting among them
should be systematic, and as objective as possible. The use of a professional
firm either to help the process or to take it over should be considered.
Whoever does it will need to both generate and evaluate alternatives
according to a set of criteria.
GENERATING ALTERNATIVES
Before creating a list of alternatives, it is useful to know which words and
phrases will describe the associations that would be useful for the brand name
to have. For example, suppose that a name is being sought for a movie video
rental service which will deliver to, and pick up from, a box attached to your
residence. Referring to a catalogue, you merely call in your selections. Useful
associations might be: fast, deliver, wide selection, convenient, easy, friendly,
movies, video, rental, competent, in-home selection, express, delivery truck,

and order by catalogue. The list can be expanded through word-association
research—such as asking members of the target audience to list whatever
comes to mind when words from the list are read, or placed on a screen.
These associations can be used to generate a set of alternatives by:
Combining them into phrases—Video Express, Movie Truck
Generating parts of words and combining them—Rentivideo
Considering symbols for each—Popcorn Video
Using rhymes—Groovy Movie
Using humor—Cecil B. Video
Adding suffixes or prefixes such as poly, omni, vita, ette, dyne, lite, syn,
ad, ix, vita, ada—Moviette
In addition, any set of words that describes objects can be a source of
alternatives, such as:
Animals—Cougar, Greyhound, Linx, Bobcat
Flower/Tree—Oak Tree, Red Rose
Person type—Cover Girl, Craftsman
People—Ford, Regis, Hewlett Packard
Adjectives—Quick, Clean
A powerful source of a name or slogan is a metaphor. A metaphor is the
use of a word or phrase denoting one concept in place of another concept
suggesting a likeness between them. A metaphor is a way to communicate
very compactly a complex idea. DieHard battery, for example, is a metaphor
which suggests that the battery is like a tough person or plant that is hard to
kill off. The metaphor desktop publishing really created a whole industry, and
stimulated sales of computers and printers in general. Unfortunately for the
originators of the metaphor, it was not a trademark which could be protected.
A naming firm, NameLab, uses morphenes as name building-blocks.2
Morphenes are a set of about 6,000 word fragments capable of stimulating
mental images even though they have no meaning by themselves. NameLab
came up with Acura (derived from accurate), Sentra (from sentry), and Geo
(from geography—a world or global connotation). Another NameLab product
was Compaq, the fusion of com (indicating computer and communications)
and paq (from compact). The paq was deliberately selected instead of pak,
pac, or pach because it stood out as being easy to pronounce yet catchy and
unusual. The name also allowed the potential to be linked to other related
products, such as wordpaq or datapaq.
In contrast to the approach of using the name to establish desired

associations, there is the empty-vase or blank-canvas theory of naming: Use a
name with no associations. The name can then be imbued with meaning
through product refinement, advertising, and packaging. It may in fact be kept
somewhat general or ambiguous, so that it can be attached to a variety of
products. Consider names like Kodak, MJB, and Wendy’s, all of which started
with no meaningful associations.
There should be a set of hundreds of (and perhaps well over a thousand)
alternatives. The next step is to evaluate the alternatives, using a set of criteria
which should include questioning whether the name is easy to recall, has
useful associations, avoids bad associations, will be helpful in generating a
logo/symbol, and can be protected legally.
IS IT EASY TO LEARN?
An important aspect of a brand name is thus its memorability: Will it be
remembered? Although the memory process clearly is complex, a substantial
amount of research into both psychology and consumer behavior has provided
at least some insights into which pertinent factors are related to memory.3 In
general, recall will be enhanced:
When a name is different or unusual enough to attract attention, and
perhaps to arouse curiosity: “Charlie” was a novel name for a perfume. A
bank name like First Federal will not stand out like Red Wagon Bank. Zap
Mail is more memorable than Speedy Mail.
When a name has something about it that is interesting—such as rhyme,
alliteration, a pun, or humor: Cola-Cola, Toys-R-Us (with a backward R),
and The Price of His Toys all provide a spark of interest, as do names with
black humor—such as The Texas Chain Saw Manicure Company (a lawncare service) and The Mad Butcher.
When a name elicits a mental picture or image: Names like Apple,
Rabbit, and Cougar should be more memorable than such names as Pledge,
Bold, and Tempo. One theory is that a visual image provides a memory trace
which is generally easier to retrieve than an abstract concept—in part because
it is likely to have more and stronger associations in memory, and in part
because it involves a different memory process.
When a name is meaningful: One study demonstrated that recall of names
was improved if the name meant something (L’eggs vs. Leget as a name for
stockings) and/or if the name fit the product (Letters vs. Economy as a name
for a writing pad).4 The implication is that the use of sets of letters like MCI
(vs. Sprint) or words without meaning, like Metrecal (vs. Slender) will be at a
disadvantage. Curiously, there is evidence that less-used words have been
found to generate higher recognition (as opposed to recall).
When a name has some emotion: Psychological studies have shown that

emotionality affects memory. Although negative emotions can rarely be
tapped, some product classes lend themselves to positive emotions. Examples
are Joy, Caress, Love, My Sin, and Obsession.
When a name is simple: All else being equal, a three-syllable word will be
harder to learn than a one- or two-syllable word, particularly if the consumer
has little motivation to learn the name. Consider names like Raid, Bold, Bic,
Jif, Dash, and Coke. A word which is more difficult to spell or pronounce
generally is more difficult to learn and use.
DOES IT SUGGEST THE PRODUCT CLASS?
Often the brand name can play a key role in achieving an association with
the product class, so that the brand will have high recognition/recall within
the product class. Some names, such as Go Fly a Kite, Ticketron, Overnight
Delivery Services, and Dietayds communicate the involved product class.
One obvious problem is that as the name becomes more descriptive of the
product class, it will be more difficult to expand the brand to other products.
For example, the name Go-Fly-a-Kite provides an unusual, funky, fun name
that implies a specialization and expertise in kites that may be very attractive.
However, if a store wants to expand into educational toys or adult games, the
name may become something of a limitation—perhaps a liability.
Even sets of syllables without meaning can have associations with a
product classv A study by two marketing professors of 25 sets of randomly
selected letters found that “whumies” and “quax” reminded people of
breakfast cereal, and “dehax” and “vig” reminded people of laundry
detergent.5
WILL THE NAME SUPPORT A SYMBOL OR SLOGAN?
A symbol and slogan can become important assets and need to be solidly
linked to the name. When a name can stimulate and support effective symbols
and slogans, the task of linking them to the name is made easier. Some names,
such as The Swaying Palm, Fat Harry’s, and The Red Ribbon, immediately
suggest strong symbols and related associations, while others less descriptive
do not.
The name Harlem Savings Bank of New York was limiting the bank,
which wanted to expand outside of both Harlem and their existing customer
base.6 The cornerstone of their image change was a new name, Apple Bank.
The name severed the association with Harlem, and provided access to the
associations of apples—something good, wholesome, and simple—and
suggested a friendly, fun, somewhat different firm. It was, further, a unique
name linked to the city’s nickname “the Big Apple.” And it provided access
to a strong symbol (an apple), a slogan (“We’re good for you”), and several
promotional lines (“Your money grows and grows at Apple Bank,” and “Take

your pick from our branches”). The new name was credited with a sharp
improvement of several measures of marketing performance.
From fruits to vegetables: A Japanese bank—now termed “the Tomato
Bank”—not surprisingly uses a tomato symbol and says “The time is ripe for
a new concept in banking,” and that they are “bright and cheerful,” like the
tomato.
DOES IT SUGGEST DESIRED BRAND ASSOCIATIONS?
A brand name like Ultrabrite, The Silent Floor, Airbus, or WordPerfect
can also identify brand attributes or other positive associations. Consider the
associations of:
Rent-a-Wreck—with a unique type of [abused] car, a suitably low price
range, and an offbeat, humorous management style
Honda’s Civic—with civic-mindedness [a car which minimizes gas
consumption and pollution] and with city driving [an easy-to-park car]
Miller’s Magnum Malt Liquor—with strength and masculinity
Mop ’n Glow—with floor-cleaning and shiny floors
Head and Shoulders—with dandruff control
Gee, Your Hair Smells Terrific—shampoo with fresh-smelling hair
Huggies [introduced as Kimbies]—with comfortable fit close enough to
be effective
Sumitomo—with friendship [“tomo” meaning “friendship” in Japanese]
Again there is the concern that a strong name association with an attribute
will be limiting. For example, the name “Compaq” was conceived to
represent compact computers. This “compact” association undoubtedly was in
part responsible for the product’s success. When the firm went into full-size
desktop computers the “compact” association needed to be both overcome
and sacrificed. The P&G approach, of course, would be simply to generate a
new name. Compaq, however, chose to stretch the old name because of its
recognition and its association with high quality and successful innovation. At
that point in time the “compact” associations were clearly no longer helpful.
Names can also generate positive feelings because they are humorous
(Rent-a-Wreck), clever (Go-Fly-a-Kite), associated with something warm
(The Teddy Bear Stationers) or likable (The Doughboy Bakery). In fact, one
study by two UCLA psychologists measured the feelings that respondents
would experience in ideal product-use situations for five product classes: cars,
aspirin, toothpaste, candy bars, and wristwatches.7 Feelings engendered by
sets of names attached to these five product classes were also obtained. Brand
preference was higher for those names generating the appropriate feelings.

Even word parts or letters can have a strong impact upon associations. An
early study showed that the word “mal” consistently was thought to represent
a larger object than the word “mil.” Similarly, sounds within a word,
independent of meaning, can imply movement, shape, luminosity, youth, or
gender. For example, masculinity is associated with plosive and guttural
sounds (e.g., Cougar), while feminity is associated with the use of “s,” soft
“c,” and weak “f” sounds (e.g., Caress, Silk-Ease).8
ARE THERE UNDESIRABLE ASSOCIATIONS?
A name can sound right, and have good associations, to a group of
involved people who are considering it from the context of a brand with
certain characteristics. But what will a naive person think when exposed to
the name for the first time? For example, when United Airlines wanted a new
name when they expanded into hotels and rental cars, they picked Allegis,
drawn from the words allegiant (meaning loyal) and aegis (meaning shield or
protector). Even to those that did pick up the loyalty theme it might have had
a negative connotation of royalty demanding subservience—not very suitable
for a service firm. Further, to many the new name probably meant allergies.
Ultimately, the firm got rid of the Allegis name as well as their hotels and
rental cars.
One way to determine the associations elicited by candidate names is to
conduct word-association research: Simply ask members of the target
audience to list whatever comes to mind when a word is read or placed on a
screen. Among the words, of course, will be the proposed names.
Jigglers Works for Jell-O
Jell-O, a strong dessert brand since the turn of the century, was in decline
during the 1970s and 1980s. Its top-of-mind awareness fell among younger
households, reflecting the fact that young moms didn’t use Jell-O the way
their moms had.
Jigglers, snack-sized pieces of Jell-O that are solid enough to eat by hand and
involving a recipe that requires four packages of Jell-O, provided an answer.9
The Jigglers effort was supported by a promotion (named the promotion of
the year by Promote magazine) that offered free Jigglers molds so that
children could create Jigglers in varied shapes. Something like a half million
molds were distributed in 1990. In addition, over 100,000 special displays
holding Jell-O and Jigglers molds were placed in supermarkets. The product
was a natural, providing wholesome fun in the Jell-O tradition. And it
worked: Sales in 1990 actually increased 7% and image indicators turned as
well.
The name Jigglers was a key ingredient in the success of the new use of the

product. The name has a good visual image (of Jell-O jiggling in the hand), is
associated with jolly, happy people and times, and is a kid’s word. In addition,
it is linked to Jell-O by the alliteration and by being descriptive of the
product.
A factor often overlooked is the impact of a name in other languages and
cultures. Nova, the name of a GM car, meant “does not work” in Spanish (no
va). A telecommunications product called Chat Box became “cat box” in
France. Consider the effects of such names as Green Pile (Japanese lawn
dressing), Creap (Japanese coffee creamer), Super Piss (Finnish product to
unfreeze car locks), and Bum (Spanish potato crisps).
IS THE NAME DISTINCTIVE?
It is important to know in advance whether a name will create an
association with a competitive product. In addition to legal considerations
there are market reasons why such associations are important. For instance, it
can be an advantage for a product to be confused with a prestige brand.
Consider for example the private-label grocery products with packages (and
sometimes names) similar to those of their higher-priced, national-brand
competitors. However, usually the desire is to create a brand and a supporting
marketing program that generate an identity separate and distinct from
competitors’, so that others do not benefit or exploit the equity that is created.
WILL IT BE STRONG LEGALLY?
A prime criteria is that the name be strong legally.10 The specter of a
name which has been used to generate promotional material or, worse, to
establish a business, but which then must be discontinued because it has
proved not legally defensible, lurks behind every new name. Unilever’s
[Elizabeth Taylor’s] Passion perfume was introduced, only to be prevented
from being carried in 55 stores because of a suit by a competitor who had
marketed a Passion fragrance. A name which is sound legally must be distinct
from the names of competitors, and it must do more than simply be
descriptive of the product or service.
A name used commercially by a firm is protected from other competitors
whose customers overlap. Thus a proposed name for a movie rental service,
such as video express, will not be available in any city or neighborhoods with
a store with that name. It is therefore necessary to check in advance the entire
potential market area, to see if competitors are using the desired name. Even a
different name may not be available, if it might be confused with a
competitor’s name. For this reason a court once concluded that a certain
skating rink could not use the name Lollipops because it might be confused
by some with an established nearby competitor named Jellibeans.

The name has to do more than just describe the product to be protected.
Thus, names such as Air-shuttle, Consumer Electronics, Windsurfer, Dial-ARide, and Vision Center would not be protected because they describe a
product or service which others could provide. Despite considerable legal
effort, Miller would be unable to protect the name Lite that they pioneered for
low-calorie beer. The courts held that it is legally equivalent to the word
“light,” a generic or common descriptive term. For this reason competitors
were free to use the term, and Miller lost a golden opportunity to exploit their
first mover advantage in the light beer segment. Another example is CocaCola, which name itself is protected thanks to vigorous efforts by the firm.
However, they were not able to prevent the use of the ’cola” term, which
describes a drink using the kola nut’s extract. Thus we also have Pepsi-Cola
and, among many others, RC Cola—and even the Uncola drink, 7-Up.
Early in the evaluation process a checkup using readily available
databases should be made as to the availability of candidate names. In some
contexts, when the competitive area is broad (both geographically and with
respect to competitors), a relatively low percentage of the possible names may
be available. However, a potential legal problem should not necessarily
exclude a name. Access to protected names can be obtained, and the strength
of trademarks can vary widely.
THE SELECTION PROCESS
Usually there are several stages to the selection process. A crude review to
eliminate obviously unsuitable candidates, and legal screening for clearly
unavailable names, can usually cull the list down to the 20-40 range. Then a
more careful subjective evaluation can get it down to 10 or so. These all
deserve close examination, including a more thorough legal analysis to
determine the legal risks associated with them.
Customer research often is used to gain more accurate information on key
characteristics of the names. Among the customer tests that could be
conducted are:
Word associations: Do any undesired associations emerge?
Recall tasks: Give respondents a list of possible names and ask them
(after a diversion task) to write down all they can recall. This test will
determine not only recall but the spellability of the word.
Scaling the brand: This is done along the important attributes related to
the product class and the brand’s position.
Rating brand preferences: Marked differences in preferences often are
associated with brand names.

Criteria for Name Selection
A proposed name should:
1. Be easy to learn and remember—it is helpful if it is unusual,
interesting, meaningful, emotional, pronounceable, spellable, and/ or if it
involves a visual image.
2. Suggest the product class so that name recall will be high while
still being compatible with potential future uses of the name.
3. Support a symbol or slogan.
4. Suggest desired associations without being boring or trivial.
5. Not suggest undesired associations—it should be authentic,
credible, and comfortable and not raise false expectations.
6. Be distinctive—it should not be confused with competitors’
names.
7. Be available and protectable legally.
Finally, the strengths and weaknesses of each name, and the bottom-line
judgment as to its value to the brand, should be developed. The perspective
should include both the critical early stages of the marketing program and the
long term as the brand matures.
CHANGING NAMES
When a name has associations that become damaging or limiting, or when
new associations incompatible with the old name are needed, a new name
may be required. In fact, nearly 2,000 corporate names are changed each year,
in large part because the cast-off name no longer reflects the firm’s business.
As we shall now see, some of these name changes are instructive.
International Harvester found itself in 1985 with the image of a dying (if
not dead) farm-equipment manufacturer, despite the fact that it had sold its
farm-equipment operation to Tenneco and was at that time the largest U.S.
manufacturer of trucks.11 The key to the image change was changing the
name to Navistar (with the tag line “The rebirth of International Harvester”).
It was a union of navi (leading or navigation) and star (heavenly body or
outstanding performance). The name probably means marine or space-flight
equipment rather than the intended associations with trucks and a “customerdriven, aggressive, and risk-taking” firm. However, using a $13 million
advertising campaign which included footage of a Navistar truck roaring up a
hill, over 85% of the target audience had seen the advertising and could recall
the content to the company s satisfaction.
Allegheny Airlines had a geographically restrictive name. They became
US Air—a name that had the right nationwide service connotation.

Consolidated Foods changed to Sara Lee. Although “Sara Lee” did not reflect
what the firm did, it was a well-known, well-liked name that, among other
things, would be received well by investors, an important target of the name.
Interestingly, the stock market, on average, responds positively to a name
change, probably in part because it signals a change in vision or strategy for
the firm.

SYMBOLS
The reality is that most firms and products are fairly similar; the
differences that do exist, such as service quality, are difficult to communicate
in an effective and credible manner. When products and services are difficult
to differentiate, a symbol can be the central element of brand equity, the key
differentiating characteristic of a brand.
The symbol can by itself, as Figure 8-2 suggests, create awareness,
associations, and a liking or feelings which in turn can affect loyalty and
perceived quality. We know that it is easier to learn visual images (symbols)
than words (names). Thus, symbols should help gain brand awareness.
However, a symbol rich in associations—such as Mickey Mouse, the Jolly
Green Giant, or the Maytag repairman—will contribute much more, and
become an important asset for the firm.
Symbols can be nearly anything, including:
Geometric shapes—Prudential’s rock
Things—the Wells Fargo stagecoach
Packages—Morton Salt’s blue, cylindrical box
Logos—Apple Computer’s apple with a bite out of it
People—the Maytag repairman
ScenesMarlboro country
Cartoon characters—the Jolly Green Giant

FIGURE 8-2 The Role of the Symbol
The choice of a symbol and how it is developed will affect the role that it
plays in the four dimensions of brand equity. We now consider first its role in
developing associations.
ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATIONS
A symbol can communicate associations—even specific attributes.
Consider the Travelers’ red umbrella, shown in Figure 8-3, which in a
compact way has consistently communicated over time that Travelers protects
—it offers protection from the elements by providing a broad shield. Note the
slogan: “You’re better off under the Umbrella.” Similarly, the now stylized
Rock of Gibraltar, the symbol of Prudential, means strength, stability, a
fortress against adversity. Consider the difficulty of communicating such
characteristics without the symbols, and the resulting constraints upon the
marketing programs even if such programs were successful. In contrast, the
umbrella and rock can be attached to anything the firms distribute, and
provide these associations as a bonus.

FIGURE 8-3 The Travelers Umbrella
Courtesy of The Travelers Corporation.
Consider banking, a service industry in which everyone tends to attempt
to develop similar associations to support their services. Those banks that
have had the good fortune or foresight to develop symbols have a
considerable advantage. For example, Dai-Ichi Kangyo, the largest bank in
the world, has a cute, happy little red heart. Customers see the heart
everywhere in their interaction with the bank. It symbolizes warmth, a
friendly “fun” atmosphere, and an organization that loves its customers. A
very large bank needs to fight the impression that, unlike their small local
competitors, they are big and impersonal. The value of an active symbol such
as the heart is invaluable.
Other symbols that have represented brand attributes include:

Mr. Clean: The muscular sailor has represented the cleaner’s strength.
Allstate: The “good hands” represent personal care and competent
service.
GM: Mr. Goodwrench means trained, professional, friendly service
people.
MULTIPLE ASSOCIATIONS
A study of banks in California confirmed that their associations are very
similar with respect to money, savings, checking account deposits, and tellers.
Nothing distinctive—with the exception of Wells Fargo, which has had a host
of associations going along with their ubiquitous stagecoach. In an industry in
which similarity is the norm, the stagecoach is an enormous asset, in part
because of the richness of the concept. In addition to providing associations
with the Old West, horses, and the gold rush, it also effortlessly is linked to
reliability in the face of adversity, adventurousness, independence, and even
building a new society out of wilderness.
Other banks, such as Bank of America and Security Pacific, have no such
symbol upon which to draw. If they wanted to develop an image of being
adventurous and independent, it would be a huge task and would mean the
sacrifice of the development of other associations. The richness of the
stagecoach symbol does provide such associations as by-products.
POSITIVE FEELINGS: LIKING
Some of the most successful and interesting symbols are cartoon
characters that invoke humor and fantasy, symbols such as the Pillsbury
Doughboy (called Poppin’ Fresh), the Jolly Green Giant, the Keebler Elves,
Charlie the Tuna, Snoopy, and Mickey Mouse. The characters tend to be
memorable, likable, and have strong associations. The Pillsbury Doughboy,
for example, with its “belly poke and giggle,” communicates the plump
freshness of bakery products, and also provides a lovable character.
Metropolitan Life, in contrast to competitors such as Prudential, Travelers,
and Allstate, had no symbol to aid in recognition and positioning in the mid1980s.12 Their solution was to adopt the Charlie Brown characters (by
Charles Schultz). The goal was to provide a warm, light, nonthreatening
approach to insurance, in direct counterpoint to those of the serious, stolid
competitors. There is evidence that the five-year-old program helped
awareness (recognition was at 89%) and positively affected feelings toward
“Met Life,” although the financial performance of the firm had been mixed
during this period. Some have argued, however, that the Charlie Brown
characters have inhibited the firm from more aggressive factual marketing
programs.

The fact that a character is liked or is associated with a positive feeling
such as fun or laughter is important. People engage in “affect transfer,” which
means that they tend to transfer affect (feelings of liking or disliking) from
one object to another which is perceived to be connected or related to it in
some meaningful way. People are uncomfortable with an inconsistency—such
as a neutral feeling toward one object closely associated with another to
which a very positive affect is attached. They cope by altering the affect that
is not very strong.
Thus, a strong positive affect toward a character like the Pillsbury
Doughboy will very likely result in a positive affect toward the Pillsbury
baking products to which the Doughboy is associated. Of course, an
unsatisfactory baking experience associated with Pillsbury could stimulate a
negative-affect link to Pillsbury that might counter or even alter the positive
Doughboy influence.
SYMBOLS AS INDICATORS OF
BRANDS AND PRODUCT CLASSES
One role of a symbol, in addition to possibly generating associations, is to
be an indicator for a brand. When Wells Fargo Bank wants to associate itself
with international capabilities and an international presence, it puts the
stagecoach in foreign settings. The result is a useful mnemonic device for the
audience. The juxtaposition of a Western symbol linked closely with the bank
to a foreign setting like the Ginza or Piccadilly is at once incongruous and
meaningful. An exposure to one such scene would he more interesting and
memorable than dozens of exposures to the same scene showing a Bank of
America sign.
The symbol may also help the brand name to associate with a product
class by linking with it. Research in consumer behavior and psychology
provides clues as to what sort of symbol characteristics will affect the ability
of a symbol to link with brand and product class.
One guideline is to make the symbol unique. There is always the danger
that the brand equity of one brand can be co-opted by someone who generates
a similar symbol. An important element of the stagecoach to Wells Fargo is its
uniqueness in the financial services setting.
Consider a shampoo such as Vidai Sassoon or Head & Shoulders, both of
which rely upon their package to act as a symbol. Private-label brands have
been produced with nearly identical packages/symbols. One study showed
that such products were perceived to have more similar attributes to the
national brands (e.g., Vidal Sassoon) than other private labels with dissimilar
packaging.13 The implication is to legally protect symbols from imitators, and
to develop symbols which are unique. One way to test a symbol is to use

recognition tasks. The symbol could be exposed for a fraction of a second,
along with a set of competing symbols. The question is how long the
exposure must be before correct recognition occurs. A distinct, differentiated
symbol will do well in such a test.
Another guideline is that it is much easier to learn the association between
a symbol and a brand if the symbol reflects the brand—for example, if a
rocking chair is the symbol for The Rocking-Chair Theater. At its extreme,
the symbol and the brand name can be the same—as with Sony, IBM, and
GM.
In one study, respondents were exposed to a subset of 48 symbols, each
reflecting a brand name.14 Half of these symbols were interactive, in that they
reflected the product class. For example, the Rocket Messenger Service
showed a picture of a delivery person wearing a rocket on his back and
delivering a package. The other symbols were noninteractive, in that they did
not reflect the product class. For example, a sketch of a bear standing near a
tree represented the Bear Delivery Service. Respondents, after viewing a set
of such stimuli, were asked to name a brand for each product class. When the
interactive symbol had been used, a much greater degree of accurate brand
recall was evidenced. There is a trade-off. If the symbol (and brand name) has
associations that are extremely strong, the brand’s ability to reposition or
extend may be reduced. An extension, for example, would not only change
the name/ product-class association but also the symbol/product-class
association. A symbol which has an inherently weak association with a
product class provides strategic flexibility.
UPGRADING THE SYMBOL
With so much invested in a symbol, it is risky to change it because of the
relearning that will have to take place. On the other hand, the symbol can
become dated and start to develop some undesirable old-fashioned, stodgy
connotations. Several firms have successfully updated their symbols over
time to keep them in touch with the times while still retaining the heritage and
associations.
Aunt Jemima has traded in her kerchief for a stylish, gray-streaked hairdo
and has added earrings and a white collar. The change was intended to
provide a more contemporary look while preserving the warmth, good taste,
and reliability that is associated with the symbol. The Morton Salt girl and
Betty Crocker have both kept fashionable over the years with new hairstyles
and dresses. The Prudential Rock has become more stylized and
contemporary over the decades.
For Coca-Cola, the cans and bottles are key symbols. The core identity
elements—the red color, the dynamic curve, the vertical lettering, and the

dual brand identities of “Coke” and “Coca-Cola”—were eroded during the
mid-1980s with the introduction of new varieties, including caffeine-free
drinks (which had a gold package). A review resulted in a more cohesive set
design which differentiated the products while still providing more impact on
the shelf. There were also some subtle changes in the script that served to help
achieve the twin goals of preserving the heritage and distinctiveness of CocaCola while legitimatizing the brevity and contemporary impact of “Coke.”
GUARDING THE SYMBOL
A symbol, with its associations, will need to be protected over time. It is
important to avoid placing the symbol in a context which will jeopardize its
associations. For example, Wells Fargo Bank needs to protect and reinforce
the stagecoach symbol. When they evaluate any proposed promotions or
products, such should be evaluated not only on their own merits but upon
their impact on the bank’s stagecoach.
Licensing a symbol (such as the Jolly Green Giant) is one way to gain
exposure. However, the symbol needs to be restricted to the right settings; any
undesirable associations can affect its equity. For example, Mickey Mouse is
licensed widely. Several questions may be addressed concerning this fact.
What associations are those desired for The Mouse? Are the various licensed
products and services consistent with those associations? Will there be
overexposure so that boredom or even irritation will emerge?

SLOGANS
A name and a symbol in combination can be an important part of brand
equity. However, there is a limit to what a single word and symbol can do. For
instance, a name like Ford, with its symbol, is pretty much set in concrete—
such a brand usually does not have the luxury of selecting another name and
symbol to reinforce a positioning or repositioning strategy. A slogan,
however, can be tailored to a positioning strategy, and added to a brand name
and symbol. It has far fewer legal and other limitations than does either a
name or a symbol.
A slogan can provide an additional association for the brand. Ford wanted
to add a quality association to its name. The slogan “Quality is Job No. 1”
provided the vehicle. Links to the Ford name help provide Ford with a quality
association. Similarly, Mazda, a name which by itself has few associations, is
aided by the slogan “It just feels right,” which summarizes the positioning
strategy of a comfortable car and ride. Rice-a-Roni gets mileage out of its

“The San Francisco Treat” tag line, what with both “San Francisco” and
“treat” having many useful associations.
A slogan can remove some ambiguity from the name and symbol.
Maybelline has a mixed image, but “Smart, beautiful, Maybelline” is very
specific. Cadillac can have different, and not always positive, associations. It
can engender visions of ostentatious, gas-guzzling, large cars. However, such
associations are much less likely in the context of the slogan “Cadillac style.”
Another capacity that a slogan has is its ability to generate equity of its
own which can be exploited. Consider AT&T’s “Reach out and touch
someone” slogan, which has associations with feelings of warmth and
friendship, as well as an action component. AT&T drew upon the slogan to
help position promotional programs such as the AT&T Reach Out America
plan, the AT&T Reach Out World plan, and even a Reach Out Saturday plan.
A slogan also can reinforce the name or the symbol. Thus, the Sharp
slogan “From Sharp minds come Sharp products” repeats the brand name.
The Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank slogan “We have your interests at heart” builds
upon the brand’s heart symbol.
FIGURE 8-4 Match the Slogans to the Brands
Slogans
1. Does she … or doesn’t she?
2. Don’t leave home without it.
3. We try harder.
4. Everything you always wanted in a beer, and
less.
5. When it rains it pours.
6. The quality goes in before the name goes on.
7. In Touch with Tomorrow
8. The Most Intelligent Cars Ever Built
9. The Right Choice
10. You’re better off under the Umbrella.
11. Making It All Make Sense
12. The Heartbeat of America
13. Solutions That Work
14. Giving Shape to Imagination
15. It Just Feels Right.
16. His Master’s Voice
Note: Answers appear at the end of Chapter 9.

Brands
1. Ameritech
2. Miller Lite
3. Microsoft
4. American
Express
5. Toshiba
6. Zenith
7. Mazda
8. Clairol
9. AT&T
10. Travelers
11. RCA
12. Morton Salt
13. Avis
14. Lockheed
15. Chevrolet
16. Saab

As with the name and symbol, a slogan is most effective if it is specific, to
the point, and memorable for some reason—interesting, relevant, funny,
catchy, or whatever. It also needs to be linked to the brand. Some brands have
spent tens of millions, only to find that few shoppers can link the brand with
the slogan. Consider the challenge of Figure 8-4. How many names can you
get correctly?
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. Consider the names, symbols, and slogans of your competitors. Which
are strong, representing competitive advantages? Which are weak?
2. What are the symbols of your brand? What mental image would you
like customers to have of your brand in the future? Do your current name,
symbol, and slogan deliver that mental image?
3. Develop some alternative symbols and slogans which would reinforce
the mental image you would like your brand to have.

9
Brand Extensions
The Good, the Bad,
and the Ugly

·
Brands have become the barrier to entry, but they are also the means
to entry.
Edward Tauber
Three things I never lends—my ’oss, my wife, and my name.
Robert Smith Surtees

THE LEVI TAILORED CLASSICS STORY
In the early 1980s Levi Strauss, a $2 billion firm, enjoyed a large market
share in its various product categories and felt that it needed to expand its
market in order to maintain growth. The expansion decision was guided by a
segmentation study of the men’s apparel market which revealed five distinct
men’s apparel segments.
The first, accounting for 26% of men’s apparel, was the utilitarian
segment. The utilitarian, a Levi loyalist, sought comfortable, durable clothing
for both work and play. The second, the mainstream traditionalist,
representing 18% of the market, was older and tended to buy polyester suits at
department stores. Levi had made good penetration in this segment with the
“Actionwear” line that featured some “give” to accommodate middle-age
spread. Levi had also made good inroads into the “price shopper” and “trendy

casual” segments. They had, however, no presence in the “classic
individualist” segment—and thus any penetration there would represent a
growth opportunity.
A classic individualist was a clothes horse who tended to buy woolcontent items and shop in specialty stores. Representing a solid 21% of the
market for men’s apparel, he was a heavy buyer of suits, with a suit wardrobe
much larger than any other segment’s. Unlike the mainstream traditionalist
shopper, who relied upon his wife’s advice, the classic individualist shopped
alone and trusted his own judgment on clothes. He was concerned with
having the right look and label. Levi had virtually no presence in his apparel
purchases.
Targeting this segment, Levi introduced Levi Tailored Classics, a line of
men’s wool-content suits which were comparable to competitors’ offerings in
material, workmanship, and fashion. The distribution emphasized department
stores rather than specialty stores, in order to exploit the Levi selling presence
in department stores. One differentiating feature was the fact that the suits
were sold as “separates”—the slacks and coat selected individually. Thus,
customers could be fitted better, and the need for tailoring would be reduced.
Further, the suits were priced lower than designer suits yet comparable to a
competitive (Hager) line.
Despite a costly professional development and introduction effort the
product was not successful, and promotional support was withdrawn within a
year. An enormous investment in both resources and reputation did not pay
off.
In retrospect, there were several “fit” problems that contributed. For one
thing, the target segment took both the concept of separates and the
department-store outlets as signals of inferior quality and fashion. The most
serious fit problem, however (which in fact surfaced in focus-group concept
tests) was the Levi name. Levi meant denim, durable, working men, mining,
and good value. Extending it via the Actionwear line to the mainstream
traditionalists worked: They could buy into the concept of Levi making a suit.
However, the classic individualists felt (and were not embarrassed to say) that
Levi lacked credibility as a maker of suits of top quality and fashion. They
also did not feel that a Levi label reflected their self-image, even though they
were less likely to verbalize this discomfort.
By contrast Dockers, a pants line established in 1986 without a strong link
to Levis, has been a smashing success. Cotton pants that are wide at the top
and taper toward the bottom, Dockers provide a “looser” fit to the aging babyboomer. They offer more comfort and fashion than jeans, yet are separated
from dress slacks. Dockers, in fact, has become a strong brand name, with

associations to both their distinctive pants and (more generally) new casual
clothing. Thus the Dockers name illustrates the tactical and strategic
advantages of creating a new name.
BRAND EXTENSIONS
Brand extensions, the use of a brand name established in one product class
to enter another product class, have been the core of strategic growth for a
variety of firms, especially during the past decade. The power of such a
strategy is evidenced by the sheer “numbers.” One survey of leading
consumer product companies found that 89% of new-product introductions
were line extensions (such as a new flavor or package size), 6% were brand
extensions, and only 5% were new brands. In general, licensed names are a
major factor in retail sales. In fact, over one-third of apparel and accessories
expenditures involve licensed names.1
The attraction of levering the brand name is powerful—often irresistible
when the alternatives are considered. The introduction of a new name in some
consumer markets can involve an investment of from $50 million to well over
$150 million. Yet no expenditure level guarantees success. In fact, the batting
average of new products, even with substantial support, is not very reassuring.
In contrast, the use of an established brand name can substantially reduce the
introduction investment and increase the success probability. Of 7,000 new
supermarket products introduced in the 1970s, fully two-thirds of the 93
products that resulted in a business whose sales exceeded $15 million
annually were brand extensions.2
Brand extensions are a natural strategy for the firm looking to grow by
exploiting its assets. Indeed, the most real and marketable assets of many
firms are the brand names that they have developed. Thus, one strategic
growth option is to exploit that asset by using it to penetrate new product
categories or to license it to others for use therein. Another option is to
acquire a firm with a brand name which can provide a platform for future
growth via brand extensions.
However, it is not all peaches and cream. A brand name can fail to help an
extension, or (worse) can even create subtle—and sometimes not so subtle—
associations that can hurt the extension. Worse still, the extension can
succeed, or at least survive, and damage the original brand equity by
weakening existing associations or adding new, undesired ones. Because the
extension can dramatically affect a key asset (the brand name), both in its
original setting and in the new context, a wrong extension decision can be
strategically damaging.

FIGURE 9-1 Results of Extending a Brand Name
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the brandextension decision and its possible outcomes as summarized in Figure 9-1—
the good, the bad, and the ugly—and to suggest ways to identify the right
extensions to pursue. The rationale for an extension (the contributions of both
the brand name to the extension, and the extension to the brand name) will be
considered first. We will next review the bad (that the brand may harm the
extension) and the ugly (that the extension may harm the brand, or prevent a
new brand name from being established). Then some suggestions about
identifying extension directions will be presented. Finally, several strategy
issues involved with the brand-extension decision will be discussed.

THE GOOD: WHAT THE BRAND NAME
BRINGS TO THE EXTENSION
BRAND ASSOCIATIONS
Purchase decisions often are based on a limited number of product
attributes. A credible and sustainable point of differentiation with respect to a
key attribute can be difficult to create, especially if one’s competitors are
established.

FIGURE 9-2 Leveraging Arm & Hammer’s Odor Fighting Association
Courtesy of Arm & Hammer.
If a firm wanted to enter a low-calorie market, for example, it might have
to engage in low-calorie shouting matches with competitors as to who has the
most low-calorie offering. The result could be an expensive and perhaps
impossible positioning task. However, by using the Weight Watchers name, a
product line gains a strong set of associations with the Weight Watchers
program, and a credible position as an effective component of a weightcontrol program. The name “Jeep” provided a new line of Jeep shoes with
instant associations with upscale casual products for active, adventurous
people which would be difficult to achieve without the Jeep name.
A strong association can help the communication task, as well as position
a brand. Consider the problem of communicating the idea that a new liquor is

rich and creamy. Simply by using the Häagen-Dazs name, Hiram Walker
successfully both communicated efficiently a complex message and gained a
strong position. Likewise, the Hershey name on a product such as milk
immediately communicates not only the chocolate taste but that it will be a
“Hershey” taste.
The association needs to get transferred to the new product class. Note the
ad for Arm & Hammer Deodorizer Spray shown in Figure 9-2. After the ad
reminds the viewer how Arm & Hammer baking soda is used as an odor
destroying product in refrigerators, it then helps the view transfer the
association to its new product, the Deodorizer Spray. First, it simulates the
baking soda being used as a spray in a refrigerator, thus associating baking
soda with a spray. Next, it explicitly mentions that the power of baking soda
is in the new Deodorizer Spray. An additional link is the use of the words
“destroys odors” in both the baking soda and Deodorizer Spray context.
There are a host of brand associations that can provide a point of
differentiation for an extension. Edward M. Tauber studied 276 brand
extensions and concluded that most fit into seven approaches:3
1. Same product in a different form: Cranberry juice cocktail and Dole
Frozen Fruit Bars
2. Distinctive taste/ingredient/component: Philadelphia Cream Cheese
Salad Dressing and Arm & Hammer Carpet Deodorizer
3. Companion product: Coleman camping equipment, Mr. Coffee coffee,
Colgate toothbrushes, and Duracell Durabeam flashlights
4. Customer franchise: Visa travelers checks, Sears Savings Bank, and
Gerber baby clothes
5. Expertise: Honda’s experience in small motors helped its lawn mowers,
and Bic’s razors were aided by a competence in making disposable
inexpensive plastic items
6. Benefit/attribute/feature: Ivory “mild” Shampoo, Sunkist Vitamin C
tablets, and Gillette’s Dry Look line
7. Designer or ethnic image: Pierre Cardin wallets, Porsche sunglasses,
Benihana frozen entrees, and Ragú pasta
QUALITY ASSOCIATIONS
In many situations product-attribute positioning may be futile. A brand
can get into a specification battle—the brand with the most fiber, the fastest
frequency response, the most effective aspirin, the lowest number of
complaints, etc. However, such claims may be short-lived—competitors may
alter their product and challenge the claim, or surpass it. Further, customers

get confused: They disregard the competing claims and decide on the basis of
an intangible perception of quality that is not necessarily based on specific
attributes. (Recall the Chapter 5 discussion of “intangibles.”)
Competing on the basis of high perceived quality often is an attractive
alternative. As noted in Chapter 4, a set of 248 business managers were asked
to identify their business’s sustainable competitive advantage. By a large
margin the most frequent mention was a reputation for quality.4 The challenge
often is to achieve high perceived quality—which sometimes is a more
difficult task than actually delivering high quality.
Often the use of established brand names is a good way to achieve a
quality perception. Thus, the H-P name provides thousands of products with
an umbrella-quality reputation that usually means far more than specifications
of individual H-P products. In fact some corporate names (such as H-P, Kraft,
GE, and Ford) are on so many products that they lack strong specific
associations. Their value, then, is primarily to provide a feeling of perceived
quality, and a related feeling that they will be around for some time to come.
The Jaguar name was applied to a line of men’s fragrance in part to
provide a quality image. The introduction, supported by an ancillary offer of a
replica of a Jaguar for $15.00, promised a status scent with drive and passion.
A study of 18 proposed extensions of six brand names—McDonald’s,
Vuarnet, Crest, Vidal Sassoon, Häagen-Dazs, and Heineken—was conducted
by Aaker and Keller.5 One finding was that the perceived quality of the brand
in its original context was a significant predictor of the evaluation of the
extension, as long as a fit existed between the two involved product classes.
Thus the general perception of quality associated with a name is a key
ingredient to the success of its extension. There is little point in extending
mediocrity.
AWARENESS/PRESENCE
The first step in gaining acceptance of a new product is developing
awareness of the brand name and associating it with the product class. As we
saw in Chapter 3, brand-name awareness provides a familiarity which can
affect purchases for some low-involvement products (such as gum and
detergent) and help determine which brands are considered in other categories
(such as cars and computers). For this reason a recognized name can translate
directly into a market advantage. Interestingly, the third most mentioned
sustainable competitive advantage in the study of 248 business managers was
high recognition within the product class—a high visibility or presence.
Creating awareness of a name and associating it with a product class can
be expensive. Over $200 million was reportedly spent in changing Esso to
Exxon. As noted in Chapter 3, Black & Decker spent over $100 million,

mostly on 15-second “spots,” to establish its name on the CE line of small
appliances it had purchased in 1982. The campaign achieved a 57%
awareness level—which was good, but still lower than what GE retained even
without making or distributing products in that category.
Many brand names—even some which have not received extensive
consumer advertising, such as Winnebago and Arm & Hammer—have
recognition levels of over 90%. The use of a recognized brand name on a new
product automatically provides name recognition and reduces the
communication task to the more manageable one of associating the name to
the new product class. We know that it is easier to communicate the fact that
the widely known Jell-O now makes Pudding Pops, and later that it makes
Gelatin Pops and Fruit Bars, than to communicate the existence of a new
name like Swenson’s Pudding Pops. One study of 98 consumer brands in 11
markets found that successful brand extensions spent less on advertising than
did comparable new-name entrees.6 Further, the difference increased as the
product class matured.
When the brand can support heavy advertising on other categories, the
brand-name awareness of the extension will benefit. For example, Helen of
Troy, a professional hairstyling tools firm, has built a $100 million retail hairdryer and curling-wand business by licensing the Vidal Sassoon name. A key
ingredient was the massive ongoing advertising support that Vidal Sassoon
shampoo and conditioner products received.
TRIAL PURCHASE
A brand name attached to a new product reduces the risk for a prospective
buyer. It means that the firm is established, is likely to be around to support
the product, and is unlikely to promote a flawed product. Thus, an IBM or
AT&T computer has credibility, while an “Advanced Compute” brand, even
with a good product, many have little chance. The established name reduces
the risk for the buyer.
A Common Word Part: Inkjet, McMuffin
The use of a common word part can allow the name to accomplish two
tasks at once: to indicate an individual product, and to be an indicator of a
group of products or a firm.
H-P uses DeskJet, PaintJet, and ThinkJet for three ink-jet printers, and
LaserJet IIP and LaserJet III for their laser printers. In sharp contrast, Quame
calls their printers Quadlaser, CrystalPrint, LaserTen, ScriptTen, and Sprint.
To gain recall and to establish associations for five names is extremely
difficult. H-P has the benefit of four advertising efforts to help establish the
Jet name. The four other names—Desk, Paint, Think, and Laser—are

descriptive variations. When recall of PaintJet, for example, is involved, there
are two memory routes, Paint and Jet, that can be accessed. The Jet suffix
gives H-P a big advantage.
Consider the value of the Mc word part to represent McDonald’s. Again the
word part provides an indicator of an individual product, in addition to
indicating the firm. Consider the value of the Big Mac as opposed to
McDonald’s large hamburger, or Chicken McNuggets vs. McDonald’s fried
chicken morsels, or McKids vs. McDonald’s children’s clothing.
McDonald’s has around 100 names with either Mac or Mc registered,
including Big Mac, Chicken McNuggets, Chicken McSwiss, Egg McMuffin,
McDonuts, McFortune Cookie, and McRib. They have even developed a
McLanguage, including McCleanest, McFavorite, and McGreatest. They
protect the Mc word part aggressively, and have objected to a bakery named
McBagels, and a McSushi restaurant.
In a study of 58 new products introduced into the Philadelphia area, the
most important predictor of trial levels was the extent to which a known
family brand was involved, and the level of promotion used.7 Both exceed the
impact of distribution, packaging, and brand awareness achieved by
advertising. In virtually all new-product concept tests, the addition of an
established name such as Pillsbury will greatly enhance initial reaction,
interest, and willingness to consider or try the product.

MORE GOOD: EXTENSIONS CAN
ENHANCE THE CORE BRAND
Extensions can (and ideally should) enhance the core brand. Instead of the
extension’s weakening the brand name and draining its good will, the
extension should reenforce its image, providing a building function. Thus,
Weight Watchers brand extensions are firmly positioned as weight-control
products. They increase the brand’s visibility, and support the main
association: weight control. Similarly, Sunkist’s associations with oranges,
health, and vitality are reinforced by the promotion of Sunkist Juice Bars and
Sunkist Vitamin C Tablets.
An extension can provide name recognition and associations to new
segments. For example, Winnebago Industries sells its expensive campers and
motor homes to middle-aged people who can afford the relatively steep price.

In 1982, Winnebago licensed a line of camping equipment to build awareness
among younger consumers who had not yet heard of Winnebago. At least
some buyers of sleeping bags and tents will eventually be prospective buyers
of motor homes. Of course, Winnebago runs the risk that, as a result, people
will sooner or later feel that the company’s campers and motor homes will be
made like a flimsy camp stove. However, if the camper and motor-home line
is anchored firmly along a quality dimension, and separated from the
camping-equipment line in terms of promotion and distribution, this
possibility will be reduced.

THE BAD: THE NAME
FAILS TO HELP THE EXTENSION
THE NAME DOES NOT ADD VALUE
When a brand name is added simply to provide recognition, credibility,
and a quality association, there often is a substantial risk that even if the brand
is initially successful, it will be vulnerable to competition.
Consider Pillsbury Microwave Popcorn, which at first benefited from the
Pillsbury name but was vulnerable to the entry of another established name
with a parity (or superior) product. The Orville Redenbacher name, for
example, entered the category late—and still won with a point of
differentiation (expertise in making quality popcorn). The General Mills
product, Pop Secret, represented the alternative strategy of developing a new
name for the category using one which implies popcorn and a product benefit
—a secret popping formula. In 1989, Orville Redenbacher held a 36% share
of the $420 million microwave popcorn market, while Pop Secret was at
21.7%. Pillsbury, at 4.5%, was one of the also-rans, along with Planters, Jolly
Time, Jiffy Pop, and Newman’s Own.8 Pillsbury had a similar experience in
microwaveable frozen pizza, where it saw its early gains eroded by those with
established pizza names.
It is particularly important for the brand extension to provide a benefit if
the product class is well established. For example, a designer name does not
always guarantee success, because it does not add value to the product. The
Bill Blass name attached to chocolates provided design and prestige
associations that were not highly valued by the customer, or at least could not
overcome the price premium.
An effort to establish the Beatrice name using the tag line “You’ve known

us all along” did not add any value to the involved brands, such as Wesson
and Orville Redenbacher. Further, the effort did not even succeed in making
consumers aware that these brands were Beatrice products. There was simply
no reason for consumers to make the connection. The result was, at best,
wasted awareness-oriented advertising.
A brand attribute and an associated name may only appear to offer a
benefit. Lilt, a major hair-permanent brand, came out with a shampoo/
conditioner designed for hair that had received a perm. For that application,
the name Lilt appeared to be a significant asset. However, the focus of the
target segment became dry hair rather than permed hair. As a result there was
no need or desire for a special perm shampoo: Any shampoo designed for dry
hair was acceptable.
It is useful to run a concept test to see if a name actually adds
value.Prospective customers given only the brand name can be asked whether
they would be attracted to the product, and why. If they can articulate a reason
why the branded new-product concept would be attractive, then the brand is
adding value. However, if they are unable to provide a specific reason, it is
unlikely that the brand name will add significant value.
NEGATIVE ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATIONS
There is also the risk that a brand-extension strategy could stimulate
negative attribute associations. The Levi Strauss Tailored Classics line of suits
failed, in large part because of the negative Levi associations with casual
living, rugged material, and the out-of-doors. Examples of brand names which
were handicaps to extensions, rather than assets, are not difficult to find:
The Corn Flakes name reduced the credibility of the honey nut concept
of Honey Nut Corn Flakes. The product failed, and was only successful
under the Nuts and Honey name without the Corn Flakes association.
Consumers could not be convinced that Grapefruit Tang would taste like
a superior grapefruit drink, because of the strong taste and content
associations of the Tang drink.
Country Time Lemonade had strong taste associations that hurt efforts to
extend the name to apple cider.
Campbell Soup called their line of spaghetti sauces Prego after they
found that a Campbell name left a connotation of being orange and
watery.
The Bic name, associated with disposable pens, lighters, and razors, did
not work for perfume, in part because cheap/disposable was a handicap
in the perfume category.

Log Cabin, the market leader in the griddle-oriented syrup business, was
disappointed in its efforts to enter the pancake-mix arena. The association
with a sticky, sweet syrup probably did not engender visions of a light and
flurry product. By contrast, Aunt Jemima was successful in going the other
way—from pancake mix to syrup. Aunt Jemima pancake mix, of course, has
links with the Aunt Jemima character—a friendly, warm person who likes to
cook pancake breakfasts. These associations were richer and stronger than the
Log Cabin associations. Why didn’t the Aunt Jemima syrup business come
back to damage their core pancake business? The likely reason is that the
extensive product experience of Aunt Jemima pancake-mix users, coupled
with the strong associations of Aunt Jemima, made it impervious to any
impact of the syrup extension.
Sometimes there are some unanticipated subtleties to the transfer. Aaker
and Keller found that in testing brand extension concepts, for example, the
Crest taste was a problem in Crest gum, but not in Crest mouthwash, although
both had positive associations of good tooth care and oral hygiene. Good taste
may not be important in mouthwash; indeed, Listerine has associated
unpleasant taste with effective freshener action.
Negative associations can sometimes be reduced or suppressed by adding
a second brand name with the right connotations, or by elaborating the
concept. Thus, there might be a Campbell’s Special Torino Spaghetti Sauce:
The Campbell’s name would be used much like the Kellogg’s name on cereals
—simply serving to sprinkle some credibility on another brand name. The
Special Torino type of subname will cue product-characteristic associations.
Alternatively, a concept elaboration could be featured: Campbell’s rich, thick,
dark spaghetti sauce. The elaboration will reduce the likelihood of Campbell’s
soup associations emerging.
The Aaker and Keller study showed that product concept elaborations
could reduce the incidence of negative associations. An experiment explored
whether either of two types of concept elaborations could overcome negative
associations engendered by four low-rated brand-extension concepts, such as
McDonald’s photo processing (e.g., greasy, lack competence). One,
elaborating the positive attributes (“The providers of fast, inexpensive, and
convenient service”) resulted in no improvement in the ratings. The other,
elaborating the concept in order to neutralize the negative associations
(“Physically separated from the food service and using a well-established
camera retailer to process the film”) improved the ratings substantially.
However, although they went from around 3.5 to 4.0 on a 7-point scale, they
were still far short of the successful extension concepts. Success, of course,
will depend on the extent to which the negative associations are damaging,

and the feasibility and cost of inhibiting their emergence.
An extension that is far removed from the original product (such as CocaCola, or McDonald’s, and clothing) has the advantage that attributes such as
taste cannot be transferred. Thus, where Coca-Cola orange juice would not
work, Coca-Cola sweat shirts are acceptable. Of course, in this case the
consumer is relying upon the manufacturer of the extension, such as Murjani
(Coca-Cola), or the retailer such as Sears (McKid’s), rather than on the
licensed name to warrant the quality of the clothing.
THE NAME CONFUSES
The name can imply a very different product from what is being
delivered. The success of Tuna Helper and Hamburger Helper prompted Betty
Crocker to create a chicken version. However, the chicken product required
more time, since the chicken content had to be prepared. Further, the name
Betty Crocker Cookbook Chicken, which was supposed to suggest a quality
homecooked meal, instead was very confusing. Many thought that the product
was a cookbook or a recipe. When the name was changed to Chicken Helper,
the association with Betty Crocker was reduced and the product was better
received.
THE FIT IS POOR
The extension needs to fit the brand. The customer needs to be
comfortable with the concept of the brand name’s being on the extension. If
the fit is poor, desired associations will not transfer but (perhaps worse) will
distract, or even precipitate ridicule.
If a premium name such as Rolls-Royce is attached to mundane products
such as bicycles or games, customers may feel that the name is being
exploited or that it is adding nothing except price. Arm & Hammer was
successful, in building on odor-destroying associations, to extend to detergent
and oven cleaner, but unsuccessful in extending to an underarm spray
deodorant. The thought of an ingredient used in oven cleaners being applied
to a sensitive part of the body was unpalatable. In a similar vein, even though
Dole has associations with Hawaii, the introduction of Dole Hawaiian resorts
or travel services might not be acceptable because it is too far a stretch.
A basis of fit can be provided in a variety of ways, as Figure 9-3
illustrates. One basis of fit can be links between the two product categories.
Aaker and Keller found that two types of relationships between product
classes were related to the acceptance of extension concepts:
1. Transferability of skills and assets: The “brand” is perceived to have the
necessary skills and assets needed to make the extension. Crest
mouthwash worked, in part because a toothpaste firm is assumed to have

the capability to make a mouthwash.
2. Complementarity: The extension is used with the product class
associated with the brand. Thus, Vuarnet skis worked, even though skis
are technologically far removed from sunglasses, because Vaurnet
sunglasses had developed a close association with skiing.

FIGURE 9-3 Bases of Fit
Fit can also be based on functional attributes relating to brand
performance, or on intangible attributes such as prestige or status. Park,
Milberg, and Lawson compared extensions for Timex, a watch with strong
functional associations, with those for Rolex, a prestige name in watches.9
The extensions were for products which were either oriented toward prestige
(bracelet, necktie, cufflinks) or function (flashlight, calculator, or batteries).
The Rolex name was significantly more helpful for the prestige products than
was the Timex name, but the reverse was true for the functionally oriented
products.
Park, Milberg, and Lawson in a related study asked people to identify four
extension possibilities for both Rolex and Timex, and to identify the basis of
fit for each suggested extension. The Rolex name generated significantly
more names than the Timex name, leading the authors to conclude that when
prestige is the basis of fit, a brand can stretch further than when a functional
attribute is the basis.
Clearly there can be many sources of a common association, including
user types (for babies), sources (Beverly Hills), ingredients (contains oats),
and symbols (stagecoach). For example, Wells Fargo generates associations
of stagecoach, Old West, safes, and pioneers, as well as banking associations.
Thus, the stagecoach and Western associations might suggest a line of

Western clothing or a Western theme park. The safe association might suggest
burglar-alarm systems or cash-transfer services. McDonald’s is associated
with Ronald McDonald and his friends, and fun times for kids, making the
concept of a McDonald’s theme park acceptable.
POOR QUALITY PERCEPTIONS
Tab flavors, such as ginger ale and root beer, were an idea that made sense
when Tab was Coca-Cola’s diet-drink entry and they wanted to compete in
other flavor categories. The concept failed, in part because substantial
segments felt that Tab had a disagreeable taste; it was basically perceived as
low-quality by large parts of the market.
Even when a brand is generally well regarded there will be some who will
have had bad experiences with it, or for some other reason have the
impression that it is of low quality. Thus, the use of an extension will limit the
market to those who are notunfavorably disposed to the brand.
THE EXTENSION IS NOT SUPPORTED
There always is a temptation to establish a new entry “on the cheap,”
relying on the power of the brand name. Diet Cherry Coke established a
substantial business without anyadvertising support, in part because of the
strength of the brand name. However, other extensions, such as Cuisinart’s
spice chopper, which attempted to rely too heavily on a brand name and thus
skimped on advertising and promotion support, have not fared so well. Their
failure may be mistakenly attributed to the concept rather than to inadequate
support.

THE UGLY: THE BRAND NAME IS DAMAGED
The brand name often is the key asset of the firm. It can be more
important than the bricks and mortar—or even the people—in terms of
replacement investment. It is tempting to evaluate the extension as a business
decision on its own merits. However, a key consideration should be the
possible damage it could cause to the brand franchise. Having the extension
fail is usually not nearly as bad as having it “succeed,” or at least survive, and
damage the brand name by creating undesirable attribute associations,
damaging the brand’s perceived quality, or altering existing brand
associations.
UNDESIRABLE ATTRIBUTE
ASSOCIATIONS ARE CREATED
An extension will usually create new brand associations, some of which

can be potentially damaging to the brand in its original context. Miller High
Life declined substantially during the 1980s. One frequently proposed theory
is that Miller Lite, by creating lite beer associations, is partially to blame for
the decline. A lite beer, to some, means fewer calories achieved by its watery
taste. The theory is that the “low-calorie taste” could become associated by
some High Life drinkers with the Miller name, which has a lingering
“Champagne of Bottled Beer” association. As sales of Miller Lite went from
9.5% share of the U.S. beer market in 1978 to 19% in 1986, the Miller High
Life brand declined from 21% to 12% in the same period.
There is certainly the possibility that Sunkist Fruit Rolls hurt the Sunkist
health image, that Black & Decker small appliances hurt their power-tool
image, and that the Sears Financial Network hurt the retailer’s image of value
—and, conversely, that the Sears associations hurt Dean Witter, that Carnation
Pet Food hurt their other food items, and that Lipton Soup at one time hurt the
image of a purveyor of fine teas. One study showed that a brand with products
high on a “gentleness” scale had this position adversely affected by a
proposed extension that was perceived to be inferior on this dimension.10
Such a predicted transfer of negative associations does not always occur.
General Mills was very reluctant to disturb the Cheerios brand associations of
being a nonsugar cereal. They tested Honey Nut Cheerios for a long time, and
even tested an adult cereal position, in order to avoid the Cheerios core
market. However, the extension did not damage the sales of Cheerios at all,
even though it was used by the same customers. It instead cut into the
presweetened portion of their diet. Further, Apple Cinnamon Cheerios was
introduced in 1989, gaining a 1.5% share of the cold-cereal market without
affecting the share held by either Cheerios (4.8%) or Honey Nut Cheerios
(3.1%).11 The Diet Coke story is similar.
Under what conditions will an extension’s potentially negative association
be transferred to the original brand context? The transfer should be less likely
if (1) the original brand associations are very strong, (2) there is a distinct
difference between the original brand and the extensions, and (3) the
difference between the original brand and the extensions is not so extreme as
to make the extension appear incongruous. Thus, Cheerios has strong
associations with oats, the doughnut shape, and “nonsugar.” Honey Nut
Cheerios, being a presweetened cereal, has a distinct difference which allows
the product to be categorized in memory separately. The two categories, while
distinct, are notincongruous. A Cheerios candy bar, however, might well
create a problem for Cheerios.
EXISTING BRAND ASSOCIATIONS ARE WEAKENED
The brand associations created by the extension can fuzz a sharp image

which had been a key asset. The danger is particularly acute when a brand’s
key association is a product class—Kleenex, Perrier, and Tampax, for
example, all are synonymous with a product category. Cadbury’s association
with fine chocolates and candy certainly weakened when it got into such
mainstream food products as mashed potatoes, dried milk, soups, and
beverages.
Trout and Ries suggested that the meaning of the Scott name became
confused when extensions such as ScotTowels, ScotTissue, Scotties,
Scottkins, and Baby Scot were added.12 The names tended to confuse a
shopping list and were in sharp contrast to the strong product-class identity of
Bounty, Northern, Pampers, and Kleenex. Interestingly, Scott in the mideighties sharply reduced its consumer advertising expenditures, backing away
from efforts to create strong brands. Instead, their revised strategy was to be a
maker of cheap, high-volume products.
It is important to make a distinction between adding associations and
diluting them. Jell-O used its association with pudding and creamy taste, plus
its wholesome/family-setting associations, to introduce Jell-O Pudding Pops.
The Jell-O name helped communicate the product concept and assisted
recognition and credibility as well. They then extended Jell-O Pudding Pops
to Jell-O Gelatin Pops and Jell-O Fruit Bars.
The question is whether the frozen-novelty association dilutes the original
pudding associations or simply adds an association without changing the
original. Does the Jell-O name still mean pudding, but also frozen novelties,
or is the pudding association weakened? The answer largely involves the
strength of the original associations. Some names and symbols (such as the
Pillsbury Doughboy and Hewlett-Packard) are so strong that it is very
difficult to damage or change existing associations. New associations are
simply added—e.g., H-P makes computers as well as test equipment.
As a brand is extended its product-class associations may be weakened,
but it may also develop a useful association with a type of product. Thus,
Armour (meats), Pillsbury (flour/baking products), Green Giant (vegetables),
and Pepperidge Farm (upscale frozen bakery products) retain useful
associations with groups of products. One consideration in making extension
decisions, then, is whether an extension set can form a coherent whole so it
includes useful specific product-oriented associations. In contrast, other
brands (such as General Electric and Kraft), and many Japanese and Korean
firms (such as Goldstar and Samsung) are associated with so many diverse
product classes that their value is mainly on providing name recognition and
perceived quality.
When the brand association is not product-related, there is more latitude.

Thus, when the dominant association is the personality of Aunt Jemima, the
life-style of the Sharper Image customer, the technological superiority of H-P,
or the fashion/style of Vuarnet, the extension can go farther afield without
affecting the existing associations.
QUALITY IMAGE IS AFFECTED
A reputation for perceived quality is the basis of sustainable competitive
advantage for many businesses. There should be a concern that an extension
widely exposed but of inferior quality might damage this reservoir of good
will.
General Mills attempted to capitalize on the Lacoste alligator, an authentic
status symbol during the 1970s, by extending the name into a wide variety of
clothing items and by reaching out into new target markets. Observers have
attributed the resulting sharp sales fall-off (starting in 1982) to a weakening of
the upscale sportsman association.13 All of a sudden the alligator no longer
was a status symbol. Similarly, the failure of the IBM Junior product
undoubtedly tarnished the IBM quality reputation, particularly for the lowend “home” market. And the undisciplined use of the Gucci name—at one
point there were 14,000 Gucci products—was one of the contributing factors
in the fall of Gucci.14
Even if an extension is successful, there will be those who dislike some
aspect of it or its positioning, and others who have had a bad use experience
with the extension. This group may become a problem for the original brand,
as their loyalty may be reduced. In the long run, the more exposure that the
brand receives via extensions, the larger will the group of people be who will
have had a bad experience, or hold a negative attitude toward the brand in
some setting.
Attaching the brand to a lower price point enhances the risk that the
quality image of the brand itself will be affected. If Hilton were to introduce a
set of low-price hotels under some variant of the Hilton name, the core Hilton
chain could well suffer. Rolls-Royce once supplied car engines to a limousine
selling at one-third of the Rolls-Royce price, and allowed their brand name to
be used in the promotion of the cut-price limos—at some cost to their image.
Cadillac introduced the Cimarron in the early 1980s as a version of both
GM’s Pontiac 2000 and the Chevrolet Cavalier with a bit more gold trim and
leather. The Cimarron wasn’t aimed at the traditional Cadillac buyer but
rather at a less affluent one who would like to move up to a Cadillac name
without a Cadillac price tag and who might otherwise buy a BMW. The
analysis that there would be little cannibalization was correct. However, the
associations with the Cimarron and its target buyers undoubtedly hurt the
Cadillac name. In the Landor Associates’ 1988 study of brand names, the

Cadillac had the 16th spot in awareness but only the 84th place in “esteem.”
The ill-fated Cimarron effort could well have been a contributing factor.
There is evidence that a very strong brand can withstand a weak extension
without being damaged. For example, the Green Giant received no detectable
damage from a six-year effort to establish a line of frozen dinners. In another
laboratory study, Keller and Aaker found that a brand with a strong perceived
quality rating can be surprisingly unaffected by failed extensions (although
the failed extensions can affect the ability of the firm to extend further).15
A DISASTER OCCURS
A disaster out of control of a firm, such as the discovery that an Ivory
model was a porno star, that Tylenol boxes had been tampered with, or that
Rely products presented a serious health hazard, can happen to almost any
brand name. To the extent that the name is used on many other products, the
damage will be more extensive.
In Chapter 7, the alleged sudden-acceleration problem with Audi 5000
cars, Audi’s response—to blame American drivers—and the Audi sales slump
were discussed. A study of the incident’s impact on the depreciation rates of
other Volkswagen products is illuminating.16 The Audi 4000, which had no
such problem, was impacted nearly as much as the Audi 5000 (7.3% vs. 9.6%
respectively), whereas the Audi Quattro suffered a smaller effect (4.6%).
Because the Quattro was less closely tied to Audi, its name was separated
from the Audi identity on the car, and Quattro ads often did not mention Audi
at all. Further, other Volkswagen names (such as Porsche and Volkswagen)
were not affected.
The threat of a disaster to the Fisher—Price name has inhibited them from
going into the child-care business. They have had very positive associations
of quality playthings for children that could very likely be transferred to child
care. However, just one child-molestation incident, or even accusation, might
cause serious damage to the whole Fisher—Price equity.
THE BRAND FRANCHISE IS CANNIBALIZED
An important part of brand equity is a brand’s customer loyalty. If sales of
a brand extension come at the expense of the original brand (the original
brand’s sales are cannibalized), the extension’s sales may not compensate for
the damage to the original brand’s equity.
Gillette had a strong brand name in the shaving-cream market—Right
Guard—and wanted to attack Barbasol with a low-end entry. The vehicle was
their Good News! line of razors that was positioned as a low-end line and
carried a low price. Gillette thus tested a Good News! Shaving Cream by
Gillette. The test showed that it took sales instead from Right Guard. In part,
the problem was that consumers felt that they could save money by buying

Good News! and still get a Gillette product.
Campbell’s, after trying a series of extensions such as Campbell’s Cup,
Campbell’s Chunky, Campbell’s “Home Cookin’,” Campbell’s Golden
Classics, and Campbell’s Creamy Natural, introduced a soup line under the
Prego name. The Prego brand provides an Italian soup position that is likely
to sharply attack the Progresso line of Italian-style soups, which had been
taking share from Campbell’s, without cannibalizing the basic Campbell’s
line.
A key question in this whole area is the degree of overlap between
segments. If the crossover between canned and dry cat food, or powdered and
liquid detergent, for example, is low, then cannibalization may be low.

MORE UGLY: A NEW BRAND NAME IS
FOREGONE
Perhaps the worst potential result of an extension is a foregone
opportunity to create a new brand equity. Consider where P&G would be
without Ivory, Camay, Dreft, Tide, Cheer, Joy, Pampers, Crest, Secret, Sure,
Folger’s, Pringles, and their 70 or so other brands. Consider how much more
value is represented by the P&G brands than a set of brands such as P&G bar
soap, P&G laundry detergent, P&G dishwashing detergent, P&G diapers,
P&G toothpaste, P&G deodorant, P&G coffee, and P&G potato snacks.
Establishing a new brand name provides a vehicle with which to generate
a set of distinct associations without being burdened with an existing set. If
the Macintosh computer had been named the Apple 360, it would not have
developed the associations, loyalty, and equity of the Macintosh name.
Contrast the Apple branding strategy with that of H-P: It can be argued that
H-P has been handicapped by its decision not to establish distinct names, first
for its calculators and subsequently for its computers. A different name in
each case might have helped to differentiate the H-P lines.
Consider the value of the name Dustbuster as opposed to Black &
Decker’s Portable Vacuum. The Dustbuster name provides a dramatic
message of cleaning effectiveness. It also provides a unique (and possibly
superior) indicator for the product that could well serve to differentiate it in
the future. There is also the possibility that the name may allow Black &
Decker to capitalize on being the first to enter the market with such a product
by having the name mean the product (the Xerox phenomenon).
A new brand also provides a platform for growth. For example, after

introducing Campbell’s Prego name for a line of spaghetti sauces to compete
with Ragú, the Prego name was then available for use in other lines, such as
frozen Italian entries. Too, as noted above, it has even been used for a soup
line to compete with the Italian-style Progresso.
The establishment of a unique new brand name, then, involves the
consideration of:
the strength of the name associations and their usefulness in telling the
brand story. Does the name help the communication task? Does it
make learning the brand message easier?
the strength and usefulness of the name in creating long-term loyalty and
advantage. Is it unique, and likely to be superior to competitors in
stimulating associations?
the cost of establishing the name, of gaining awareness and associations.
Can the brand justify marketing support adequate to establish the
name? (While Honda could develop the Acura line in the U. S., it
chose to retain the Honda name in the smaller European countries.)

HOW TO GO ABOUT IT
Developing a brand extension systematically involves three steps:
identifying brand associations, identifying products linked to those
associations, and selecting the best candidates from that product list for
concept testing and new-product development.
WHAT ARE THE ASSOCIATIONS?
The first step is to determine the associations with the brand name. As
discussed in Chapter 6, a variety of techniques can be employed, such as:
Name associations: What comes to mind when the following brands are
mentioned?
Projective techniques: Jan had just finished eating Campbell’s tomato
soup and felt …
Exploring perceptual differences: What other brands is it different from,
and why?
For example, Vuarnet generates associations with expensive, skiing,
quality, style, fashion, trendy, and UV protection. Vidal Sassoon generates
associations with expensive, good scent, brown bottle, French, hair designer,
fashionable, hair salons, and hair care.

Typically, a large set of associations emerges, from say 10 or 20 all the
way up to over 100. Judgment will be needed to reduce this list to the most
promising set of 5 to 15 on which to focus. One criterion is the strength of
association with the brand. Is it extremely strong? (Nearly everyone
associates McDonald’s with kids, for example.) Or is it weak? A list of
associations could be scaled by a set of customers asked to indicate how much
the word reminds them of McDonald’s.
Associations will be more useful if they can provide a link (a basis of fit)
with other categories, and provide competitive leverage for extensions. In that
respect, associations with a product class usually are limiting. The association
of Chanel with perfume (or even with a female personal-grooming product) is
more limiting than a French association or a style association.
DETERMINING CANDIDATE PRODUCT CLASSES
For each of the major associations, or sets of associations, the next step is
to identify related product categories. Again, customers could be asked
directly to generate names of products related to the associations. Thus,
McDonald’s could build on the “kids” association to have a line of toys,
clothing, or games directed at children. The “efficient, low-cost” association
might allow them to enter any service in which those qualities might be
valued. A McDonald’s clothing store would therefore be expected to sell
clothes at a relatively low price and in an efficient manner.
Table 9-1 shows the results of a search for extension products for Vaseline
Intensive Care Lotion that used this approach.17 Eight primary associations
were obtained. For each, three related categories are shown. The sharp
differences in brand vision that emerge are shown graphically. If the brand
should build on a moisturizer association it could go into soap, face cream,
and skin cream, all with a moisturizer position. In contrast, if it were to build
on the medicinal association, antiseptic, first-aid cream, and hemorrhoid
cream would be logical. Clearly, the choice of the first extension would tend
to solidify an association and influence the choice of subsequent extensions.
TABLE 9-1 Vaseline Intensive Care Associations and Related Products
Associations
Soap
Moisturizer

Lotion

Related Products
Face cream
Skin cream
Sunburn
After-shave
Baby lotion

Antiseptic
Medicinal
First-aid cream
Hemorrhoid cream
Cotton
Purity
Gauze
Sterile pads
Emery boards
Body care
Muscle toner
Cotton swabs
Liquid hair-net
Pump bottle
Mustard
Glass cleaner
Diapers
Baby care
Powder
Oil
Perfume
Fragrance
Room deodorizer
Deodorant
SOURCE: Adapted from Figure 3 in Edward M. Tauber, “Brand Franchise
Extension: New Product Benefits from Existing Brand Names,” Business
Horizons, Vol. 47, March-April 1981, pp. 36-41.
In fact, Vaseline did build on the lotion and moisturizer associations, but
positioned them as medicinal/therapeutic, thereby drawing on the third
association.18 Their first extension, Vaseline Lip Therapy (introduced in
1976), was followed by Vaseline Intensive Care Foam Bath and Vaseline
Intensive Care Skin Lotion. The use of “Therapy” and “Intensive Care”
signaled the medicinal/therapeutic position. Note the ad shown in Figure 9-4.
All have done well in the market, as has Vaseline Baby Oil, a close
competitor with Johnson & Johnson. Not so successful, however, is Vaseline
Hair Tonic. Perhaps a moisturizer association is not helpful in that category—
or, more likely, the product is perceived as being greasy.
Another approach is to focus on such bases of fit as complementarity,
transferability of skills and assets, user types, attributes, benefits, components,
and symbols. Consider complementarity—which other products would be
used in the same application (perfume with lipstick, for example).
Transferability of skills and assets reflects the fact that makers of a product

(such as potato chips) will be perceived to have a capability of making some
other products (such as pretzels) better than others (such as pickles). A
common attribute such as aroma could lead to products that have aroma as a
key attribute.
SELECTING CANDIDATE PRODUCTS
From the resulting list of products, the next task is to select a limited
number to explore through a concept-testing stage. Two primary criteria
should be used. First, the brand should be perceived to fit the extension.
Second, it should provide some point of advantage.
The extension needs to fit the brand—the customer should be comfortable
with the concept of the brand being on the extension. If the brand is to help
the extension by transferring a perceived quality or an association, a basis of
fit will make that transfer more feasible. If the customer perceives a lack of
fit, he or she may become distracted, focus upon the fit issue, and not allow
the desired transfer to occur. At the extreme, a perceived incongruity could
stimulate ridicule and laughter.

FIGURE 9-4 A Vaseline Extension
Courtesy of Chesebrough-Pond’s USA Co.
One approach to the evaluation of fit is simply to ask respondents whether
a brand name fits a series of alternative product classes. A low fit rating,
however, is not necessarily fatal. Some products that don’t appear to fit may
actually do so if positioned in such a way as to accentuate a link between the
brand and the product class. Thus, an attractive extension (it involves an
attractive market, for example) may merit a more extensive concept test, even
if there appears to be a fit problem.
A particularly common fit problem occurs when a brand is used on a
trivial (for the brand) product class, a product class in which there is little
perceived differentiation. The brand will then be perceived to be exploiting its
name because it has little to offer. Further, it will probably be perceived as

being overpriced. Aaker and Keller found such a situation with the concept of
Heineken popcorn.
A second criterion to be used in selecting candidate extensions is that the
extension should provide a point of advantage. If a customer cannot say why
he or she would like a proposed extension, there is cause for concern. The
name should provide a reason to buy. It should suggest a benefit such as
higher quality, more chocolate, more reliable performance, or a feeling of
status.
Again, market research can provide guidance. Prospective customers can
be asked to identify competitors of the proposed extension, and to list ways in
which the extension may be superior to the offerings of each competitor (or
sets of competitors), and ways in which it will be inferior. To gain insight as
to whether the benefits of the extension are sufficient, customers can be asked
to provide an overall evaluation on the basis of just the name. Asking next for
the reasons for the evaluations can provide insights into the importance of the
potential benefits and liabilities of the extension. Of course, such an approach
will not, however, reflect the impact of any new association which could be
created as part of the brand-extension positioning strategy.

STRATEGY CONSIDERATIONS
Since the brand-extension decision is in fact a strategic one, in making
such a move several strategic issues should be considered.
WHEN DOES AN EXTENSION MAKE SENSE?
A brand extension will tend to be the optimal route when:
1. Strong brand associations provide a point of differentiation and
advantage for the extension.
2. The extension helps the core brand by reinforcing the key associations,
avoiding negative associations, and providing name recognition. When
the brand name provides only name recognition and a perceived quality
umbrella, often the extension will be vulnerable to competition.
3. The category will not support the resources needed to establish a new
name, or a new name will not provide a useful set of associations or a
platform for future growth.
THINK STRATEGICALLY
Since an extension builds upon the associations of a brand name it is

important to think beyond the first extension to future growth areas, as was
seen in the Vaseline case. A brand name such as Rossignal will have a set of
associations like French, skiing, technology, quality, and style. The first
extension will probably build up some of those associations and weaken
others. The resulting set will then provide the basis for future extensions, and
inhibit others. Thus, it is important to think through which umbrella
associations should ultimately provide the brand group with a fit logic and a
source of differentiation and advantage. Unless this thought process occurs
before the first extension, significant opportunities might be lost.
USE NESTED BRAND NAMES
It is possible to develop brand names within brand names and use them to
develop associations and platforms for new growth. For example, Black &
Decker had a line of appliances designed to be mounted off the kitchen
counter. The phrase “Spacesaver,” developed as an umbrella name for the
line, provided a link to the key customer benefit of saving shelf space. Jell-O
introduced Deluxe Bars, an extension of Jell-O Pudding Pops providing
peanut- and chocolate-covered flavors not offered in the standard Pudding
Pop line.
A nested brand name provides the reassurances of an established name
and the product-attribute associations as well. The only problem is that it still
represents a new name which needs to be established. Unless there is the sales
base, and the will and ability to establish the name, the name may provide
confusion instead of value.
Campbell’s, which has Manhandler, Homestyle, and Special Request in
addition to distinct lines of Chunky, Home Cookin’, Golden Classics, Gold
Label, Creamy Natural, Soup du Jour (a frozen microwave soup), Cookbook
Classics (a microwaveable, shelf-stable soup), and Fresh Chef (refrigerated
soups), may have too many. Each of these was costly to establish, and added
to the potential for confusion. Eventually the cost in dollars and confusion to
establish such a variety of names may surpass their value in terms of offering
associations.
HEDGE YOUR BETS
The risk of a brand extension can be reduced if the brand name is not
linked too closely with the new product. A problem with, say, Kellogg’s
Product 19 (e.g., if it contained an ingredient involved in a cancer scare)
might then be isolated to the Product 19 line. Cup-a-Soup from Lipton
represents less risk to its core-brand name than if the core brand were a part of
the labeled name, as it is in Campbell’s Cup. Distancing the brand name from
the extension is particularly helpful in vertical brand extensions, whereby a
brand is extended down to a lower-quality product, and it is important that the

original price/quality positioning remain unaffected by the extension.
Marriott was very concerned about how to use the Marriott name in their
new hotel lines. Figure 9-5 shows their decision. The top-line Suites Hotel
carries the Marriott name, and should reinforce its progenitor’s awareness and
perceived quality. The others represent problems, since they are a cut below
the flagship Marriott name. The solution: Have a “by Marriott” connotation.
For example, “Courtyard by Marriott,” in which Courtyard is the featured
name, provides the essence of the reassurances of the Marriott association, but
with less risk to the parent organization than would a name that more
prominently featured the magical word “Marriott.”
The use of the Marriott name, especially by the economy-positioned
Fairfield Inn line, is a Marriott risk. Travelers may well think they are getting
Marriott quality when staying at Courtyard, or even Fairfield. But at least
some of the core Marriott clientele are sure to turn (or return) to
less-“contaminated” prestige hotels.

FIGURE 9-5 The Marriott Line
The use of a corporate name to endorse a weak brand, such as putting the
name Nabisco on Royal Pudding, will usually be of limited help. It may help
reassure first-time purchasers, but it also may have little ability to add
credibility and perceived quality—because of a perceived fit problem with the
product class, or because its perceived quality is not exceptional.
THE STAGE IN THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
A brand extension has a larger comparative advantage in an established
product class when the brand name helps generate awareness, associations,
and distribution in a cluttered marketplace. By contrast, the risk to a brand
name is greatest when a product class is young. Consistent with these
judgments, the aforementioned study of 98 consumer nondurable brands in 11
markets (page 213) found that all but two of the 11 pioneer brands (the first

brands into the market) were new-name brands (both the extensions actually
failed), that the use of brand extensions by the new entrants increased as the
product class matured, and that the survival rate of the nonpioneering new
entrants using extensions was greater than that of those using new-name
brands.
PROTECTING AND NURTURING THE BRAND NAME
Clearly, the viability of growing by using extensions is based on the
equity of the original brand name. Consequently, it is crucial that the name be
protected and nurtured. Since its associations can be influenced by any market
activity, the marketplace needs to be actively managed. In particular, sales
promotions, product composition decisions, distribution decisions, and
pricing policies can affect the brand. When those decisions are made, the
concept of brand equity should be at the forefront.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. Develop a list of candidate brand extensions that have logical links to
your brand.
2. For several candidate brand extensions analyze them in terms of their
implications—the good, the bad, and the ugly (see Figure 9-1).
3. Think strategically. Jumping ahead of a logical brand extension, what
should be the set of brands and subbrands in the future? How should they
interrelate?
4. What is the role of the corporate name? How should it be used in
supporting other brands?
Answers to the slogan test from Figure 8-4 in Chapter 8.
1. Clairol
2. American Express
3. Avis
4. Miller Lite
5. Morton Salt
6. Zenith
7. Toshiba
8. Saab
9. AT&T
10. Travelers
11. Microsoft
12. Chevrolet
13. Ameritech
14. Lockheed
15. Mazda

16. RCA

10
Revitalizing the Brand

·
A rough sea makes a great captain.
Anonymous
Marketing should focus on market creation, not market sharing.
Regis McKenna

THE YAMAHA STORY
Yamaha Pianos offers an example of how a declining market can be
revitalized.1 After decades of investment and effort, Yamaha had succeeded in
capturing 40% of the global piano market. Unfortunately, this market was
declining by 10% every year and low-cost Korean firms were entering. It was
a classic time to milk the brand equity and try to recover as much return as
possible. Clearly, to even maintain share was going to be difficult and
unrewarding.
Yamaha responded by developing the Yamaha Disklavier (shown in
Figure 10-1). Introduced into the U.S. in January of 1988, the Disklavier
functions and plays just like comparable Yamaha pianos, except that it also
includes an electronic control system. This system is based on a combination
of digital and optical technology which can distinguish among 127 different
degrees of strength and speed of key touch. Because of the digital base, each
keystroke can be recorded with great accuracy and stored on a 3.5″ disk. The
disk can be used to replay a piece exactly as it was played; every nuance of

phrasing is meticulously reproduced.

FIGURE 10-1 The Yamaha Disklavier
Courtesy of Yamaha Corporation of America.
In addition to reproducing the original performance the Disklavier can
also modify it. The tempo can be adjusted up to 20% faster or 50% slower in
order to capture a different sound. The composition can also be transposed
into a different key, again allowing a different sound. Or a portion of the
sound (such as the upper half of the keyboard) can be deleted so that a student
can practice using only the right hand while the left-hand part plays, or vice
versa. Although the Disklavier is a piano (termed an “acoustic” piano to
distinguish it from electronic synthesizers that only produce a piano sound), it
can be connected to digital instrumentation which will provide the

professional musician additional flexibility in producing music.
The Disklavier offers considerable benefits, especially for the
professional. We have already seen that a composer or arranger, using the
instrument to alter the key and/or the tempo of the piece, can explore
variations of an execution. Additionally, a vocalist or instrumentalist can have
the piano accompanist’s part recorded on a disk so that it will be available for
other practice sessions. No longer will practice depend upon a live
accompanist: A lounge or store with a Disklavier piano can replace that artist
with the recorded version.
A teacher can use the record/replay, especially with the slow-down option,
to demonstrate technique or to help display errors or deficiencies in play.
Linking the piano with a source of background music can serve to make scale
drills more useful and enjoyable for the student. Practice with one hand can
be more meaningful if the music from the other hand is being played by the
Disklavier. A disk of a student’s early efforts can provide a baseline record
against which to demonstrate later improvement, and perhaps a record to
place beside a periodic photo album as a journal of formative experiences.
Most intriguing, however, is the value of the Disklavier to those who do
not play the piano well enough to provide entertainment to others. These
unfortunates now have the potential to have Vladimir Horowitz, George
Shearing, or Liberace play in their home. A library of disks, the Yamaha
PianoSoft Library, allows a user to obtain and present specially prepared
recorded versions of selected live performances of the best artists. The piano
therefore does not have to stand idle when a family member is not practicing,
or (more importantly) when the last family member gives up on learning and
practicing the piano.
In essence Yamaha reinvented the player piano, which in its heyday of the
1920s provided music to the home, and still enjoys associations with family,
fun, and “live” music. The Disklavier, of course, provides a level of
reproduction quality that is a far cry from the limited quality of the old player
piano with its key-activating, punched-paper rolls.
In part, the piano industry was being undercut by the clever gimmickry of
electronic keyboards and organs, which had special appeal for the gimmickloving younger crowd. The high-end piano was being replaced in the market
by keyboards costing a small fraction of the price—but the Disklavier
provided a response. Those who were proud of their furnishings, and/or
wanted the look, sounds, and feelings associated with a real piano, now had
another option.
The Disklavier and (as one might expect) its competitors appear to have
revitalized a declining industry. Three years after its introduction the

Disklavier, which sold for $9,000 to $25,000, was the industry leader, and
represented 20% of Yamaha’s piano sales. The instrument got a big boost
when it was used early in 1990 to recreate a performance of George Gershwin
playing “Swanee.” Interestingly, over half of its buyers do not play the piano,
suggesting that the player-piano legacy is an important driver of purchase
decisions. Also, over half (50% of grand buyers and 63% of upright buyers)
of the buyers have already had a piano. Thus, for some at least, the Disklavier
is undoubtedly making the traditional piano obsolete.
Another intriguing music-oriented business, this pioneered by firms such
as PianoDisc and QRS Music Rolls, provides a “retrofit kit” (for around
$2,500 to $4,000) which turns existing pianos into a version of the Disklavier.
There is a base of something like 40 million pianos in the U.S., many of
which have become pieces of furniture producing memories rather than
music. The kids either have left home or become involved in competing
activities. Meaningful sales of the retrofit kit would provide a substantial side
market for digital disks (not to be confused with CDs), and even for piano
tuners. People would now have an incentive to have their piano tuned
regularly.
Faced with a declining market, the conventional approach in the piano
world as elsewhere is simply to compete harder by cutting costs, adding
differentiating features to improve margins and market share, or milking the
business by drawing down the equity. Instead of trying to beat competition in
a rather sick business area, Yamaha developed a product breakthrough which
created a new niche, one with high growth potential in which they could
develop substantial competitive advantages. The result appears to be the
dramatic transference of a declining, unattractive business area into an
exciting growth context.
REVITALIZATION OPTIONS
What if brand equity has stagnated? Must a firm be satisfied with
maintaining a brand which is old and tired or just a plodder? In this chapter
we consider the possibility of revitalizing a brand which may be old in spirit
but, redirected, may have planty of life left. In revitalizing the brand, the goal
is not only to generate added sales levels but to have them based upon
enhanced equity, a move which often involves improved recognition,
enhanced perceived quality, changed associations, an expanded customer
base, and/or increased loyalty.
In fact, the revitalization of a brand usually is substantially less costly and
risky than introducing a new brand, which can cost tens of millions and will
more likely fail than succeed. Firms look at brands something like the way
homeowners view homes: It is cheaper, and often better, to fix one up or add

onto it than to buy a new one.
Not all brands are candidates for revitalization, however. Often there is a
temptation to try to revive an old friend that simply cannot overcome either its
liabilities or a sinking market. There has to be a workable concept to breathe
new life into the brand. The final section of this chapter considers problems of
product “old age,” when maintenance is required and even when product
“death” must be looked in the face.

FIGURE 10-2 Revitalizing the Brand
There are seven avenues for brand revitalization. One (number 7 in Figure
10-2), by exploiting brand equity through brand extensions, was discussed in
detail in Chapter 9. The six other approaches are shown in Figure 10-2, and
discussed in the following pages of this chapter. Although each provides a
useful perspective, providing a different route to revitalization, none is
mutually exclusive. For example, the Yamaha Piano case involved virtually
all of them: (1) product usage was increased, (2) new uses were found, (3) a
new market was attacked (those who didn’t play), (4) the brand was
repositioned, (5) the product was augmented, (6) the current product was
obsoleted, and (7) the brand name was extended.
It is useful to have seven different ways of looking at the revitalization
objective even though several of them may come up with the same solution.
Each has a different perspective, and the use of several maximizes the
possibility that a good approach will be found. This all follows a prime tenet

of creative thinking: Looking at a familiar problem from a different
perspective can be the key to finding a novel, creative solution.

INCREASING USAGE
Attempts to revitalize a brand by improving its market share through
improving the brand or using more aggressive marketing will often stimulate
a vigorous competitive response. The alternative of attempting to increase
usage among current customers is usually less threatening to competitors, and
thus can be a more effective way to increase the size of the brand’s sales base,
and thus its equity. Instead of trying to get a bigger slice of the pie, it’s usually
easier and more rewarding to attempt to make the pie bigger.2
When developing programs to increase usage, it is useful to begin by
asking some fundamental questions about both the user and the consumption
system in which the product is embedded: Why isn’t the product or service
used more? What inhibits the usage decision? How does the light user differ
from the heavy user in terms of attitudes and habits?
Increased product usage can be precipitated in two ways, as detailed in
Table 10-1: by increasing the frequency of use, and by increasing the quantity
used in each application.
TABLE 10-1 Increasing Usage in Existing Product-Markets
Approach

Strategy
Examples
Reminder communication
Jello Pudding
Position for frequent use
Shampoo, car care
Frequency of
Position for regular use Make Flossing teeth after meals
Use/Consumption
the use eisier or more
Dixie Cup dispencer,
convenient
microwaveable
Provide incentives Reduce
Frequent-flyer plan
undersirable consequences of
Gentle shampoo
frequent use
Cereal as snack vs.
Use on different occations
breakfast
use at different locations
Radio in shower
Level of
Increase insurance
Reminder communication
Use/Consumption
coverage
Special price for

Provide incentives
Influence
norms Reduce
Use of larger container
undesirable
Low-calorie candy
consequences of
increased use level
Develop positive
associations with use
occasions

accessories

Frito-Lay—“Can’t
Just Eat One”

INCREASING THE FREQUENCY OF USE
Reminder Communication. In some contexts, awareness as reflected in
top-of-mind recall of either the brand or the use occasion (or both) is the
driving force. A problem here is that whereas some people know about the
brand and/or their use of it, they simply do not think of using it without being
prodded. In these cases, reminder advertising may be what is needed. Steak
sauce and other condiment brands conduct reminder advertising campaigns to
obtain more-frequent usage. A manufacturer of canned spiced ham found that
most customers kept the product in their pantry “just in case.” The problem
was to get it used in recipes. The strategy employed was a reminderadvertising and promotion campaign. General Foods conducted a reminder
campaign for Jell-O Pudding, with Bill Cosby asking, “When was the last
time you served pudding, Mom?”
Routine maintenance functions like dental checkups or car lubrication are
easily forgotten, and reminders can make a difference. An Arm & Hammer
consumer survey revealed that people who use baking soda as a deodorizer in
refrigerators thought that they changed the box every four months when
actually they do so every 14 months.3 An advertising campaign, geared to
seasonal reminders to replace the box, attempted to change these habits.
Position for Frequent or Regular Use. Products can change an image of
occasional usage to one of frequent usage by a repositioning campaign. For
example, the advertising campaigns for Clinique’s “Twice-a-Day” moisturizer
and “Three glasses of milk per day” both represent efforts to change the
perception of the products involved. A related approach is to position for
regular use, because a usage habit is the best guarantee that the usage will be
maintained. An advertising campaign, for example, might emphasize the need
for a brush-after-every-meal habit, or the desirability of phoning a relative
once a week.
Make the Use Easier. Asking why customers do not use the product or

service more often can lead to approaches for making product use easier. For
example, a Dixie Cup or paper-towel dispenser encourages use by reducing
the usage effort. Packages that can be placed directly in a microwave make
usage more convenient. A reservation service can help those who must select
a hotel or similar service. Frozen waffles and Stove-Top Stuffing are
examples of product modifications that increased consumption by making
usage more convenient.
Provide Incentives. Incentives can be provided to increase consumption
frequency. Programs such as the airlines’ frequent flyer plans can affect usage.
A problem is to structure it so that usage is affected and so that it does not
simply become a vehicle for debilitating price competition. Price incentives
(such as two for the price of one) can also be effective—but also risk
stimulating a focus upon price.
Reduce Undesirable Consequences of Frequent Use. Sometimes there are
good reasons why a customer is inhibited from using the product more
frequently. If such reasons can be addressed, usage may increase. For
example, some people might believe that frequent hair-washing may not be
healthy. A product designed to be gentle enough for daily use might alleviate
the worry and stimulate increased usage. A low-calorie, low-sodium, or lowfat version of a food product may sharply increase the market. The brand that
becomes best associated with the product change will be in the best position
to capitalize on the increased market.
Use at Different Occasions or Locations. Increased usage can be obtained
by asking customers when and where the usage is occurring. Can new times
and/or places be introduced? Makers of fruit juices have attempted to move
their products from the highly competitive breakfast-only beverage business
to snack uses. A fertilizer product can be used on shrubs and trees as well as
on lawns. A radio called “Wet Tunes—The Shower Radio” was designed for
use in the shower.
INCREASING THE QUANTITY USED
Similar techniques can be employed to increase the quantity used on each
occasion:
1. An insurance customer can be reminded to consider increasing the
coverage on a house whose replacement value increased. A shirt buyer
might be reminded to consider a tie or other accessory.
2. Incentives can be used. A fast-food restaurant, for example, might
attempt by pricing or promotion to increase the number of items
purchased at a meal. A special price would be available if say a drink and
fries were ordered with a hamburger.

3. Efforts can be made to affect the usage-level norms. The size of a
“normal” serving might be influenced by creating a larger container and
getting it accepted.
4. The perceived undesirable consequences of heavy consumption might be
addressed. Thus, a light beer or a low-calorie salad dressing could
remove a reason to restrict the usage level. Life-Saver candies have
advertised that one piece has fewer calories than most people think.
5. Positive associations with use occasion might be developed through
advertising. Thus, a sense of fun and refreshment associated with PepsiCola might encourage heavier usage. Frito-Lay has used the “Can’t just
eat one” tag line to emphasize the taste pleasure. A computer equipment
firm could associate increased business efficiency with buying a more
powerful system with more terminals.

FINDING NEW USES
The detection and exploitation of a new functional use for a brand can
rejuvenate a business which has been considered a has-been for years. A
classic example is Jell-O, which began strictly as a dessert product but found
major sources of new sales in applications such as Jell-O salads.
Arm &: Hammer Baking Soda’s annual sales were around $15 million and
stagnant in the early 1970s, when the suggestion of using the wellknown
product to deodorize refrigerators was advanced. The results, stimulated by a
1972 advertising campaign, were spectacular. The number of households that
reported using the product in this application rose from 1% to 57% in just 14
months. Later campaigns suggested its use as a sink deodorizer, a freezer
deodorizer, a cat-litter deodorant, a dog deodorant, and a treatment for
swimming pools. By 1981, Arm & Hammer was a $150 million business.
Extending the brand into deodorizer products (recall Figure 9-2 in Chapter 9),
dentifrices, and laundry detergent, by 1990 the brand had sales exceeding
$400 million.
Other brands successfully finding growth by means of new applications
are:
Grape Nuts, used as a garnish, is served over yogurt or ice cream; and
microwaved with milk makes a fast, hot breakfast or snack.
A chemical process developed for use in oil fields to separate water from
oil is now used by water plants to get rid of unwanted oil

Lipton Soup includes recipes for new uses on boxes and in ads that
suggest “Great meals start with Lipton—recipe soup mix—soup.” The
recipe concept is even in the slogan.
The identification of new uses can best be obtained by market research
determining exactly how customers use the brand. From the set of uses that
emerge, several can be selected to pursue. For example, users of external
analgesics were asked to keep a diary of their uses.5 A surprising finding was
that about one-third of Ben-Gay’s usage, and over 50% of its volume, went
for arthritis relief instead of muscle aches. A separate marketing strategy was
developed for this use, featuring dancers (e.g., Ann Miller) and football
players (e.g., John Unitas) who now have arthritis, and the brand caught a
wave of growth.
Another tack is to look at application areas of competing product forms.
The widespread use of raisins prompted Ocean Spray to create dried
cranberries. They are used in cookies, and in cereals such as Muesli, with a
“Made with real Ocean Spray cranberries” seal on the package. They also are
being tried as a snack food, tentatively called Ocean Spray Craisins.
Sometimes a larger payoff is to the firm that can provide applications not
currently in general use. Thus, surveys of only current applications may be
inadequate. Firms such as General Mills have sponsored recipe contests, one
objective of which has been to create new uses for the product by discovering
a new “recipe classic.” For a product (like stick-on labels) which can be used
in many ways, it might be worthwhile to conduct formal brainstorming
sessions or other creativity exercises.
If some application area has been uncovered that could create substantial
sales, it needs to be evaluated. First, a market survey or other forecasting
device might be used to estimate the potential level: How many customers
could use the product in that way? What level of product purchase would that
application support for each customer? Arm & Hammer conducted over 150
market research studies to support its development of new-use applications
and new products.
Second, the feasibility and costs of exploiting the application area need to
be assessed. Some new applications can require substantial marketing
programs. Angostura Bitters, a 160-year-old brand used primarily in
Manhattans, decided to promote nonalcoholic drinks, starting with the
Charger.6 The Charger, a drink which was around bars for decades, consisted
of sparkling water, bitters, and lime. Canada Dry was enticed to promote it by
putting a packet of bitters with a recipe on the necks of bottles of Canada Dry
Seltzer. Tastings were organized at museums and street fairs. Radio ads with a

“Charger” theme were run. Other drinks, such as the Caribbean (made with
cranberry juice, pineapple juice, and bitters) followed.
Third, the possibility that a competitor will take over the application area
by product improvement, heavy advertising, or other means, or will engage in
price warfare, needs to be analyzed. The issue is whether the brand can
achieve a sustainable advantage in the new application. Ocean Spray has an
association with cranberries that might protect an entry into a cranberry
snack, but their name will be of less help in a processed application such as
cookies and cereals.

ENTERING NEW MARKETS
An obvious way to generate growth is to move into a new market area
with the potential for new growth. Heretofore that market may not have been
ready for the product, or the price may have been excessive for that market, or
perhaps no firm had even thought of that market. In any case, it nevertheless
represents untapped sales potential for the industry.
In some cases the new markets may require product modifications. Texas
Instruments looked at the previously neglected women’s market for
calculators as a way to revitalize this mature, competitive business.7 Around
60% of all calculators were (and are) purchased by women, but few were
designed specifically for them. The approach was to turn calculators into
fashion accessories under the name Nuance. Nuance—shown in Figure 10-3
—looks like a compact and has a latch-key cover which protects the keyboard
in a purse or briefcase. Available in a sophisticated purple and a soft beige, its
rubber keys are contoured for comfort, and staggered so that women with
longer nails can avoid double strokes. The solar-powered unit never needs
batteries, and will work in low light levels. Too, the “four-function” keyboard
includes a percent key for discounts and sales tax.
A proposed caffeine-laden Diet Pepsi, named Pepsi A.M., represents an
entry into the breakfast market.8 It provides an alternative to coffee. The
advertising calls the product “The great-tasting cola that beats coffee cold!”
There are many examples of firms that have found growth in mature,
competitive industries by looking toward new markets:
Vans, long used for delivery by businesses, represented a rather mature
market until they were adapted for consumer use and sales exploded.
The small refrigerator allowed the product to move from the home to the

office or student dormitory. The same can be said for microwave ovens.
Johnson & Johnson’s baby shampoo was languishing until they looked
toward adults who wash their hair frequently, and their need for a mild
shampoo: “If it’s gentle enough for baby….” The result was a market
share gain from 3% to 14%.
HOW TO FIND NEW MARKETS
There are several guidelines that can help to find and select new markets.
First, consider a wide variety of segmentation variables such as age,
geographic location, benefits sought, and gender. Sometimes a different way
to look at the market will uncover a useful segment. Second, consider growth
segments within declining or mature industries—for example, light beer and
nonalcoholic beer are growth segments in the mature beer industry. Third,
identify segments that are not served well such as the women’s calculator
market or the fashion needs of older people. Those segments represent
opportunities if their needs can be served better. Fourth, segments should be
sought for which the brand can be adaptable and for which the brand can
provide value.

FIGURE 10-3 Pretty Enough to Show—Practical to Use
Courtesy of Texas Instruments.

REPOSITIONING THE BRAND
CHANGING ASSOCIATIONS
A positioning strategy can become inappropriate because it becomes
obsolete over time, the target market ages, or the association becomes less
appealing (or even a source of ridicule) as tastes and fashions change.
Cheez Whiz was introduced by Kraft in 1956 as a sandwich spread, for

snacks, and for casual eating—primarily by kids.9 By the 1980s, however, the
business was sinking at the rate of 2% a year, in part because of the
associations. The product has been described as the culinary equivalent of a
velvet painting of Elvis Presley. The film The Revenge of the Nerds II was
said by one critic to be so dumb that it makes you feel as if your head has
been hollowed out and pumped full of Cheez Whiz. Kraft, however,
repositioned the brand as a cheese sauce for the microwave oven which can
be used on a variety of dishes—including casseroles, vegetable side-dishes,
and baked potatoes. Figure 10-4 illustrates. Supported by an increased
advertising effort of $6 million (up from $2 million), the brand received a
35% jump in sales.
A positioning strategy can also simply wear out. The target segment
becomes saturated; new associations and associated segments are needed to
generate growth. V-8 Cocktail Vegetable Juice had been positioned as a
better-tasting drink than tomato juice.10 But in the early 1970s, sales became
stagnant. Tests revealed that changes in advertising expenditures and/or prices
did not help. What did work was a repositioning as a healthy drink which
would help in weight control. Using the “I couda had a V-8” slogan, the new
positioning created a 20$ sales increase.
Among the brands that have achieved a boost by repositioning have been:
Campbell’s Soup, once positioned as a lunch supplement: Mothers
received a guilt trip if they did not provide the “M’m, good!” soup. As
kids eating lunch at home became history, repositioning the soup as a
main-meal substitute for adults (“Soup is good food”) made sense.
Geritol, the iron and vitamin supplement: Once a favorite potion of the
Lawrence Welk generation, now it is the brand for amorous middle-aged
people.
A dormant headache powder which repositioned by returning to its roots
—the original package, a bitter taste, graphic events such as bass-fishing
tournaments, and the blue-collar Southwestern user.11 It had
unsuccessfully attempted to stimulate sales by modernizing its package
and changing the product’s taste.

FIGURE 10-4 Changing Cheez Whiz Associations
CHEEZ WHIZ is a registered trademark of Kraft General Foods, Inc.
Reproduced with permission.
ADD VALUE BY DIFFERENTIATING:
NEW ASSOCIATIONS
Sometimes as it matures a product becomes a commodity, and price
pressures make the business unprofitable. One therapeutic approach is to
attempt to reposition the commodity as an upscale branded product.
In the 1960s, chickens were a pure commodity, sold pretty much like a
homogeneous grain or raw material. Frank Perdue, tired of being in a
commodity business, changed all that by creating Perdue chickens. He
completely repositioned his product as a high-quality branded product, largely
on the basis of an advertising campaign that featured himself—a colorful,

crusty character—and the line “It takes a tough man to make a tender
chicken.” The campaign was a convincing story about the superiority of the
brand on the basis of better feed, careful processing, ice-packed storage, the
upscale retailers who handled it, and (mainly) the will of Frank Perdue. And it
employed humor: Perdue bragged about his tender chickens having a soft life
in $60,000 homes, getting eight hours’ sleep, avoiding junk food, and
drinking pure well-water (“Your kids never had it so good”). Sales margins
and profits were dramatically affected.

AUGMENTING THE PRODUCT/SERVICE
The following scenario is all too common: Product-class sales are
stagnating or declining. The product is looking more and more like a
commodity. The brand assets (used to differentiate) that once seemed so
strong have finally been matched by several competitors, and customers seem
more and more concerned with price. It is more difficult to find customers
willing to pay a premium price for a brand which has performed historically a
bit more reliably and competently. The temptation is to become resigned to a
very competitive environment.
In this context it can be useful to buy into Theodore Levitt’s position that
any product or service, even a commodity, can be differentiated.12 When the
product is close to becoming a commodity, says Levitt, consider augmenting
it, providing services or features not expected by the customer as they go
beyond anything being offered. There really are two ways to win: Do
something better, or do something extra or different. With a mature product, it
often is more feasible to do something extra or different than better.
Improving the package is one way to offer a differentiating extra which
can stimulate a new look to a tired product class. McCormick created a
pepper container whose cap allowed the container to double as a pepper mill.
Nestlé packaged its chocolate in tiny tubs similar to the packets of preserves
found in restaurants, so that children could make a hot chocolate or sundaes
with the help of a microwave. Sometimes too the new package can solve a
customer problem. P&G’s Citrus Hill offers a screwcap juice carton which
allows customers to shake the contents without having spillage. And
Campbell’s Chunky Soups added ring-pull tops to provide easy access for
those who can use a microwave.
The L’eggs market effort in the early 1970s provides a classic example of
an augmented product. The firm increased sales from $9 million in 1970 to

$290 million in 1974, in the face of a declining hosiery industry. The
cornerstone of the L’eggs effort, the concept of selling high-quality hosiery in
supermarkets, was supported by a total marketing program. The unique eggshaped package was difficult to shoplift, and enhanced the use of the catchy,
memorable name. A vertical display managed by a staff of route salespeople
eliminated the disorder usually associated with prior efforts to put hosiery in
supermarkets. Selling on consignment reduced the investment involved and
helped the line to be very profitable for supermarkets.
Another example is Foremost-McKesson, in drug wholesaling, who used
a computer-based information system to provide a myriad of services to the
druggist, including virtually taking over inventory management, reorder
decisions, and pricing decisions. The system also processed medical insurance
claims, and provided information on drug interactions and Medicaid numbers
for store customers. McKesson also set up labeling systems and computerized
accounts-receivable programs, and developed a “rack jobber” service which
took over the management of the shelves for at least some products.
As a result, the large McKesson sales force engaged in store-level selling
was replaced by a very small force which serviced the systems.13 The large
order-processing department no longer was needed. Customers, very sensitive
to item pricing, became committed to McKesson’s systems. Despite shedding
some business areas, McKesson grew from $1 billion in 1978 to $5 billion 10
years later, while making a 20% return on assets—all in a business area which
looked unattractive in 1975.
The need is to find augmentations that the customer will really value, and
that are linked enough to the product so that it will in fact benefit. The process
starts by understanding the customer: What are the problems that are really
irritating to the customer—that make a difference? Is there any way that
added services can deal with them? In what way is the customer dissatisfied?
What can be done? Consider the system in which the product is embedded,
including the decision to buy, the ordering process, and logistics. Can
anything be done to improve efficiencies, perhaps by getting more involved in
the ordering system as McKesson did?
CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT
When providing a product or service to an organization, a key is to get the
customer involved in the process of finding ways to augment the product or
service. Customer involvement not only helps to identify the most appropriate
areas on which to work but also makes the effort visible to the customer, and
helps the implementation of any proposed solution.
The textile firm Millikin formalizes the process, using Customer Action
Teams (CATs).14 A CAT is a self-contained effort to seek a creative solution

to both better serving current customers and developing new ones. To launch
a team, the customer is required to supply team members to join with Millikin
representatives—usually including manufacturing, sales, finance, and
marketing. Millikin launches hundreds of CATs each year, and their success
stories provide incentives for customers to join.
A series of CATs turned Millikin’s shop towel (industrial rag) business
from a commodity to a value-added service business. Millikin now virtually
runs the business of their customers, industrial laundries. Millikin now
provides computerized ordering and logistics systems, market research
assistance, leads from trade shows, audiovisual sales aids, operations
seminars, sales-force training, and so on.

OBSOLETING EXISTING PRODUCTS WITH
NEW-GENERATION TECHNOLOGIES
Sometimes a sleepy industry can be revitalized by a product which
obsoletes the existing installed base and accelerates the replacement cycle.
Certainly the Yamaha Disklavier is such an example. Others include the largehead tennis racket, color television, and the transistor radio.
Such a rebirth happened in the home audio market in the early 1980s,
after it had been stagnant for a decade. Compact discs were perhaps the major
factor. By providing the ability to upgrade the sound of an audio system, they
not only generated sales but stimulated users to upgrade their speakers and
receivers as well. The advent of stereo television sets was also a factor. U.S.
stereo sales moved to a growth rate of around 10% in the mid-eighties.
The decision to pursue new technologies is particularly tricky for a market
leader who has a vested interest in the old technology but faces competitive
risks due to a strategy of delay and disinterest. The Gillette experience of the
early 1960s illustrates. Gillette resisted the stainless-steel blade technology
because the product’s durability meant that people would need far fewer
blades, and because the cost to change its manufacturing and marketing
efforts would be high.15 (The company was making in excess of 40% return
on investment.) As a result, the small British “stainless” innovator, Wilkinson,
and their American rivals, Eversharp and Schick, made major and permanent
inroads into Gillette’s share and profits. Gillette’s share fell from 70% to 55%,
and their return fell to below 30%. It is remarkable how rarely new-generation
technology comes from the market leader, even when it is investing large

amounts in R&D.

ALTERNATIVES TO REVITALIZATION:
THE END GAME
The prospects for any brand will depend upon the strength of the brand,
its equity, the intensity and commitment of the competition, and the market
demand for the product class. When one or more of these factors become(s)
unfavorable, then the options of milking the brand or exiting the market
should be considered.16
There are substantial risks in investing in a declining industry, especially
with a brand which shows signs of weakness. First, the investment may not
pay off. Sailing against a current is difficult, especially with a craft not
designed for that. Although success is not impossible, it is hardly guaranteed.
Further, a strategy of investing, for a multibrand organization, may draw
resources away from other brands or business areas that are more attractive.
All brands should not be given equal access to resources; some will by their
very nature have more attractive prospects than others.
If every brand receives a commitment to survive, or even to reinvest its
profits, there will be some brands (especially newer ones) that will be starved
for resources. An optimal strategy is to withhold resources from some brands,
and upon occasion even allow a brand to die. Relegating a brand to die (or
even to a milking strategy) can be difficult, of course, particularly if the brand
is an old friend and if the brand management team is still enthusiastic. The
bottom line here is that every brand’s management, in addition to pondering
generating revitalization alternatives, should also consider the “milk” and
“exit” options.
THE MILKING OPTION
A milk (or “harvest”) strategy involves avoiding investment in the brand,
attempting instead to generate additional cash flow from it. In general, a
milking strategy will accept a decline in sales and profits, and the risk that the
brand will eventually go under. A common way to exploit brand equity, its
underlying assumptions are: (1) that either a faltering brand, strong
competition, or eroding market demand make the present business area
unattractive; (2) that the firm has better uses for the funds; (3) that the
involved brand is not crucial to the firm, either financially or synergistically;
and (4) that milking is feasible (as well as desirable) because sales will

decline in an orderly way.
There are variants to a milking strategy. A “hold” or “maintain” variant
will allow enough investment in the brand to hold or maintain its position, but
to avoid growth-motivated investment. A “fast milking” strategy involves
sharp reductions in operating expenditures, and perhaps price increases, to
maximize short-term cash flow and minimize the possibility that any
additional money will be invested in the business. A fast milking strategy will
accept the risk of a sharp sales decline’s precipitating a market exit. The
common denominator is a restriction in the resources that are put behind the
brand.
A good example of a milking strategy is that of Chase & Sanborn
discussed in the accompanying insert. Another is Unilever’s Lux Beauty Bars
once “Used by nine out often Hollywood stars.”17 It now has less than 3% of
the market, and hasn’t advertised in more than 15 years. It just rides the truck
with the stronger Lever products, generating $25 million in sales—about half
of which is gross profit.
The Chase & Sanborn Story
Chase & Sanborn illustrates the potential of a milking strategy.18 The
brand, introduced in 1879, became the first American company to pack
roasted coffee in sealed cans. In 1929, Chase & Sanborn, then a major player
in the coffee market, combined with Royal Baking Powder and Fleischmann
to form a company called Standard Brands. During the 1920s and 1930s,
Chase & Sanborn advertised heavily and dominated the coffee industry. “The
Chase & Sanborn hour,” starring Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy, was
one of the most popular radio shows of its time.
After World War II, instant coffee and General Foods’ Maxwell House both
appeared. Instead of fighting the heavy advertising of Maxwell House, Chase
& Sanborn chose a milking strategy. Over the years, advertising support for
the brand was reduced until, finally, advertising was stopped entirely. In 1981,
Standard Brands merged with Nabisco, which then sold off the coffee
business for about $15 million to a small Miami firm, General Coffee.
Three years later, General Coffee was bought by Hills Bros., who found that
brand awareness for Chase & Sanborn was exceptionally high despite the fact
that the brand had not been advertised for over 15 years. About 88% of
consumers in the Northeast and Southeast recognized the name. Just by
putting the brand on shelves in that region, a market share of 0.41% was
obtained, a share much higher than P&G’s High Point and a more recent
entry, Mr. Coffee. Standard Brands also followed the slow milking strategy
with Royal Pudding when that product was faced with another General Foods

brand, Jell-O.
Several situational characteristics can lead to a milking strategy rather
than an exit strategy:
1. The industry decline rate is not exceedingly steep. There are pockets of
enduring demand in the industry that will ensure that the decline rate will
not suddenly become precipitous.
2. The price structure will be stable at a level which allow profits to be
made among the efficient firms.
3. The brand has enough customer loyalty, perhaps in a limited part of the
market, to generate sales and profits in a milking mode. The risk of
losing relative position with a milking strategy is low.
4. The brand creates some value to the firm by providing economies of
scale, or by otherwise supporting other brands.
5. A milking strategy can be successfully managed.
Implementation of a milking strategy can be difficult. One of the most
serious problems is that a suspicion that a milking strategy is being employed
can create a momentum of its own, which may upset the whole strategy. In
fact, the line between a milking strategy and abandonment is sometimes very
thin. Customers may lose confidence in the firm’s product, and employee
morale may suffer. Competitors may attack more vigorously. All these
possibilities can create a sharper-than-anticipated decline. To minimize such
effects, it is helpful to keep a milking strategy as inconspicuous as possible.
Another serious problem is the difficulty of placing and motivating a
manager in a milking situation. Most brand managers have neither the
orientation, the background, nor the skills to engage in a successful milking
strategy. Adjusting the performance measures and rewards appropriately can
be difficult for both the organization and the involved managers. One
reasonable solution—use a milking specialist—often is not feasible, simply
because such manager types are rare.
The most serious concern, however, is that the premises upon which the
milking strategy is based will turn out to be wrong. Information regarding
market prospects, a competitor move, a cost projection, or some other
relevant factor, could prove erroneous. Another possibility is that the
circumstances may change. For example, products such as oatmeal have seen
a resurgence in sales because of its low cost and high associations with
naturalness and health.
In a milking strategy a firm may be slow to detect changes, or may be

reluctant to make appropriate investments, and thus may miss opportunities.
For example, two large can manufacturers, American and Continental, were
engaging in a milking strategy and lost share when they missed the industry
move to produce two-piece cans.
DIVESTMENT OR LIQUIDATION
When prospects for the brand are bad and a milking strategy does not
seem feasible, the final alternative—divestment or liquidation—is
precipitated. Among the conditions that would suggest an exit decision rather
than a milking decision are:
1. The decline rate is rapid and accelerating, and there are no pockets of
enduring demand that are accessible to the business.
2. The price pressures are anticipated to be extreme, caused by determined
competitors with high exit barriers and by the lack of brand loyalty and
product differentiation. A milking strategy is unlikely to be profitable for
anyone.
3. The brand position is weak, and there exist(s) one or more dominant
competitors who have achieved irreversible advantage. The business is
now losing money, and future prospects are dim.
4. The firm’s mission changes as the role of the business becomes
superfluous or even unwanted.
5. Exit barriers, such as specialized assets or long-term contracts with
suppliers, can be overcome.
Managerial pride often inhibits the exit alternative. Professional managers
tend to view themselves as problem-solvers and are reluctant to accept the
judgment that a turnaround is not worthwhile. Further, there is the emotional
attachment to a brand that has perhaps been in the “family” for many years,
and indeed may even have been the original brand upon which the rest of the
firm was created.
A serious concern is that a business area might be killed off while
potentially profitable business activity remains. IBM, for example, felt that its
286 series machine was going to be replaced by the 386 series, and effectively
eliminated it from its line. In fact, the 286 machines provided the basis for
dozens of companies to erode IBM’s position. IBM belatedly put a version of
the 286 back into its line—but damage had been done.
SELECTING THE RIGHT END GAME: MILK VS. EXIT
The selection of a milk or exit strategy involves an analysis of the three
determinants of brand profitability: brand strength, market demand, and
competitive intensity. Figure 10-5 shows a set of questions under each

category which can be a guide to the investment decision in a declining
industry.
Market Prospects. A basic consideration is the rate, pattern, and
predictability of decline. A precipitous decline should be distinguished from a
slow, steady decline. One determining factor is the existence of pockets of
enduring demand, segments that are capable of supporting a core demand
level. The overall cigar industry has experienced a slow, steady decline, in
part because the premium segment is stable and loyal. Contrariwise, the
vacuum-tube industry has continued to have strong replacement demand,
even after vacuum tubes have all but disappeared from new products. And, in
the leather industry, leather upholstery is still healthy—imitations
notwithstanding.
FIGURE 10-5 The Investment Decision in a Declining Industry: Some
Strategic Questions
Market Prospects
1. Is the rate of decline orderly and predictable?
2. Are there pockets of enduring demand?
3. What are the reasons for the decline—is it temporary? Might it be
reversed?
Competitive Intensity
1. Are there dominant competitors with unique skills or assets?
2. Are there many competitors unwilling to exit or contract gracefully?
3. Are customers brand-loyal? Is there product differentiation?
4. Are there price pressures?
Brand Strength and Organizational Capabilities
1. Is the brand strong? Does it enjoy high recognition and positive,
meaningful associations?
2. What is the market share position and trend?
3. Does the business have some key competitive SCAs with respect to key
segments?
4. Can the business manage a milking strategy?
5. Is there synergy with other businesses?
6. Does the brand fit with the current firm’s strategic thrust?
7. What are the exit barriers?
Competitive Intensity. A second consideration is the level of competitive

intensity. Is there one or more dominant competitor(s) with substantial shares,
and a set of unique assets and skills which form formidable and sustainable
competitive advantages? Is there a relatively large set of competitors not
disposed either to exit or to contract gracefully? If the answer to either of
these questions is yes, the profit prospects for others may be dismal.
Another perspective comes from the customers. A key to making profit in
a declining industry is price stability. Are customers relatively priceinsensitive, such as buyers of premium cigars or replacement vacuum tubes?
Is there a relatively high level of product differentiation and brand loyalty? Or
has the product become a commodity? Are there costs involved in switching
from one brand to another?
Brand Strength and Organizational Capabilities. Sources of brand
strength in a declining environment often are quite different from those in
other contexts. What is helpful in a declining industry are:
Established strong relationships with the profitable customers, especially
those in the pockets of enduring demand
Strong associations (at this stage it will be difficult for competitors to
alter their image significantly)
The ability to operate profitably with underutilized assets
The ability to reduce costs as business contracts
A large market share if economies of scale are present
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
1. Why aren’t customers using the product more often? Why don’t they
use it in greater quantity? Would reminders help? What about incentives? Is
the use inconvenient? Are there undesirable consequences of usage that could
be overcome? Could users be encouraged to use the product in different
contexts? Could users expand the usage level? The potential for increased
usage is usually greater with the heavy-user segment—look there first.
2. How do your customers use your brand? Analyze the potential of each
application area: What is the potential? What marketing effort would be
required?
3. What are the brand’s primary markets? How is the brand positioned in
each market? Is the current market saturated? What are some alternative
positioning strategies? Would any open up new growth prospects? What are
alternative markets? Evaluate the potential of each.
4. What are the unmet needs of the customer? Customer problems and
annoyances? Consider not only the customer’s interaction with the product
but also the system in which the product is embedded. Could an extra service,

product feature, or product modification be helpful to the customer? Are any
competitors offering extras that are valued? Consider firms in similar
industries: What “extras” serve to differentiate? Would any work in your
context?
5. Should milking or exiting be considered? Consider the questions in
Figure 10-5.

11
Global Branding
and a Recap

·
The game’s not over ’til it’s over.
Yogi Berra

THE KAL KAN STORY
Early in 1989, Mars changed the name of its Kal Kan cat food to Whiskas
in the U.S., to complete the creation of a worldwide name.1 There were
several motivating reasons. With more communication among global
marketing professionals at Mars, the use of the same name made it more
likely that ideas—and perhaps advertising campaigns— could be shared.
Further, pet owners travel and might switch if their familiar brand was not
available somewhere. Just two years earlier, Mars had created two other
global brands by changing the name of its Kal Kan dog food in the U.S. to
Pedigree, and its Mealtime dry dog food to Pedigree Mealtime. Judging by
U.S. market-share data, those changes also were successful.
The risk associated with the Kal Kan name changes was mitigated by the
fact that although the Kal Kan name had substantial equity, it did not have a
great name. “Whiskas,” by contrast, was more likable and was perceived as
being much more feline-sounding. Similarly, “Pedigree” was associated with
a quality, expensive pet that would be served only the best food. Kal Kan had
lacked such positive attributes—it seemed to serve only as a reminder that the
container was a can. Hardly an association that contributed much to the brand.

THE PARKER PEN STORY
Parker Pen in 1985 launched a global business strategy in order to combat
Cross from above and the Japanese from below.2 The centerpiece of the effort
was a new pen, called the Victor, and a common advertising campaign (built
around the theme “It’s wrought from pure silver and writes like pure silk”), a
common slogan (“Make your mark with a Parker”), and a common pricing
strategy. The effort was a disaster—so bad in many of its 150 markets that
local units resisted pressures to adopt it.
The common pricing was a problem, as market conditions in some
countries made the standardized price and resulting quality positioning
untenable. The selected name did not have the greatest associations in all
countries, either. And the advertising and its resulting associations were
judged by many to be ordinary.
Among the casualties of the global branding strategy were some effective
local branding efforts. For example, the offbeat agency of the highly
profitable Parker unit in England, one of 40 agencies used by Parker prior to
globalization, had developed a particularly successful campaign. It associated
the brand with people with the élan to deliver a well-crafted insult written
with a Parker. One such insult was a note to an airline, reading “You had
delusions of adequacy?” Unfortunately the campaign’s humor was very
British and would not have worked well outside the Empire.

A GLOBAL BRAND?
Should there be a global brand—a single name, symbol, and slogan
together with common associations? Should the same one familiar brand
name (such as Kodak, McDonald’s, Sony, IBM, or Coca-Cola) be used
throughout the world? Or should a variant, a related but different brand name,
be adapted for each country, or even for different regions within a country? If
different brands are now used, should they be replaced by a global brand
name?
The case for global products and marketing efforts have been argued by
several leading management thinkers including Harvard’s Theodore Levitt,
and Kenichi Ohmae of McKinsey in Japan. They note that tastes and styles
throughout the world are becoming more homogeneous, in part due to
television and travel and also because of the spread of affluence. As a result, a

product and appeal that are effective in one area are likely to be effective in
another. Further, all areas want—indeed demand—the best quality and most
advanced features. Thus, it is necessary to provide the finest product design
and accompanying associations all over the world.
A key to the argument for a global product is the economies of scale that
result from the world-wide volume—regarded as crucial to being competitive
in many industries. Of course, some manufacturing and product design
economies of scale do not depend upon the use of a global brand. However,
there will exist sometimes substantial economies of scale in the design of
advertising, promotions, packaging, and other aspects of the brand that will be
affected by a global branding policy. The development costs can be spread
over a larger market. Another perspective is that the smaller markets will have
access to the resulting efforts involving larger budgets.
A global brand can have substantial advantages in gaining brand
awareness when customers travel between countries. The presence of
advertising and distribution can impact upon country visitors. In Europe and
elsewhere where between-country travel is extensive, such exposure can be
important to a brand. Another efficiency issue involves situations where
media coverage overlaps countries. In that case, a global brand can buy
exposures much more efficiently. In particular, as the European Common
Market matures there is likely to be more and more media overlap and
customer crossover and thus more payoff to a global brand strategy.
A global brand can have some useful associations. Just the concept of
being global can symbolize the ability to generate competitive products in
addition to strength and staying power. Such an image can be particularly
important in pricey industrial products or consumer durables like cars or
computers where there are customer risks that a product may be unreliable or
be technologically surpassed by a competitor. Such Japanese firms as
Yamaha, SONY, Cannon, and Honda that operate in markets where
technology and product quality are important have benefited from a global
brand association.
A global brand often provides a country association for a brand which is
very established in one country and for which the country association is part
of the essence of the brand. For example, Levi is U.S. jeans, Chanel is a
French perfume, Dewar’s is a Scotch whiskey, Kikorian is a Japanese soy
sauce, and Bertolli is an Italian olive oil. In each case, the brand is established
in the home country and the country itself is part of the essence of the brand.
In such a context, a global brand will tend to be worthwhile.

TARGETING A COUNTRY
Even if the name is not established, the constraint that the name, symbols,
and associations work in all countries is very confining. Most names,
especially names with useful associations, will have a damaging meaning (or
will be preempted) in some countries. For example, P&G’s Pert Plus, the very
successful combination shampoo and conditioner, is sold as Rejoy in Japan,
Rejoice in much of the Far East, and Vidal Sassoon in the U.K. because the
Pert Plus name or something similar was preempted. It is no coincidence that
many of the global brands and symbols like IBM and SONY are, by
themselves, not association rich.
A similar problem exists for symbols and associations. Those that are
“universal,” that work in all settings, are not necessarily the most effective.
Consider, for example, Heinz baby food and Levi jeans which both have a
strong value position in the U.S. and a premium position in other markets.
Clearly, two such very different tacks will need to involve very different
symbols and associations.
A local brand can benefit from distinct associations that can be useful—
even pivotal: Is there any tendency to “buy home-grown,” or any positive
feeling toward local traditions or characteristics, that can be integrated into
the brand’s positioning strategy? Or, does the global brand have negative
associations locally because it has an undesirable meaning in some countries,
or is it tied to a country’s politics and thus subject to the ups and downs of
international events?
A worldwide association may simply not be appropriate in some countries
because of the competitive context. A British Airways globalization effort
involved the centralization of advertising, which resulted in a “The world’s
favorite airline” theme. It featured a 90-second commercial which showed the
Manhattan skyline rotating slowly through the sky. Even in the U.S., where
the campaign originated, managers wondered if the replaced campaign (which
had emphasized traditional British values with the theme “We’ll take good
care of you”) was not more effective. In countries where British Air was an
also-ran, the claim did not make much sense. Further, there were operational
problems. For example, 90-second ads could not be used in South Africa.
In primary market areas, local marketing units may generate better ideas
than big-budget global efforts. Further, ten different ideas from ten countries
may be more likely to emerge, with something really good among them, than
one “global” idea, even if the “global” one was created by a large budget and
the best talent. When Polaroid was repositioning from a “party camera”

platform to a more serious, utilitarian platform, a campaign which was
developed in Switzerland was the most effective.3 It promoted the functional
use of instant photography as a way to communicate with family and friends
—the “Learn to speak Polaroid” campaign. If local units had not been free to
generate their own campaigns, this superior campaign would not have
surfaced.
The rush to global branding is somewhat ironic as, in the U.S., there is a
strong move to regional marketing. Firms such as P&G and Campbell’s are
giving local marketing units responsibility for sales promotions and
advertising which had previously been centralized.

ANALYZING THE CONTEXT
A proposal for globalization of the brand—the symbol, the slogan, or
associations—should be accompanied by a country-by-country (or region-byregion) analysis. As Figure 11-1 summarizes, there are a set of advantages
and disadvantages to a global brand that can guide the analysis. Assume that
there is a global brand option that will be driven by the largest markets or by
the most established markets. For each country or region several questions
need to be addressed. As compared to using a global brand:
What is the cost of creating and maintaining awareness and associations
for a local brand? How significant is the customer cross-boundary travel and
the resulting brand exposure? Is there significant media overlap that makes
local advertising and promotion inefficient?
FIGURE 11-1 Global vs. Local Branding
Global Brands Provide:
Scale Economies in the Development of
Advertising, Packaging, Promotion etc.
Exploitation of
Media Overlap
Exposure to Customers Who Travel
Associations
Of a Global Presence
Of the “Home” Country

Local Brands Provide:
Names, Symbols, and Associations That
Can Be
Developed Locally
Tailored to Local Market
Selected without the Constraints of a Global Brand
Reduced Risk from “Buy Local”
Sentiments
Are there economies of scale in the creation and implementation of
advertising and other components of the brand’s marketing program?
Is there value to associations of a global brand or of a brand associated
with a “home” country?
What local associations will be engendered by the global name/symbol/
slogan/associations? What are their positive or negative marginal value(s)?
Is it feasible culturally and legally to use a brand name, symbol, and
associations across countries? What does the name and symbol mean in
different countries? Is it pronounceable? Consider Meiieselex cereals and
Freixenet champagne.
What is the value of the awareness and associations that a regional brand
might develop? Is the product relatively culture bound? An in-home product
like frozen food will tend to be more linked to the local language, symbols,
and culture than will an industrial product like computers.
One common misconception is that globalization is an all or nothing
proposition. In fact, globalization can involve some elements of the brands—
the name, the symbol, the slogan, the perceived quality, or the associations—
it need not involve all of them. It may be optimal to globalize some but not all
elements of the brand.
Even Coca-Cola found that it could not use Diet Coke in much of Europe
because of local restrictions regarding the use of the word “diet” and because
it had medicinal connotations in some markets. Instead, the drink is called
Coca-Cola Light in Europe. Thus Coca-Cola, perhaps the classic example of
global branding, is not using a global brand name on a key product!
The trick will be to globalize those elements for which there is a resulting
pay off in cost or impact, and allow the other elements of brand equity to be
customized to local markets.

A RECAP

After spending 10 chapters discussing brand equity and its management, it
is time to sit back and reflect—to take as it were a stroll down memory lane.
First, a summary model of brand equity will be presented, a more complete
structure than the one presented in Chapter 1. Second, a set of observations
will be drawn from each chapter, representing points about brand equity and
its management that deserve highlighting: They serve to provide a reminder
of some issues and findings. Clearly, this brief review indicates that
considerable progress has been made toward the management of brand equity.
However, it also reminds that there is much to be done.
A BRAND EQUITY MODEL
In Chapter 1 a Figure was presented which provided an overview structure
for the brand-equity concept. The five asset dimensions that underlie brand
equity (brand loyalty, brand awareness, perceived quality, brand associations,
and other proprietary brand assets) were shown as creating brand equity.
Further, the value that brand equity generates to the customer and to the firm
was detailed as an “output” of brand equity.
In each of the following four chapters, ways in which each of the
dimensions of brand equity might create value were suggested and discussed.
In Figure 11-2, a revised brand-equity model integrates these contributions
into Figure 1-3 (Chapter 1). Brand equity is shown to consist of the five asset
dimensions. Ways in which each dimension might create value for the
customer and/or the firm are now in the model. These paths to value creation
are then distilled into a compact, summary set of ways (shown at the right of
the figure) in which brand equity can provide value to the customer and to the
firm.
In any given context some of these potential sources of value may not
apply, but others will. However, the model does provide a starting point for
analysis for any decision that will impact upon brand equity.
CHAPTER OBSERVATIONS
Chapter 1: What Is Brand Equity? Brand equity is here defined as the set
of brand assets and liabilities linked to the brand—its name and symbols—
that add value to, or subtract value from, a product or service. These assets
include brand loyalty, name awareness, perceived quality, and associations.
There are considerable pressures for short-term performance, in part
driven by the dictum that shareholder wealth is a primary goal of business,
and the reality that stock prices are responsive to short-term performance
measures. Short-term activities (such as price promotions) can show dramatic
results, while brand-building activities (such as image advertising) may have
little immediate impact. The challenge is to understand better the links

between brand assets and future performance, so that brand-building activities
can be justified.

FIGURE 11-2 Brand Equity
Estimating the value of a brand can help show that the underlying assets
do have worth. The assessment of the value of brand equity can be based on
the price premium that the name supports, the impact of the name on
customer preference, the replacement cost of the brand, and the stock value
minus the value of other assets. The most persuasive measure, however, may
be a multiplier of the earning power of the brand. The multiplier would be
based upon an analysis of the relative strength of the brand assets.
Chapter 2: Brand Loyalty. The core of brand equity is the loyalty of its
customer base—the degree to which customers are satisfied, have switching

costs, like the brand, and are committed. A loyal set of customers can have
substantial value which is often underestimated. They can reduce marketing
costs, since a customer is much less costly to keep than to gain or regain, and
provides leverage over others in the distribution channel. Customers can
create brand awareness and generate reassurance to new customers. Loyal
customers will also give a firm time to respond to competitive advances.
Retaining old customers and building loyalty involve active management;
they do not happen automatically. What will help is treating the customers
right: Do the little things, stay close to the customer, measure satisfaction,
create switching costs, provide extras, and, in general, over-invest in your
customer. Organizations of all kinds have found the implementation of a
customer orientation difficult, even though it sounds simple and obvious.
Chapter 3: Brand Awareness. Don’t underestimate the power of brand
awareness—recognition, recall (your brand is recalled as being in a product
class), and top-of-mind (the first recalled). People like the recognizable.
Further, recognition is a cue for presence, substance, and permanence. Recall
can be a necessary condition to being considered, and can have a subtle
influence on purchase decisions as well. It also provides the anchor to which
other associations are linked.
Building awareness is much easier over a longer time-period because
learning works better with repetition and reinforcement. In fact, brands with
the highest recall are generally older brands. Event sponsorship, publicity,
symbol exposure, and the use of brand extensions all can improve awareness.
However, developing recall requires a link between the brand and the product
class, and just name exposure will not necessarily create that link.
Chapter 4: Perceived Quality. Perceived quality pays off. According to
studies using data from thousands of businesses in the PIMS database, it
improves prices, market share, and ROI. In addition, it was the top-named
competitive advantage in a survey of managers of business units. It provides a
reason-to-buy, a point of differentiation, a price premium option, channel
interest, and a basis for brand extensions.
The key to obtaining high perceived quality is to deliver high quality, to
identify those quality dimensions that are important, to understand what
signals quality to the buyer, and to communicate the quality message in a
credible manner. Price becomes a quality cue, especially when a product is
difficult to evaluate objectively or when status is involved. Other quality cues
include the appearance of service people, stereo speaker size, and the scent of
a cleaner.
Chapter 5: Brand Associations. A brand association is anything mentally
linked to the brand. The brand position is based upon associations and how

they differ from competition. An association can affect the processing and
recall of information, provide a point of differentiation, provide a reason to
buy, create positive attitudes and feelings, and serve as the basis of
extensions.
Positioning on the basis of an association with a key tangible product
attribute is effective when the attribute can drive purchase decisions, but often
it can also result in a specification-shouting match. The use of an intangible
attribute such as overall quality, technological leadership, or health and
vitality can sometimes be more enduring. The association with a customer
benefit is another option. One study showed that the combination of a rational
benefit and an emotional benefit was superior to a rational benefit alone.
The relative price position often is central: Is the brand to be premium,
regular, or economy—and, further, is it to be at the top or bottom of the
selected category? Among the other association types to consider are use
applications, product users, celebrities, life-styles and personalties, product
class, competitors, and country or geographic area.
Chapter 6: The Measurement of Brand Associations. Insights about what
a brand means to people and what motivations it taps often can be obtained by
using indirect methods of eliciting associations. A customer, for example, can
be asked to describe a brand user or use experience, to generate free
associations with the brand, or to indicate how brands differ from each other.
Another way to gain a rich profile of a brand is to ask people to consider the
brand as a person (or animal, activity, magazine, etc.), and probe as to what
type the brand would be.
A companion method would usually involve a representative sample of a
customer segment which would scale the brand and its competitors with
respect to such positioning dimensions as product attributes, customer
benefits, user characteristics, use situations, or competitors. The result is a
perceptual map which graphically identifies the important perceptual
dimensions and shows the position of the brand for the customer sample.
Chapter 7: Selecting, Creating, and Maintaining Associations. A
successful brand position will usually follow three tenets: (1) Don’t try to be
something you are not. (2) Differentiate your brand from competitors’. (3)
Provide associations that add value and/or provide a reason-to-buy.
A key to creating associations is to identify and manage signals. The label
“35-mm single-lens reflex” signals that a camera has certain characteristics. A
promotion can signal that non-price attributes are not important unless it is
structured so that it reinforces the desired image. To deliver an attribute and
communicate that it exists may not be enough if the appropriate signals are
not managed properly.

Being consistent over time and over elements of the marketing program is
crucial in maintaining associations. When a disaster hits, the best strategy is
usually to avoid arguing over who is to blame, and to attempt to resolve it
quickly.
Some organizations have attempted to protect brand equities by adjusting
the organizational reward structure, and even by creating equity managers.
Chapter 8: The Name, Symbol, and Slogan. The name, symbol, and
slogan are critical to brand equity, and can be enormous assets, because they
serve as indicators of the brand and thus are central to brand recognition and
brand associations.
A name should be selected by a systematic process involving the creation
of a host of alternatives based upon desired associations and metaphors. The
name should be easy to recall, suggest the product class, support a symbol or
logo, suggest desired brand associations, not suggest undesirable associations,
and be legally protectable. There usually are trade-offs to be made. For
example, a name which suggests a product class might be strategically
limiting when brand extensions are considered.
A symbol such as the Wells Fargo stagecoach or Travelers (red) umbrella
can create associations and feelings. A symbol such as IBM or SONY that is
based upon the name will have an edge in creating brand recognition.
However, a symbol such as the Morton Salt label (showing salt raining upon a
girl holding an umbrella) that includes the product class (e.g., salt) should
help in brand recall where the link to the product class needs to be strong.
A slogan can be tailored to a positioning strategy, and is far less limited
than a name and symbol in the role it can play. A slogan can provide
additional associations, or focus existing ones.
Chapter 9: Brand Extensions. One way to exploit brand equity is to
extend the name to different products. An extension will have the best chance
when the brand’s associations and/or perceived quality can provide a point of
differentiation and advantage for the extension. Extensions rarely work when
the brand name has nothing to offer beyond brand awareness.
An extension should “fit” the brand—there should be some link between
the brand and the extension. The fit could be based upon a variety of linking
elements, such as common-use contexts, functional benefits, links to prestige,
user types, or symbols. Any incongruity could damage, and result in the
failure of, desired associations to transfer. In addition, there should not be any
meaningful negative association created by the brand name.
There is a risk that an extension will damage the core brand by weakening
either its associations or its perceived quality. As illustrated by such
extensions as Diet Coke, Honey Nut Cheerios, and Green Giant frozen

entrees, that will not necessarily happen, especially if the original brand name
and its associations are strong and there is a distinct difference between the
original brand and the extensions. In fact, an extension will usually help brand
awareness and, in the best situation, will reenforce the brand associations.
Probably the biggest risk of an extension is that the potential of a new
brand name with unique associations may be lost.
Chapter 10: Revitalizing the Brand. One option for a brand which is old
and tired is to pursue one of the seven routes to brand revitalization. One
(increasing usage by existing customers, perhaps through reminder
advertising or making the use easier), often is both relatively easy and
unlikely to precipitate competitive reaction. A second is to find a new product
use which can be feasibly stimulated by the brand (using Arm & Hammer
baking soda as a refrigerator odor-fighter, for example). A third is to find new
markets (such as moving into Europe) or attacking a neglected market (such
as calculators for women).
A fourth revitalization route is to reposition by changing associations (i.e.,
Cheez Whiz as a sauce) or adding new associations. A fifth is to augment the
product or service by providing features or services that are not expected. A
sixth is to obsolete existing products with new-generation technologies, as the
Yamaha Disklavier did. The seventh is the extension option covered in
Chapter 9.
Revitalization is not always possible or economically justifiable,
especially in the face of a brand which lacks a strong position, is facing a
declining market and dominant competitors, is not central to the long-range
thrust of the firm, and lacks a revitalization strategy. One option is to divest or
liquidate. Another, to milk the brand, would be preferred when there is an
enduring niche that remains loyal to the brand, the decline is orderly (with
relatively stable prices), and the milking option seems feasible.
A PARTING WORD
In a growing number of contexts, the brand name and what it means
combine to become the pivotal sustainable competitive advantage that firms
have. The name is pivotal because other bases of competition (such as product
attributes) usually are relatively easy to match or exceed. Further, customers
often lack the ability or motivation to analyze the brand-choice decision at a
sufficient depth to allow specifications to win the day.
Brand equity does not just happen. Its creation, maintenance, and
protection need to be actively managed. Further, it involves strategic as well
as tactical programs and policies. This book has attempted to provide some
hows and whys of that management task.

Notes

CHAPTER 1

What Is Brand Equity?
1 The P&G story is in part drawn from a special issue of Advertising Age

titled “The House That Ivory Built,” August 20, 1987, from the hook by
Oscar Schisgall, Eyes on Tomorrow: The Evolution of Procter & Gamble
(Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publ. Co., 1981); from the 1984 P&G booklet
“Celebrating 100 years of Ivory Soap”; and from selected P&G annual
reports. The note on detergent is drawn from Philip Kotler and Gary
Armstrong, Marketing, 2d ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall), pp. 200202.
2 The history on branding draws from Peter H. Farquhar, “Managing

Brand Equity,” Marketing Research, September 1989, pp. 24-34.
3

Henry Schacht, “Ripe Business in Trademark Licensing,” The San
Francisco Chronicle, April 26, 1989, p. C1.
4 Paul M. Schmitt, “Research Tools for the Nineties” (Chicago: Nielsen

Marketing Research, 1989), and Tod Johnson, “The Myth of Declining Brand
Loyalty,” Journal of Advertising Research, February/March, 1984, pp. 10-17.
Although given the measures used, a 9% change over eight years seems
substantial; Johnson described it as modest.
5

“Focus: A World of Brand Parity,” Report published by BBDO
Worldwide, 1988.
6 Kevin Kerr, “Consumers Are Confused by Sears’ New Policy,” Adweek’s

Marketing Week, June 12, 1989, pp. 30-31.
7 George Garrick, “Properly Evaluating the Role of TV Advertising,”

Proceedings of the ARF Conference, 1989.
8 Schmitt, op. cit.
9 Garrick, op. cit.
10 Garrick, op. cit.
11

David A. Aaker, “Managing Assets and Skills: The Key to a
Sustainable Competitive Advantage,” California Management Review, Winter
1989, pp. 91-106.
12 Gregg Cebrzynski, “Researchers Get Advice on Brands, International

Market,” Marketing News, September 3, 1990, p. 38.
13 Anthony Ramirez, “Fake Fat: Sweet Deal for Monsanto,” The New York

Times, May 28, 1990, pp. 21-22.
14

B. G. Yovovich, “What Is Your Brand Really Worth?” Adweek’s
Marketing Week, August 8, 1988, pp. 18-24.
15 Bill Saporito, “Has-Been Brands Go Back to Work,” Fortune, April 28,

1986, pp. 123-124.
16

Carol J. Simon and Mary W. Sullivan, “The Measurement and
Determinants of Brand Equity: A Financial Approach,” Working Paper, The
University of Chicago, 1990.
17 David Fredericks, “The Lights Are On but Nobody’s Home—Again,”

Presented at the MSI Branding Conference, December 1990.

CHAPTER 2

Brand Loyalty

1 The MicroPro story was drawn in part from a variety of published

sources including Cheryl Spencer, “The Rebirth of a Classic,” Personal
Computing, February 1987, pp. 63-73; Kate Bertrand, “Can MicroPro Catch
Its Fallen ‘Star’?” Business Marketing, May 1989, pp. 55-66; Christine
Strehlo, “What’s So Special About WordPerfect?” Personal Computing,
March 1989, pp. 100-116; Paul Freiberger, “MicroPro Future Unsure,” San
Franciso Examiner, April 4, 1989, p. C-1; Steven Burke, “WordStar Names
New Chief,” PC Week/Business, October 15, 1990, p. 161; Computer Reseller
News, February 26, 1990, p. 15.
2

Jim Seymour, “Leave a Wake-Up Call for December 1990,” PC
Magazine, January 16, 1990, p. 15.
3 Alix M. Freedman, “Perrier Finds Mystique Hard to Restore,” The Wall

Street Journal, December 12, 1990, pp. B1-B4.
4 Ronald Alsop, “Brand Loyalty Is Rarely Blind Loyalty,” The Wall Street

Journal, October, 19, 1989, p. B1, and Thomas Exter, “Looking for Brand
Loyalty,” American Demographics, April 1986, pp. 33.
5

Frederick F. Reichheld, “Making Sure Customers Come Back for
More,” The Wall Street Journal, March 12, 1990. Mr. Reichheld is an
executive at Bain & Co.
6 Frederick F. Reichheld and W. Earl Sasser, “Zero Defections: Quality

Comes to Services,” Harvard Business Review, September-October, 1990, pp.
105-111.

CHAPTER 3

Brand Awareness
1 The Nissan material is in part drawn from Anastasia C. Jackson, “The

Value of a Japanese Brand: The Demise of Datsun by Nissan,” Unpublished
Paper, 1990. Also, Cleveland Horton, “Nissan: Is It Losing Its Edge?”
Advertising Age, October 27, 1986, p. 4. John Revett, “Nissan Change May
Work, but Price Is High,” Advertising Age, July 27, 1981, p. 24.

2 Mim Ryan, “Assessment: The First Step in Image Management,” Tokyo

Business Today, September 1988, pp. 36-38.
3 “Shoppers Like Wide Variety of Housewares Brands,” Discount Store

News, October 24, 1988, p. 40.
4

The distinction between recognition and recall and their role in
advertising planning is described in John R. Rossiter, Larry Percy, and Robert
J. Donovan, “A Better Advertising Planning Grid,” Working Paper 890-039,
The University of New South Wales, 1989.
5 The concept of a dominant brand is discussed in Peter H. Farquhar,

“Managing Brand Equity,” Marketing Research, September 1898, pp. 24-33.
6 R. B. Zajonc, “Feeling and Thinking,” American Psychologist, February

1980, pp. 151-175.
7

Prakash Nedungadi, “Recall and Consumer Consideration Sets:
Influencing Choice without Altering Brand Evaluations,” Journal of
Consumer Research, December 1990, pp. 263-276.
8

Arch G. Woodside and Elizabeth J. Wilson, “Effects of Consumer
Awareness of Brand Advertising on Preference,” Journal of Advertising
Research, Vol. 25, August/September 1985, pp. 41-48.
9

David A. Aaker and George S. Day, “A Dynamic Model of
Relationships Among Advertising, Consumer Awareness, Attitudes, and
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 59, June 1974, pp. 281-286.
10 Mim Ryan, op. cit.
11 Michael Lev, “Assessing Nissan’s Zen Effort,” The New York Times,

May 14, 1990, p. 24.
12 Bill Saporito, “Has-Been Brands Go Back to Work,” Fortune, April 28,

1986, pp. 123.
13

Leo Bogart and Charles Lehman, “What Makes a Brand Name
Familiar?” Journal of Marketing Research, February 1973, pp. 17-22.

14 Thomas S. Wurster, “The Leading Brands: 1925-1985,” Perspectives,

The Boston Consulting Group, 1987.
15 Henry J. Claycamp and Lucien E. Liddy, “Prediction of New Product

Performance: An Analytical Approach,” Journal of Marketing Research,
November 1969, pp. 414-420.
16 Kevin Lane Keller, “Memory Factors in Advertising: The Effect of

Advertising Retrieval Cues on Brand Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer
Research, Vol. 14, December 1987, pp. 316-333.
17

Joseph W. Alba and Amitava Chattopadhyay, “Salience Effects in
Brand Recall,” Journal of Marketing Research, November 1986, pp. 363-369.

CHAPTER 4

Perceived Quality
1 The Schlitz story comes in part from Susan Anderson, “Evaluation of

Brand Equity” MBA Thesis, University of California at Berkeley, June 1989;
Jacques Neher, “What Went Wrong?” Advertising Age, April 13, 1981, pp.
46-64, and April 20, 1981, pp. 49-52; and “Anheuser Finds Quality Pays Off
… But Schlitz Encounters Problems,” Financial World, June 4, 1975, pp. 1617. The Busch quote is from the Financial World article. The Schlitz ad
manager quote is from the April 20 Advertising Age article (p. 52).
2

For a literature overview see Valarie A. Zeithaml, “Consumer
Perceptions of Price, Quality, and Value: A Means-End Model and Synthesis
of Evidence,” Journal of Marketing, July 1988, pp. 2-22.
3 David A. Aaker and Kevin Lane Keller, “Consumer Evaluations of

Brand Extensions,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, January 1990, pp. 27-41.
4 Robert D. Buzzell and Bradley T. Gale, The PIMS Principles (New

York: The Free Press, 1987), Chapter 6.
5 Robert Jacobson and David A. Aaker, “The Strategic Role of Product

Quality,” Journal of Marketing, October 1987, pp. 31-44.

6

David A. Aaker, “Creating a Sustainable Competitive Advantage,”
California Management Review, Winter 1989, pp. 91-105.
7 David A. Garvin, “Product Quality: An Important Strategic Weapon,”

Business Horizons, Vol. 27, May-June 1984, pp. 40-43
8

David Woodruff, “A New Era for Auto Quality,” Business Week,
October 22, 1990, pp. 84-96; Alex Taylor III, “Why Toyota Keeps Getting
Better and Better and Better,” Fortune, November 19, 1990, pp. 66-79.
9

A. Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry, “A
Conceptual Model of Service Quality and Its Implications for Future
Research,” Journal of Marketing, Fall 1985, pp. 41-50.
10 David Walker, “At Sheraton, the Guest Is Always Right,” Adweek’s

Marketing Week, October 23, 1989, pp. 20-21.
11

Valarie A. Zeithaml, Leonard L. Berry, and A. Parasuraman,
“Communication and Control Processes in the Delivery of Service Quality,”
Journal of Marketing, April 1988, pp. 35-48.
12 Amna Kirmani and Peter Wright, “Money Talks: Perceived Advertising

Expense and Expected Product Quality,” Journal of Consumer Research, Vol.
16, December 1989, pp. 344-353.
13 Akshay R. Rao and Kent B. Monroe, “The Effect of Price, Brand

Name, and Store Name on Buyers’ Perceptions of Product Quality: An
Integrative Review,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 26, August, 1989,
pp. 351-357.
14 Harold J. Leavitt, “A Note on Some Experimental Findings About the

Meaning of Price,” Journal of Business, Vol. 27, July 1957, pp. 205-210.
15 Jacobson and Aaker, op. cit.

CHAPTER 5

Brand Associations: The Positioning Decision

1 The Weight Watchers story is drawn in part from Rebecca Fannin,

“Shape Up,” Marketing & Media Decisions, February 1986, pp. 54-60; Brian
O’Reilly, “Diet Centers Are Really in Fat City, Fortune, June 5, 1989, pp.
137-140; Warren Berger, “The Big Freeze at Heinz,” Adweek’s Marketing
Week, August 21, 1989, pp. 20-25; Gregory L. Jiles, “Heinz Ain’t Broke, But
It’s Doing a Lot of Fixing,” Business Week, December 11, 1989, pp. 84-88;
“Anthony O’Reilly—What’s on His Plate?” Advertising Age, February 26,
1990, pp. 1 and 16; and annual reports of H. J. Heinz Company.
2 “Anthony O’Reilly—What’s on His Plate?” Advertising Age, February

26, 1990, p. 16.
3 Warren Berger, “The Big Freeze at Heinz,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,

August 21, 1989, pp. 20-25.
4 Regis McKenna, The Regis Touch (New York Addison-Wesley, 1986), p.

41.
5 Joseph W. Alba and J. Wesley Hutchinson, “Dimensions of Consumer

Expertise,” Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 13, March 1987, pp. 411454.
6 Jerry Flint, “A Brand Is Like A Friend,” Forbes, November 14, 1988,

pp. 267-270; and “Shirley Young: Pushing GM’s Humble-Pie Strategy,”
Business Week, June 11, 1990, pp. 52-53.
7 Stuart Agres, Emotion in Advertising: An Agency’s View, The Marschalk

Company, 1986. Also see a selection by the same title which appears in Stuart
J. Agres, Julie A. Edell, and Tony M. Dubitshy, Emotion in Advertising: The
Critical or Practical Explorations (New York: Quorum), pp. 3-18.
8

Glen L. Urban, Philip L. Johnson, and John R. Hauser, “Testing
Competitive Market Structures,” Marketing Science, Vol. 3, Spring 1984, pp.
83-112.
9 Aimee L. Stern, “Maybelline Ascendant,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,

April 3, 1989, pp. 22-28.
10

Stan Luxenberg, “Cadbury Trusts Anyone Over 30,” Adweek’s
Marketing Week, August, 22, 1988, pp. 18-21.

11 “Perfect 10s Give Way to Families of Four,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,

March 27, 1989, p. 34.
12 Tom Murray, “The Wind at Nike’s Back,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,

November 14, 1986, pp. 28-31.
13 Keith Reinhard, “How We Make Advertising,” presented to the Federal

Trade Commission, May 11, 1979, pp. 22-25.
14 Roger Enrico, The Other Guy Blinked (New York: Bantam Books,

1986).
15 C. Min Han and Vern Terpstra, “Country-of-Origin Effects for Uni-

National and Binational Products,” Journal of International Business Studies,
Summer 1988, p. 242.
16 N. G. Papadopoulos, L. A. Heslop, F. Graby, and G. Avlonitis, “Does

‘Country-of-Origin’ Matter?” Working Paper, Marketing Science Institute,
1989.

CHAPTER 6

The Measurement of Brand Associations
1 Drawn from Douglas Scott and Flaurel Englis, “Tracking Automotive

Intentions and Imagery: A Case Study,” Journal of Advertising Research,
February/March 1989, RC-13 to RC-20.
2 Joseph S. Newman, Motivation Research and Marketing Management

(Boston: Harvard University Press, 1957), p. 143.
3 David A. Aaker and Douglas M. Stayman, “Implementing the Concept

of Transformational Advertising,” Psychology & Marketing, 1991.
4 Joseph T. Plummer, “How Personality Makes a Difference,” Journal of

Advertising Research, Vol. 24, December 1984/January 1985, pp. 27-31.
5

Rena Bartos, “Ernest Dichter: Motive Interpreter,” Journal of

Advertising Research, February-March 1986, pp. 15-20.
6

Annetta Miller and Dody Tsiantar, “Psyching Out Consumers,”
Newsweek, February 27, 1989, pp. 46-47.
7 Plummer, op. cit.
8 Bartos, op. cit.
9

Joel N. Axelrod and Hans Wybenga, “Perceptions That Motivate
Purchase,” Journal of Advertising Research, June/July 1985, pp. 19-22.
10 Mason Haire, “Projective Techniques in Marketing Research,” Journal

of Marketing, April 1950, pp. 649-656.
11 Sidney J. Levy, “Dreams, Fairy Tales, Animals, and Cars,” Psychology

& Marketing, Vol. 2, Summer 1985, pp. 67-81.
12 Axelrod and Wybenga, op. cit.
13 Thomas J. Reynolds and Jonathan Gutman, “Advertising Is Image

Management,” Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 25, February-March
1984, pp. 29-37; and Jonathan Gutman, “A Means-End Chain Model Based
on Consumer Categorization Processes,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 46,
Spring 1982, pp. 60-73. See also S. Young and B. Feigin, “Using the Benefit
Chain for Improved Strategy Formulation,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 39,
July 1975, pp. 72-74.
14 For more detail on scaling, see David A. Aaker and George S. Day,

Marketing Research, 4th ed. (New York:John Wiley, 1990), Chapters 9, 17,
18, and 19.
15

George S. Day, Allan D. Shocker, and Rajendra K. Srivastava,
“Customer-Oriented Approaches to Identifying Product Markets,” Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 43, Fall 1979, pp. 8-19.

CHAPTER 7

Selecting, Creating, and Maintaining Associations

1 Iegor Siniavski, “Communication at Honeywell France,” Unpublished

Master’s Thesis, University of California at Berkeley, 1990.
2 “Dutch Boy’s Image Gets a Fresh Coat of Paint,” Adweek’s Marketing

Week, May 22, 1989, pp. 65-67.
3 Joseph M. Winski, “No Caffeine—Choice: 7-Up,” Advertising Age, May

30, 1983, p. 3.
4 Keith Reinhard, “How We Make Advertising,” presented to the Federal

Trade commission, May 11, 1979, pp. 22-25.
5 Regis McKenna, The Regis Touch (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1986), Ch.

3.
6 Mita Sujan, “Consumer Knowledge: Effects on Evaluation Strategies

Mediating Consumer Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research, June 1985,
pp. 31-46.
7 Nicholas Glenn, “Auto Rebates Don’t Cut the Mustard,” Promote, April

9, 1990, p. 21.
8 Gary J. Gaeth, Irwin P. Levin, Goutam Chakraborty, and Aron M. Levin,

“Consumer Evaluation of Multi-Product Bundles: An Information Integration
Analysis,” Working Paper, The University of Iowa, 1990.
9 R. T. J. Tuck and W. G. B. Harvey, “Do Promotions Undermine the

Brand?” ADMAP, January 1972, pp. 29-33.
10 David Kiley, “Can J. C. Penney Change Its Image Without Losing

Customers?” Adweek’s Marketing Week, February 26, 1990, pp. 20-24.
11 Robert F. Hartley, Marketing Mistakes, 4th ed. (New York: John Wiley,

1989), pp. 117-153.
12 David Kiley, “How Suzuki Swerved to Avoid a Marketing Disaster,”

Adweek’s Marketing Week, October 24, 1988, pp. 27-28.
13 Hartley, op.cit, pp. 30-45.

CHAPTER 8

The Name, Symbol, and Slogan
1 Material is drawn from Andy Keane, The Volkswagen Story,

MBA
Thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1990; “A Battered VW Begins the
Long Road Back,” Business Week, February 5, 1972, pp. 52-56; and David
Kiley, “Can VW Survive?” Adweek’s Marketing Week, May 1, 1989, pp. 1824. (The sales figures were provided by Volkswagen of America.)
2 Robert A. Mamis, “Name-Calling,” INC., July 1984, pp. 67-70.
3 Kim Robertson, “Strategically Desirable Brand Name Characteristics,”

The Journal of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 6, Fall 1989, pp. 61-71.
4

R. N. Kanungo, “Brand Awareness: Effects of Fittingness,
Meaningfulness, and Product Utility,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol.
52, 1968, pp. 290-295.
5

Robert A. Peterson and Ivan Ross, “How to Name New Brands,”
Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 12, December 1972, pp. 34-39.
6 Jerome R. McDougal, “Apple Name Change Polishes Image of Thrift,”

Bank Marketing, February 1987, pp. 18-20.
7

Albert Mehradian and Robert DeWetter, “Experimental Test of an
Emotion-Based Approach to Fitting Brand Names to Products,” Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 72, 1987, pp. 125-130.
8 Robertson, op. cit.
9 Lorraine C. Scarpa, “Brand Equity at Kraft General Foods,” Paper

written for the Marketing Science Institute Brand Equity Conference, 1990;
and Laurie Petersen, “Promotion of the Year,” Promote, December 10, 1990,
p. 36.
10 An excellent short book on naming products which provides good

insight into the legal aspects is Henri Charmasson, The Name Is the Game
(Homewood, III.: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1988), Ch. 5.

11 Rich Zahradnik, “More than Pretty Pictures,” Marketing

& Media

Decisions. Business-to-Business Guide 1986, pp. B34-B41.
12

Dan Keoppel, “What Have Snoopy and Gang Done for Met Life
Lately?” Adweek’s Marketing Week, November 13, 1989, pp. 2-3.
13 James Ward, Barbara Loken, Ivan Ross, and Tedo Hasapopoulos, “The

Influence of Physical Similarity on Generalization of Affect and Attribute
Perceptions from National Brands to Private Label Brands,” 1986 AMA
Conference Educator’s Proceedings, Chicago: American Marketing
Association, 1986, pp. 25-20.
14 Kathy A. Lutz and Richard J. Lutz, “Effects of Interactive Imagery on

Learning: Application to Advertising,” Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol.
62, November 1977, pp. 493-498.

CHAPTER 9

Brand Extensions: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
1 See Edward F. Ogiba, “The Dangers of Leveraging,” Adweek, January 4,

1988, p. 42; and Lori Kesler, “Extensions Leave Brands in New Area,”
Advertising Age, June 1, 1987, S1.
2 Edward M. Tauber, “Brand Leverage: Strategy for Growth in a Cost-

Controlled World,” Journal of Advertising Research, August-September
1988, pp. 26-30.
3 Tauber, op. cit.
4 David A. Aaker, “Managing Assets and Skills: The Key to a Sustainable

Competitive Advantage,” California Management Review, Winter 1989, pp.
91-106.
5 David A. Aaker and Kevin Lane Keller, “Consumer Evaluations of

Brand Extensions,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, January 1990, pp. 27-41.
6 Mary W. Sullivan, “Brand Extension and Order of Entry,” Working

Paper, University of Chicago, February 1989.
7 Henry J. Claycamp and Lucien E. Liddy, “Prediction of New Product

Performance: An Analytical Approach,” Journal of Marketing Research,
November 1969, pp. 414-420.
8 Bradley Johnson and Julie Liesse Erickson, “Popcorn Leaders Make

Light Moves,” Advertising Age, July 24, 1989, p. 2.
9 C. Whan Park, Sandra Milberg, and Robert Lawson, “Evaluation of

Brand Extensions: The Role of Product Level Similarity and Brand Concept
Consistency,” Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh, 1990.
10 Deborah Roedder John and Barbara Loken, “Diluting Brand Equity:

The Negative Impact of Brand Extensions,” Working Paper, University of
Minnesota, 1991.
11

John C. Maxwell Jr., “New Cereal Brands Put Snap in Market,”
Advertising Age, July 23, 1990, p. 43.
12 Al Ries and Jack Trout, Positioning: The Battle for your Mind (New

York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1985).
13 Walter Kennedy, “Marketing Solutions,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,”

January 2, 1989, pp. 44-45.
14 John Rossant, “Can Maurizio Gucci Bring the Glamor Back?” Business

Week, February 5, 1990, pp. 83-84.
15 Kevin Lane Keller and David A. Aaker, “Managing Brand Equity: The

Impact of Multiple Extensions,” Working Paper, University of California at
Berkeley, February 1990.
16 Mary Sullivan, “Measuring Image Spillovers in Umbrella Branded

Products,” Working Paper, University of Chicago, 1988.
17 Edward M. Tauber, “Brand Franchise Extension: New Product Benefits

from Existing Brand Names,” Business Horizons, Vol. 47, March-April, 1981,
pp. 36-41.

18 David Kiley, “Chesebrough-Pond’s Squeezes Another Brand Out of

Vaseline,” Adweek’s Marketing Week, July 18, 1988, p. 21.

CHAPTER 10

Revitalizing the Brand
1

This section was stimulated by Kenichi Ohmae, “Getting Back to
Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, November-December 1988, pp. 149156. (Carter Schuld of Yamaha provided helpful information.)
2 This section draws upon the excellent paper by Philip E. Hendrix,

“Product/ Service Consumption: Implications and Opportunities for
Marketing Strategy,” Working Paper, Emory University, 1986.
3 Barnaby J. Feder, “Baking Soda Maker Strikes Again,” The New York

Times, June 16, 1990, p. 17.
4 Jack J. Honomichl, “The Ongoing Saga of ‘Mother Baking Soda’,”

Advertising Age, September 20, 1982, pp. M2-M3.
5 Linden A. Davis, Jr., “Market Positioning Considerations,” in E. L.

Bailey (Ed.), Product-Line Strategies (New York: The Conference Board,
1982), pp. 37-39.
6

Robert Hanson, “Angostura’s Past Helps Revive Bitters,” Adweek’s
Marketing Week, May 23, 1988, pp. 53-55.
7 Aimee Stern, “TI Liberates the Calculator,” Adweek’s Marketing Week,

August 22, 1988, p. 3.
8 Matthew Grimm, “Waterloo, Iowa Wakes Up and Smells the Pepsi,”

Adweek’s Marketing Week, November 27, 1989, pp. 2-4.
9 Ronald Alsop, “Giving Fading Brands a Second Chance,” The Wall

Street Journal, January 24, 1989, p. B1.
10 Joseph O. Eastlack, Jr. and Ambar G. Rao, “Modeling Response to

Advertising and Pricing Changes from ‘V-8’ Cocktail Vegetable Juice,”
Marketing Science, Vol. 5, Summer 1986, pp. 245-259.
11 Ronald Alsop, “Folksy Ads Help in Reviving Old-Time Headache

Powder,” The Wall Street Journal, January 20, 1987, p. 18.
12

Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Success Through Differentiation—of
Anything,” Harvard Business Review, January-February 1989, pp. 83-91.
13 Foremost-McKesson: “The Computer Moves Distribution to Center

Stage,” Business Week, December 7, 1981, pp. 115-119; and Tom Peters,
Thriving on Chaos (New York: Knopf, 1987), p. 110.
14 Tom Peters, Thriving on Chaos (New York: Knopf, 1987), pp. 56, 57,

and 112.
15 Robert F. Hartley, Marketing Mistakes,

3d ed. (New York: Wiley,

1986), pp. 91-105.
16 For an excellent treatment of strategies in declining industries see

Kathryn Rudie Harrigan, Strategies for Declining Businesses (Lexington,
Mass.: Lexington Books, 1980); and Kathryn Rudie Harrigan and Michael E.
Porter, “End-Game Strategies for Declining Industries,” Harvard Business
Review, July-August 1983, pp. 111-120.
17 Bill Saporito, “Has-Been Brands Go Back to Work,” Fortune, April 28,

1986, pp. 123-124.
18

Milton Moskowitz, “Last Days of Chase & Sanborn,” The San
Francisco Chronicle, February 22, 1982, p. 56; and Ruth Stroud, “Chase &
Sanborn Gets Back in the Chase,” Advertising Age, Februry 25, 1985, p. 12.

CHAPTER 11

Global Branding and a Recap
1 David Kalish, “Cat Fight,” Marketing & Media Decisions, April 1989,

pp. 42-48.

2 Joseph M. Winski and Laurel Wentz, “Parker Pen: What Went Wrong?”

Advertising Age, June 23, 1986, pp. 1, 60, 61, and 71.
3 Kamran Kashani, “Beware the Pitfalls of Global Marketing,” Harvard

Business Review, September-October 1989, pp. 91-98.

Index

Aaker, David A., 88, 212, 218, 219, 225, 232
Absolut, 128
Advertising, 173;
see also Brand associations;
Brand awareness;
Brand extensions;
Brand loyalty;
Brand revitalization;
Perceived quality
automobile, 57–59
brand-building potential of, 13
positive feelings and, 112–113
radio, 4
rational and psychological benefits and, 118–120
transformational, 163–164
Volkswagen Beetle, 182–185
Airbus, 191
Allegheny Airlines, 197
Allegis, 193
Allstate Insurance Company, 200, 201
American Can Company, 259
American Dental Association, 114
American Express, 20, 112, 161, 167, 173
American Motors, 23
Anacin, 160–161
Angostura Bitters, 248
Anheuser-Busch, 78, 80, 82, 84
A-1 steak sauce, 63
Apple Bank, 191
Apple Computer, 142, 187, 198, 227
Arm & Hammer, 62, 210, 211, 219, 245, 247, 248, 275
Armour Food, 105, 223

Armstrong tile, 24
Assets, role of, 13–15
Associations: see Brand associations
Atari, 140
AT&T Company, 161, 163, 176, 178, 204
Attribute associations, 198–200
Audi 4000, 130, 133, 134, 225
Audi 5000, 176–177, 179, 225
Audi Quattro, 225
Aunt Jemima, 203, 217–218, 224
Automobile industry, 56–60, 92–93, 102, 103, 128–129
Avis, 127
Awareness: see Brand awareness
Axelrod, Joel, 143, 145
Band-aid, 62
Banking industry, 200
Bank of America, 110
Bank of California, 110
Banquet Food, 105
Barbasol, 226
Bayer aspirin, 116
BBDO, 10
Beatrice Foods, 216
Beetle, 41, 181–187
Behavior data, 43–44
Bekins Van Lines, 97, 98
Bell Telephone Company, 122, 138
Ben and Jerry’s ice cream, 74, 171
Ben-Gay, 247
Berry, Leonard L., 93, 96
Bertolli olive oil, 266
Betty Crocker, 22, 73, 125, 126, 163, 203, 219
Bic, 217
Bill Blass, 216
Birds Eye, 140
Black & Decker, Inc., 22, 60–61, 213, 222, 227, 233
Black Jack, 65
Bloomingdale s, 112
Blue Cheer, 5
BMW, 114, 118, 161

Boeing, 22
Bold 3, 6
Boston Consulting Group, The, 70
Bounce, 5
Bounty, 5
Brand associations, 16–22, 28, 30, 42, 269, 270, 272–273
brand extensions and, 209–212
brand name and, 191–194
celebrity/person, 114, 115, 124–125
changing, 172, 173
competitors, 114, 115, 127–128
country/geographic area, 114, 115, 128–129
creating, 164–172
customer benefits, 114, 115, 118–120
defined, 109
Dove story, 153–154
Ford Taurus story, 130–135, 151
Honeywell story, 154–156
indirect methods of understanding, 136–137
intangibles, 114–118
life-styles/personality, 114, 115, 126
maintaining, 172–176
managing disasters, 176–179
product attributes, 114–116
product class, 114, 115, 126–127
relative price, 114, 115, 120–122
scaling approaches, 135, 147–152
selecting, 156–164
types of, 113–129
use/application, 114, 115, 122–123
user/customer, 114, 115, 123–124
value of, 110–113
Weight Watchers story, 104–109
Brand awareness, 16–19, 22, 27–29, 42, 48, 56–77, 269–272
achievement of, 72–76
Black & Decker story, 60–61
brand extensions and, 213–214
defined, 61
levels of, 62
limitations of, 69

Nissan story, 56–60
power of old brand names, 69–71
value of, 63–69
Brand-building neglect, 8–13
Brand cues, 75–76
Brand equity
assets and liabilities and, 16–21, 269, 270
associations: see Brand associations
awareness: see Brand awareness
defined, 4, 15–16, 269
extensions: see Brand extensions
loyalty: see Brand loyalty
perceived quality: see Perceived quality
Brand-equity manager, 176
Brand extensions, 30, 69, 75, 88, 113, 154, 206–237, 274
brand associations and, 209–212
brand awareness and, 213–214
development of, 228–232
Levi Strauss story, 206–207
negative results of, 206–207, 209, 216–227
perceived quality and, 212–213
positive results of, 209–215
strategy considerations, 232–236
Brand loyalty, 16–19, 21, 22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 34–55, 270, 271
levels of, 8–10, 39–41
maintaining and enhancing, 49–52
measuring, 43–46
MicroPro story, 34–39
promotions and, 169–170
strategic value of, 46–49
Brand management system, 5, 6
Brand name, 187–197, 273–274
brand associations and, 191–194
changing, 196–197
distinctiveness of, 194
generating alternatives, 188–189
as intangible asset, 14–15
legal aspects of, 194–195
memorability of, 189–190
product class and, 190–191

selection process, 195–196
undesirable associations, 193, 194
Brand parity, 10
Brand personality, 139–140
Brand recall, 62, 66–68, 75, 76, 190
Brand recognition, 62, 63–65, 67–70, 76
Brand revitalization, 238–262, 275; see also Brand extensions
alternatives to, 256–262
augmenting product/service, 242, 243, 253–255
entering new markets, 242, 243, 248–251
finding new uses, 242, 243, 247–248
increasing usage, 242, 243–246
obsolete existing products, 242, 243, 255–256
repositioning, 242, 243, 251–253
Yamaha story, 238–241, 243
Brands, role of, 7–8
Brand value, 21–30
customer preference, 24
future earnings and, 26–30
price premiums, 22–23
replacement cost, 24
stock price movements and, 25–26
Bran One, 116
British Airways, 266
Brown-Forman, 26
Budget Gourmet, 121
Budweiser, 22, 73, 75, 78, 84, 120, 159
Buick, 117
Busch, August, 82
Buyer-preference measures, 23
Buzzell, Robert, 88, 89
Cadbury’s, 124, 223
Cadillac, 117, 204, 225
Camargo Foods, 104
Camay, 4, 5
Campbell’s, 68–69, 105, 122, 217, 218, 226, 227, 234, 251, 254
Canada, 129
Canada Dry, 124, 176, 248
Candle Lite Dinners, 107, 109, 122
Cannon, 61, 265

Caress, 127, 159
Carnation Pet Food, 222
Categorizing brands, 166
Caterpillar Tractor, 93, 165
Celebrity/person positioning approach, 114, 115, 124–125
Cervantes, Miguel de, 56
Chanel, 228, 265
Change, risk of, 44–45
Channel member interest, 88
Channel relationships, 16, 18, 21
Charger, 248
Charlie Brown, 112, 201
Charlie the Tuna, 201
Charmin, 5
Chase & Sanborn, 257, 258
Cheer, 5
Cheerios, 222, 223
Cheez Whiz, 251, 252, 275
Cher, 111
Cherry 7–Up, 165
Chesebrough-Pond’s USA Company, 231
Chevrolet, 117
Chevrolet Cavalier, 225
Chevrolet Celebrity, 130, 134, 135
Chevrolet Geo, 189
Chevron, 113
Chicken Helper, 219
Chipso, 4
Chiquita bananas, 20
Chivas Regal, 99–100
Chrysler Corporation, 23, 176, 177, 179
Chrysler LeBaron, 130, 134
Cimarron, 117, 225
Citrus Hill orange juice, 6, 254
Clinique, 245
Close-Up, 112
Club Med, 124
Coca-Cola, 25–26, 49, 68–69, 75, 124, 159, 195, 203, 218, 221, 268
Coffee market, 67, 122–123
Coke Classic, 49

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 181
Colgate-Palmolive, 176
Colgate toothpaste, 112, 160
Colonel Sanders, 73, 125
Comet, 5
Committed customers, 40–41, 43, 46
Communication, service quality and, 91
Compaq, 142, 165, 189, 192
Competence, service quality and, 91, 93–94
Competitors
associations, 157, 158–159
positioning strategy and, 114, 115, 127–128
Conformance with specifications, product quality and, 91, 92
Consolidated Foods, 197
Continental Can Company, 259
Coors, 75, 84, 120, 122, 139
Coors Gold, 120, 122
Corelle, 61
Corning, 61
Correspondence analysis, 150
Cosby, Bill, 112, 245
Cosmetics industry, 123–124
Country/geographic area positioning strategy, 114, 115, 128–129
Country Time Lemonade, 217
Couponing, 11
Courtesy, service quality and, 91, 94
Cover Girl, 123
Crayola crayons, 62
Credibility, service quality and, 91, 94
Crest, 5, 88, 112, 114, 118, 212, 218, 219
Crisco, 4
Crosby, Phil, 78
Cuisinart, 221
Customer Action Teams (CATs), 255
Customer base, 29; see also Brand loyalty
Customer benefits of brand associations, 114, 115, 118–120
Customer expectations, 96
Customer involvement, 255
Customer preference, 24
Customer research, 23

Customer-retention programs, 52–55
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, 200, 205
Dash, 5, 6
Datsun, 56–58, 60, 185
Datsun 510, 57
Dean Witter, 222
Declining industry, 256–262
Dell computer, 48, 142
Depreciation, 14
Dewar’s, 265
Dichter, Ernest, 140, 141
Diet Cherry Coke, 69, 221
Diet Coke, 25–26, 222, 268, 274
Differentiating association, 111–112
Discounting, 10
Disneyland, 50, 96
Distribution channel, 18, 21
Dr. Pepper, 140
Dockers, 207–208
Dole, 219
Dollarmetric scale, 23, 46
Dominant brands, 62–63
Domino’s Pizza, 51
Dove, 153–154, 159, 173
Doyle Dane Bernbach, 184, 186
Dreft, 4, 6
Dreyers Ice Cream, 25, 26
Dristan, 76
Duncan Hines, 5, 6, 140
Durability, product quality and, 91, 93
Dustbuster, 227
Dutch Boy, 158
Duz, 5
Ecko, 61
Edy’s Ice Cream, 25
Empathy, service quality and, 91, 94
Era, 6
Esso, 213
Event sponsorship, 75
Eversharp, 256

Exit strategy, 259–262, 275
Extensions: see Brand extensions
Extrinsic cues, 99, 100
Exxon Corporation, 213
Factor analysis, 149
Familiarity, 64–65
Famous Amos, 125
Features, product quality and, 91–92
Federal Express, 94
Ferfauf, Eugene, 174
Ferrari, Pierre, 153
Finland, 128
Finlandia, 128, 160
Fisher-Price, 226
Fit and finish, product quality and, 91, 93, 94
Fleischmann, 258
Focus groups, 50
Folger s coffee, 5
Foodways National, 104
Ford LTD, 130, 132–134
Ford Motor Company, 130–135, 204
Ford Taurus, 130–135, 151
Foremost-McKesson, 51, 254–255
Formica, 187
France, 128, 129
Free association, 137–138
Frito-Lay, 246
Future earnings, brand value based on, 26–30
Gain, 5
Gale, Bradley, 88, 89
Garvin, David A., 91, 93
Gatorade, 112, 123, 175
Gee, Your Hair Smells Terrific, 192
General Coffee Company, 258
General Electric Company, 22, 60–61, 70, 95, 213, 224
General Foods Corporation, 245, 258
General Mills, Inc., 8, 26, 216, 222, 224, 248
General Motors Corporation, 49, 117
Georgescu, Peter A., 15
Geritol, 253

Germany, 128, 129
GiftLink Shoppers Reward, 52
Gillette, 226, 256
Global branding, 263–268
Goldstar, 224
Good News! line, 226
Goodrich, B. F., Company, 73
Goodyear blimp, 73, 74
Grape Nuts, 247
Great Britain, 129
Green Giant, 112, 198, 201, 223–225, 274
Greyhound, 69
Gucci, 224
Häagen-Dazs, 211, 212
Habitual buyers, 40, 41, 42
Hamburger Helper, 157–158, 219
Harlem Savings Bank of New York, 191
Harley-Davidson, 41, 69
Hathaway shirts, 125
Head and Shoulders, 192, 202
Heineken, 212
Heinz, H. J., Company, 75, 104–105, 109, 266
Helene Curtis, 121
Helen of Troy, 213–214
Hertz, 127
Hewlett-Packard, 103, 118, 212, 214, 223, 224, 227
Hills Brothers, 123, 258
Hilton Hotels, 224–225
Hiram Walker, 211
Holiday Inn, 96, 140
Honda, 57, 60, 75, 92, 94, 113, 227, 265
Honda Acura, 18, 189, 227
Honda Civic, 192
Honey Nut Cheerios, 222, 223, 274
Honeywell, 154–155
Honey well France, 155–156
Hospitality industry, 121
Household Finance Corporation (HFC), 163
Housewares industry, 60–61
Huggies, 192

Hyundai, 114
Iacocca, Lee, 177
IBM Corporation, 22, 34–35, 39, 41, 50, 69, 93, 96, 142, 155, 158, 159,
165, 224, 260, 266, 274
IBM System 360, 39
Iceland, 128
Icy, 128
Image, 110
Infiniti, 69, 92
Insurance industry, 45
Intangibles, 14–15, 114–118
International Harvester, 196
Intrinsic cues, 99, 100
Ipana, 65
IRI, 12, 13
Isuzu, 121–122
Italy, 128
Ivory brand, 1–6, 18, 72–73, 141–142, 168–169, 225
Ivory Flakes, 4
Ivory Liquid, 5
Ivory Snow, 4, 5
J. Walter Thompson, 170
Jack-in-the-Box, 138
Jackson, Michael, 126
Jacobson, Robert, 88
Jaguar, 114, 212
Japan, 128, 129
automobile industry in, 92–93
customer culture in, 50
employee initiative in, 96
Jell-O, 62, 193, 213, 223, 233, 245, 247, 258
Jif peanut spread, 5
Jigglers, 193
Jingles, 73
Johnson & Johnson, 177–178, 230, 249
Jolly Green Giant, 112, 198, 201
Jordan, Michael, 125
Joy, 5
Juan Valdez, 125
Kahlua, 128

KaI Kan, 263
Keebler elves, 125, 201
Keller, Kevin Lane, 212, 218, 219, 225, 232
Kellogg’s, 26, 218
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, 24
Kentucky Fried Chicken, 141
Kidder Peabody, 24
Kikorian soy sauce, 265–266
King, Stephen, 1
Kleenex, 223
Kodak, 187, 189
Korvette’s, 173–174
Kraft, 8, 224, 251, 252
L. L. Bean, 96
Lacoste alligator, 224
Landor Associates, 68–69, 225
Laura Scudder, 125
Lawson, Robert, 220
Lean Cuisine, 75, 105, 107, 116
Leavitt, Harold J., 100
L’eggs, 254
Lever Brothers, 4–5, 127, 154, 159
Levi Strauss, 168, 174–175, 206–207, 217, 265, 266
Levitt, Theodore, 254, 264–265
Lexus, 92
Libbey, 61
Licensing, 8
Lifebuoy, 4
Life cereal, 75–76, 118
Life-styles/personality positioning approach, 114, 115, 126
Liking of brand, 43, 45–46, 65–67, 200–201
Lilt, 5, 216
Lionel trains, 63
Lipton Soup, 222, 247
Listerine, 218
Log Cabin, 217
Long-term perspective, 12, 13
Lotus, 165
Lowenbrau, 120, 122, 139, 163
Loyalty: see Brand loyalty

Luvs, 5
Lux, 4, 70, 257
MacDougal, Malcolm, 56
Macintosh computer, 41, 227
Maiden, Karl, 20
Market research, 7
Market segments, 4–5, 249, 251
Market share, 24, 89
Marlboro, 173, 198
Marlboro man, 125
Marriott Hotels, 51, 234–235
Mars, 263
Maxim, 126–127
Maxwell House, 143, 258
Maxwell Master Blends, 122
Maybelline, 124, 204
Maytag, 50, 160, 173
Maytag repairman, 125, 198
Mazda, 74, 75, 204
Mazda Miata, 74, 92
McCann-Erickson, 140
McCormick, 254
McDonald’s, 20, 63–64, 69, 19–110, 138, 173, 212, 214, 218, 221, 228,
229
McElroy, Neil, 5
McKenna, Regis, 116, 238
Means-end chain model, 145–146
Memorability of brand name, 189–190
Mercedes, 112, 114
Mercury Sable, 187
Metaphor, 189
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 112, 201
Michelin tire giant, 125
Michelob, 84, 120
Mickey Mouse, 201, 204
MicroPro, 34–40, 49
Microsoft, 165
Microsoft Word, 35, 36, 39
Milberg, Sandra, 220
Milking strategy, 256, 257–260, 275

Miller, Ann, 247
Miller beer, 75, 80, 83–84, 112, 119, 120
Miller High Life, 140, 222
Miller Lite, 124, 167, 195, 222
Miller Magnum Malt Liquor, 192
Millikin, 255
Mrs. Paul, 125
Mr. Clean, 125, 200
Mr. Goodwrench, 125, 200
Mr. Whipple, 125
Mitsubishi, 75
Mitterand, François, 155
MJB, 189
M&M’s, 160
Mop ’n Glow, 192
Morphemes, 189
Morton Salt, 56, 63, 75, 198, 203, 274
MS-DOS, 35
Murjani, 218
Name: see Brand name
Name awareness: see Brand awareness
NameLab, 189
National Car Rental, 127
Natural grouping, 150
Navistar, 197
Nedungadi, Prakash, 66
Nescafe, 143
Nestle, 176, 178, 179, 254
New Coke, 26, 49
Newstar Software, 38
NEXT, 41
Nielsen, 10
Nike, 125
Nissan, 56–60, 69, 92
Nissan Maxima, 92, 130, 133, 134
Nissan Sentra, 189
Nissan Stanza, 57
Nordstrom, 21, 52, 85–86, 94, 101, 112, 165
Northwest Airlines, 185
Nova, 194

Noxell, 123
NPD, 10
Nuance, 249, 250
NutraSweet, 20, 160
Nuts and Honey, 217
Ocean Spray, 247–248
Ogilvy, David, 78
Ohmae, Kenichi, 265
Oil of Olay, 140, 141
Oldsmobile, 117
Oldsmobile Ciera, 130, 134, 135
Old Spice, 122
O’Reilly, Anthony, 105
Orville Redenbacher, 216
Oxydol, 6
Pabst, 78, 84
Palmolive, 160
Pampers, 5
Parasuraman, A., 93, 96
Park, C. Whan, 220
Parkay, 72
Parker Pen, 264
Passion perfume, 194
Past-use experience, 16, 141–142
Patagonia sportswear, 171
Patents, 16, 21
PC Magazine, 165
Pedigree, 263
Pepperidge Farm, 224
Pepsi A.M., 249
Pepsi-Cola, 25–26, 49, 124, 126, 195
Pepsi Free, 160
Perceived quality, 16–19, 22, 28, 29, 31, 42, 78–103, 269, 270, 272
brand extensions and, 212–213
defined, 85–86
delivery of high quality, 94–96
matching actual quality with, 101–103
price as quality cue, 99–101
product context, 91–93
promotions to enhance, 170

Schlitz story, 78–85
service context, 91, 93–94
signals of high quality, 97–99
value of, 86–90
Perdue, Frank, 253
Perdue chickens, 20, 253
Performance, product quality and, 91, 94
Perrier, 42, 223
Pert Plus, 266
Peters, Tom, 50, 104, 165
Philadelphia cream cheese, 63
Phillip Morris, 83
PianoDisc, 241
Picture interpretation, 137, 138–139
Pierre Cardin, 122
Pillsbury, 25, 26, 140, 216, 223
Pillsbury Bake-Off, 169
Pillsbury Doughboy, 125, 169, 200–201, 223
PIMS database, 88–90, 100
PIMS Principles, The: Linking Strategy to Performance (Buzzell and
Gale), 88, 89
Playboy, 69
Plummer, Joseph, 139
Polo, 167
Pontiac, 117, 128
Pontiac 2000, 225
Pontiac 6000, 130, 134, 135
Porsche, 69, 122, 225
Positioning, 87; see also Brand associations
Positive feelings, 112–113, 190, 200–201
Posner, Fred, 34
Prego brand, 226, 227
Prell, 5
Price, 89
brand associations and, 114, 115, 120–122
premiums, 18, 19, 22–23, 46, 87
promotions, 11, 14, 42
as quality cue, 99–101
Price earnings (P/E) multipliers, 27
Prince, 125

Pringle’s potato chips, 5, 6, 166–167
Procter, Harley, 1
Procter & Gamble (P&G) Company, 1–6, 166–167, 226–227, 254, 258,
266, 267
Product attributes, 114–116
Product class, 114, 115, 126–127, 190–191
Product quality, 91–93; see also Perceived quality
Profitability, 89
Progresse, 226, 227
Projection research, 136
Promotions, 10–11, 167–171
Prudential Insurance Company, 197, 198, 201, 203
Psychological benefit, 118–120
Publicity, 73–74, 171
Purchase-likelihood measures, 23
QRS Music Rolls, 241
Quaker Oats, 123
Qualitative marketing research, 146
Quality, see Perceived quality
Quame, 214
Radio Shack, 96
Radisson Hotel, 99
Ragú, 227
Ralph Lauren, 167
Ranks Hovis McDougall, 28
Rational benefits, 118–120
Reason-to-buy, 86–87, 160–161
Rebates, 11
Redgrave, Lynn, 107
Reduced marketing costs, 46–47
Reebok, 125
Reeves, Rosser, 160–161
Reliability, 46
product quality and, 91, 92
service quality and, 91, 94
Rely, 5, 225
Reminder communication, 244–245
Rent-a-Wreck, 192
Replacement cost, 24
Repurchase rates, 44

Research International, 150
Reserve Cellars of Ernest & Julio Gallo, 122
Responsiveness, service quality and, 91,94
Return on investment (ROI), 88–89
Revlon, 123–124
Rewards for brand loyalty, 51–52
Rice-a-Roni, 204
Ries, Al, 181, 223
Right Guard, 226
Rinso, 4
RJR Nabisco, 8, 236, 258
Robinson, James, 78
Rolex, 69, 220
Rolls-Royce, 69, 219, 225
Ronald McDonald, 20
Rosen, Ben, 165
Roto-Rooter, 72
Royal Baking Powder, 258
Rubbermaid, 61
Ry-Crisp, 127
Sabroso, 128
Safeway, 165
Salem, 159
Samsung, 224
Sara Lee, 26, 125, 197
Saran Wrap, 142
Saratoga Water, 115
Satisfaction/dissatisfaction, 45, 47–49, 50–53, 86
Scaling brand perceptions, 135, 147–152
Schering-Plough, 124
Schick, 256
Schlitz, 78–85
Schultz, Charles, 112, 201
Schweppes, 124
Scope, 5
Scott Paper Company, 223
Sears, 122, 218, 222
Secret, 5
Segmentation commitment, 164
Self-analysis, 157–158

Serviceability, product quality and, 91, 93
Service quality, 91, 93–94
7–UP, 127, 160, 195
Shakespeare, William, 34, 181
Sharp, 160. 204–205
Sharper Image, 224
Sheraton Hotels, 95
Short-term performance, 11–15
Shriver, Pam, 125
Signals
identifying and managing, 164–166
understanding unanticipated, 166–167
Silent Floor, The, 191
Simon, Carol J., 25
Simplesse, 20
Skills, role of, 13–15
Sloan, Alfred, 117
Slogans, 72–73, 191, 204–205, 273, 274
Smucker’s, 25, 26
Snickers, 119
Snoopy, 201
Solo, 6
SONY, 69, 75, 265, 266, 274
Soviet Union, 128
Spic & Span, 5
Standard Brands, 258
Stock price movements, brand value based upon, 25–26
Stolichnaya, 128
Store choice decisions, 46–47
Stouffer’s, 75, 105, 107
Strategic value of brand loyalty, 46–49
Suave, 121
Subaru DRIVE program, 53
Sujan, Mita, 166
Sullivan, Mary W., 25
Sumitomo, 192
Sunbeam, 61
Sunkist, 8, 113, 175, 215, 222
Sunlight, 4
Surtees, Robert Smith, 206

Sustainable competitive advantage (SCA), 90, 212
Suzuki Samurai, 176, 177, 179
Swan, 4
Sweden, 128, 129
Switching costs, 40, 43–45, 51–52
Symbols, 73, 112–113, 184–185, 191, 197–204, 266, 273–274
attribute associations, 198–200
guarding, 203–204
as indicators of brands and product
classes, 202–203
positive feelings and, 200–201
upgrading, 203
Sytek, 165
Tab, 221
Tampax, 223
Tandem Computers, 93
Tangibles, product quality and, 91, 94
Target market, 157, 159–164
Target stores, 85–86
Tauber, Edward M., 206, 211, 229
Taylor, Elizabeth, 194
Tenneco, 197
Texas Instruments, 116, 249, 250
Tide, 5, 18
Tiffany, 161, 162
Timex, 220
Toshiba, 142
Toyota, 57, 60, 185
Toyota Cressida, 130, 133, 134
Trade guilds, 7
Trade leverage, brand loyalty and, 47–48
Trademarks, 16, 21
Trade-off (conjoint) analysis, 23
Transamerica, 73, 75
Transformational advertising, 163–164
Travelers Corporation, The, 73, 111, 198, 199, 201, 274
Trial purchase, 214, 215
Trout, Jack, 181, 223
Trustworthiness, service quality and, 94
Tukey, John, 130

Tuna Helper, 219
Turbo computer software products, 187
Tylenol, 176, 177–179, 225
Ultrabrite, 191
Uncola campaign, 127
Unilever, 4, 70, 194, 257
Unique selling proposition (USP), 160
Unitas, Johnny, 247
United Airlines, 193
US Air, 197
Use/application positioning approach, 114, 115, 122–123
User/customer positioning approach, 114, 115, 123–124
Vaseline Intensive Care Lotion, 229–231
V-8 vegetable juice, 63, 251
Velcro, 187
Vidal Sassoon, 202, 212, 214, 228, 266
Virginia Slims, 75
VISA Gold, 170
Visions, 61
Viva paper towels, 115
Volkswagen, 181–187, 225
Volkswagen Rabbit, 185, 186
Volvo, 75, 93, 114, 116
Vuarnet, 88, 212, 219–220, 224, 228
Waldenbooks, 53
Warner Brothers, 69
Wasa Crispbread, 127
Weight Watchers, 22, 75, 104–109, 113–116, 122, 215
Wells, William, 163
Wells Fargo Bank, 22, 110, 111, 168, 197, 200–203, 220, 274
Wendy’s, 189
Wesson, 216
Whiskas, 263
Wholesale case discounts, 11
Wilkinson, 256
Windex, 69
Winnebago Industries, 215
Wolfe, Tom, 38
Word association, 137–138, 193
WordPerfect, 35–37, 39, 191

Word-processing programs, 34–39
WordStar, 34–36, 38, 39, 45
WordStar 2000, 36, 38, 39
WordStar Professional, 38
WordStar Release, 35
Worthington Steel, 50
Xerox Corporation, 94
Yamaha Pianos, 75, 238–241, 243, 265, 275
Young, Shirley, 117
Young & Rubicam, 139, 141
Zeiss sunglasses, 116
Zeithaml, Valarie A., 93, 96
Zenith Corporation, 142

