International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing (2020) 17:353–373
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12208-020-00251-6
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations
and its relationship with the attitude toward charity
and donation intention
Leonilde Conceição da Silva 1 & Emerson Wagner Mainardes 1,2 &
Arilda Magna Campagnaro Teixeira 1,2 & Lindemberg Costa Júnior 3
Received: 19 November 2019 / Accepted: 2 June 2020 / Published online: 12 June 2020
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract
This study aimed to verify the effects that the factors which constitute the brand
orientation exert on the attitude toward charity and the donation intention. A
model capable of indicating the relationship between the dimensions of brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations (orchestration, interaction and affect) with
the attitude toward charity and donation intention was developed. The target
population is comprised of Brazilians who know about Nonprofit Organizations.
A sample of 340 respondents was obtained. The proposed model was analyzed
through Structural Equations Modeling (SEM) with partial least squares (PLS)
measurement. The results support the hypothesis that the attitude toward charity
has a significant influence on the intention of the Brazilians respondents to
donate to Nonprofit Organizations and that the interaction dimension positively
influences the attitude toward charity and the donation intention of these individuals, while the dimension of orchestration only influences the attitude towards
charity, and the dimension affects only the donation intention.
Keywords Brand orientation . Nonprofit organizations . Donation intention . Attitude

toward charity

* Emerson Wagner Mainardes
emerson@fucape.br; emainardes@kesservice.com.br
Leonilde Conceição da Silva
leonilde.mally@gmail.com
Arilda Magna Campagnaro Teixeira
arilda@fucape.br
Lindemberg Costa Júnior
lindemberg.junior@ifma.edu.br
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

354

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

1 Introduction
Nonprofit Organizations play a key role in society, representing an important element
for the economy and development of various countries (Hassay and Peloza 2009;
Apaydin 2011; Modi 2012; Chad et al. 2013). With the expansion in the number of
these organizations there was an increase in the dispute over resources (LaidlerKylander et al. 2007; Weerawardena and Mort 2008; Michel and Rieunier 2012),
which made fundraising a more difficult task, leading these organizations to seek ways
to improve fundraising to keep their operation (Sargeant 1999; Vázquez et al. 2002;
Chad 2013).
In this context, Nonprofit Organizations began to notice the need to employ
marketing practices similar to those adopted by the commercial sector (Ewing and
Napoli 2005; Macedo and Pinho 2006). Among these practices, brand orientation is
pointed out as attractive to Nonprofit Organizations (Hankinson 2001; Apaydin 2011;
Napoli 2006; Stebbins and Hartman 2013). Brand orientation refers to how the
organization deliberately creates, develops and protects its brands in order to achieve
its organizational objectives (Liu et al. 2015). Its application unifies internal and
external actors around a common purpose and gives organizations better results
(Laidler-Kylander et al. 2007; Kylander and Stone 2012).
It was verified in the literature that as the contributions of brand orientation of
Nonprofit Organizations were identified, it happened to be object of study in diverse
investigations in the nonprofit sector (e.g., Hankinson 2000, 2001; Ewing and Napoli
2005; Napoli 2006; Mulyanegara 2011; Apaydin 2011). However, there are still several
research opportunities on brand orientation in Nonprofit Organizations (LaidlerKylander and Simonin 2009; Modi and Mishra 2010; Modi 2012; Chad et al. 2013).
Based on the foregoing, it can be seen that the studies which investigated the brand
of Nonprofit Organizations (Hankinson 2000, 2001; Ewing and Napoli 2005; Napoli
2006) brought evidence of brand orientation in charitable organizations, identifying
ways of verifying it and perceiving its relation with performance. However, such
research does not make any reference to the relation of brand orientation of Nonprofit
Organizations with the attitude toward charity and donation intention. Thus, this study
aimed to verify the effects that the factors which constitute the brand orientation exert
on the attitude toward charity and the donation intention.
The present research is theoretically justified by extending the understanding of the brand
of Nonprofit Organizations, demonstrating that its constituent factors can influence the
attitude toward charity and donation intention. Thus, it can affect, for example, the pretension of the use of its services and the donations of time, money and/or goods. Differently
from other investigations that analyzed brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations, such
as Ewing and Napoli (2005), Napoli (2006) and Apaydin (2011), this study verifies how its
elements relate to and affect factors external to these organizations.
In this perspective, the literature presents evidence of the influence of brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations in donation intention. However, most studies
developed in this area have given little emphasis on the contributions that the brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations can exert on fomenting donations (Venable
et al. 2005; Stebbins and Hartman 2013). For example, the need for more research
which explores brand orientation and the intention to donate is pointed out by
Hankinson (2001), Napoli (2006), Apaydin (2011) and Zhang et al. (2019).

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

355

Therefore, one of the contributions of this study is the development of a model
capable of identifying the association between the factors that comprise the brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations (Ewing and Napoli 2005; Napoli 2006), the
attitude toward charity (Dean 2002) and the donation intention (Wang et al. 2004). This
allows a better understanding of how brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations can
influence fundraising, representing new possibilities for analyzing brand orientation in
this sector. It is important to highlight that the main novelty of this study is the analysis
of the dimensions of brand orientation, instead of analyzing brand orientation as a
single construct, this being the gap to be filled in this study. When analyzing each
dimension and its relationships with the attitude towards charity and the donation
intention, one can have an insight into what a Nonprofit Organization needs to do to
develop an attitude towards charity and donation intention. It is demonstrated that each
dimension behaves differently when they are inserted as antecedents of the attitude and
intention constructs.
This approach is also justified because brand orientation plays an important role so
that Nonprofit Organizations gain greater support from society, better perform
fundraising and more satisfactorily fulfill their mission (Apaydin 2011; Kylander and
Stone 2012). Given the above, in a practical way, the results of this study can provide
managers of Nonprofit Organizations with a comprehensive insight into the contributions of brand orientation to these organizations, providing insights into how the
dimensions of brand orientation affect attitude toward charity and donation intention.
This allows them to identify if their brands have these dimensions, and thus develop
strategies that can result in greater fundraising, better recruitment of volunteers, better
organizational performance, among others, thus obtaining competitive advantages.

2 Theoretical framework
2.1 Nonprofit organizations
Nonprofit Organizations make up the economy of many countries and contribute to the
well-being of society, exercising relevant roles of increasing importance in a global
context (Lee and Markham 2015). These organizations offer, for example, religious,
educational and health services (Hassay and Peloza 2009; Apaydin 2011; Smith 2018).
In some countries, they offer more jobs than the for-profit sector, thus reiterating their
growing social and economic relevance (Pope et al. 2009).
Like for-profit organizations, they also need resources to finance their operating costs and
achieve their goals. However, they increasingly depend on donations from different external,
individual and/or corporate sources (Mainardes et al. 2016; Valaskova 2019). According to
Ranganathan and Henley (2008) and Mainardes et al. (2017), individual donations have
been the main source of funding for these organizations.
In this context, given the significant increase in the number of Nonprofit Organizations, it is necessary to expand the fundraising through donations (Michel and
Rieunier2012; Laurett and Mainardes 2018). Nevertheless, the nonprofit sector is
becoming more and more competitive, making the attraction of funds and volunteers
more complex (Napoli 2006; Chad 2013). This hinders the development of activities
and the fulfillment of the mission of Nonprofit Organizations (Apaydin 2011).

356

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

For this reason, it is necessary for such organizations to adapt to the dynamic
environment in which they operate to obtain sustainable competitive advantages (Lee
2013). They need to, among other things, analyze how donors behave, identifying what
encourages them to donate (Ranganathan and Henley 2008; Curran et al. 2016; Smith
2018). According to Laurett and Mainardes (2018), knowledge of donor behavior
makes strategies for attracting and raising funds more consistent. Thus, in order to
obtain more resources, non-profit organizations began to investigate donor behavior,
verifying, for example, their intention to donate (Weerawardena and Mort 2008; Lwin
et al. 2014).
2.2 Proposed model
In order to achieve the objective of this study, we proposed the model presented in
Fig. 1. This model was built on the assumption that brand orientation can influence
attitudes toward charity and donation intention (Webb et al. 2000; Ellen et al.2006;
Barone et al. 2007; Russell and Russell 2010), and that the attitude toward charity may
influence donation intention (Dean 2002; Smith and McSweeney 2007; Teah et al.
2014). Therefore, the relations between the constructs that measured the effects of
brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations on the attitude toward charity and donation intention were taken into consideration.
In this regard, the constructs of brand orientation were admitted as elements that
influence the attitude toward charity and the donation intention (Webb et al. 2000;
Dean 2002; Ellen et al. 2006; Barone et al. 2007; Russell and Russell 2010).The
literature shows that the brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations generates positive consequences (Hankinson 2001; Ewing and Napoli 2005; Napoli 2006), enabling
better performance and internal and external guidance (Hankinson 2000; Kumar et al.
2011). For this reason, it is expected that the factors which constitute the brand
orientation of these organizations positively influence the attitude of Brazilians toward
charity and their donations intentions.

Fig. 1 Proposed model

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

357

It was assumed that the dimensions of brand orientation (orchestration, interaction
and affect) are antecedents of both attitude towards charity and donation intention. In
other words, the brand orientation activities of Nonprofit Organizations tend to be
reflected in society and in behaviors of individuals (represented here by the attitude and
intention). In the model developed for this study, the dimensions can influence the
intention directly or through the attitude, meaning that the attitude may not always be
necessary for the donation intention to happen. In this way, the model was developed
with direct and indirect influences from the dimensions of the brand orientation on the
donation intention.
2.3 Construct definitions
Intention is identified in the literature as an antecedent of individual behavior (Sheeshka
et al. 1993; White et al. 2017). The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) states that
intentions are the closest predictors of real behavior (Ajzen 1991). Thus, the TPB is
used to understand and predict human behavior, including donation (Cannière et al.
2009; Holdershaw et al. 2011). Mittelman and Rojas-Méndez (2018) cite that the TPB
has been widely used to predict donor intentions in a variety of activities, such as blood
donation (Veldhuizen et al. 2011) and organ donation (Hyde and White 2009).
However, although TPB has been successfully applied to predict the intention to donate
(Knowles et al. 2012; Mittelman and Rojas-Méndez 2018), its application is still
limited in the context of charity (Webb et al. 2000; Kashif et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2019).
The attitude towards charity can be defined as the global and relatively long-lasting
assessments of individuals in relation to non-profit organizations that help society
(Webb et al. 2000). In this way, the creation of favorable attitudes is one of the main
objectives of these organizations (Teah et al. 2014). Based on the definition of attitude
to charity used in this study (Webb et al. 2000) and in its proposed objectives, the
measurement of the attitude towards charity construct was carried out based on the
adaptation of the scale by Dean (2002), which is used to measure attitude towards an
event for people with disabilities. This scale was chosen because, after analyzing its
content, it proved to be more adequate to fulfill the objectives of this research,
compared to other scales, such as those employed by Van der Linden (2011) and by
Schuyt et al. (2010), which indicate they are more focused on measuring the intentions
of charity donation than the attitude.
Although brand building has long been adopted by commercial organizations as a
means of gaining strategic advantages in a competitive market (Anees-ur-Rehman et al.
2016; Freitas and Almeida 2017; Hahn et al. 2016; Hankinson 2000; Lee 2013; Iyer
et al. 2018), investigations into its relevance and attributions in the nonprofit sector are
recent (Ewing and Napoli 2005; Hassay and Peloza 2009; Modi and Mishra 2010;
Stebbins and Hartman 2013). Nonprofit Organizations serve diverse audiences, such as
revenue providers, clients, beneficiaries, employees and volunteers, and compete with
other organizations for funding, such as government funds, private and corporate
donations, volunteer support and clients (Apaydin 2011; Chad et al. 2013). In light
of this, brand orientation is relevant for these organizations (Anees-ur-Rehman et al.
2016; Hankinson 2000; Kumar et al. 2011; Paço et al. 2014), representing broader
attributions and providing guidance both internally and externally (Anees-ur-Rehman
et al. 2016; Laidler-Kylanderet al. 2007; Laidler-Kylander and Simonin 2009).

358

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

It was identified that many Nonprofit Organizations have adopted brand orientation
as an element of competitiveness. By doing so, they seek to convey their values to their
target audience in order to differentiate themselves from competitors (Hankinson 2001;
Lee 2013; Stebbins and Hartman 2013), get more support and trust from society,
improve fundraising, and better fulfill its role (Apaydin 2011; Chad 2013; Hankinson
2000; Kylander and Stone 2012). In this sense, the use of the brand as a strategic
resource is being increasingly adopted by the nonprofit sector when it comes to
obtaining resources and attracting volunteers (Apaydin 2011; Kylander and Stone
2012; Paço et al. 2014). Michel and Rieunier (2012) mention that the more favorable
the brand, the greater the potential for attracting donations. This is because the brand
orientation can contribute to the development of stakeholder confidence, the strengthening of awareness, the dissemination of the activities of these organizations and their
values (Hankinson 2001; Wymer et al. 2016).
Among the investigations on brand orientation present in the literature (e.g.,
Hankinson 2000, 2001; Ewing and Napoli 2005; Mulyanegara 2011; Paço et al.
2014), there is the study developed by Napoli (2006), which sought to identify
the effects of brand orientation, composed by the factors orchestration, interaction and affect, in the performance of Nonprofit Organizations of different sizes.
The results showed a positive relationship between the dimensions of nonprofit
brand orientation and organizational performance. It was also identified that the
Nonprofit Organizations which are more successful are more likely to be brand
oriented.
2.4 Donation intention
Among the investigations that analyze the behavior of individuals in terms of the
intention to donate to Nonprofit Organizations, it is cited, for example, Michel and
Rieunier (2012), Stebbins and Hartman (2013), Kashif et al. (2015), Mainardes et al.
(2017), Mittelman and Rojas-Méndez (2018), Zhang et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2019).
In their study, Michel and Rieunier (2012) examined the elements that make up the
brand image of Nonprofit Organizations and verified whether these images influence
people’s intentions to donate time or money. Stebbins and Hartman (2013) examined
whether brand personalities of small charities influence donor behavior. The authors
identified that the personality traits of these organizations impact on the donation
behavior of individuals.
Kashif et al. (2015) sought to identify the factors that contribute to donation in
Malaysia. It was noticed that past behavior, subjective norms and intentions to donate
contribute positively to the real behavior of donating money. When investigating
predictors of young people’s intentions to donate money to charity in the future,
Knowles et al. (2012) identified that attitude, moral norms and past behavior are
significant.
In their research, Mainardes et al. (2017) aimed to recognize and classify external
factors that encourage individuals from emerging countries to donate money and/or
assets to Nonprofit Organizations. The results showed that the five elements suggested
by the authors motivate the donation to these organizations: environmental and/or
political aspects, the cause or situation of the donation, the characteristics of the
organization, the influence of others and the effect of personal rewards.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

359

In a research in Saudi Arabia, Alhidari et al. (2018) analyzed the effect of trust on
individual monetary donations to Nonprofit Organizations. It was identified that trust is
manifested when individuals understand that these organizations fulfill their mission,
are honest in the use of donations and prioritize the rights of their beneficiaries. It was
also verified that trust influences both donation intention and future behaviors of
monetary donations.
Mittelman and Rojas-Méndez (2018), based on TPB, tested an expanded model of
donations to charity, analyzing three dimensions of attitudes: in relation to a charity, in
relation to aid and in relation to donation. They identified that the intention to donate is
strongly influenced by past behaviors, subjective norms and perceived behavioral
control. Similarly, also based on TPB, Liu et al. (2019) sought to identify the effect
of power on donation intention. The results showed a greater intention of donation in
individuals with a sense of power.
Zhang et al. (2019) verified the role of advertising appeals in donation intentions,
studying mediating effects of social connection and competitive orientation. It turned
out that a warm appeal tends to be more effective in attracting volunteers, and this
relationship is mediated by the social connection. A competent appeal is more effective
in attracting donations of money, and this relationship is mediated by competitive
orientation.
In this context, Baghi and Gabrielli (2013) say branding represents a valuable
strategic resource for the nonprofit sector when it comes to raising resources and
attracting volunteers (Kylander and Stone 2012; Paço et al. 2014). This is because,
for these organizations, the fact of being brand oriented contributes to achieving greater
support and trust in society, positively affecting their intentions, which tends to result in
greater fundraising and attraction of volunteers (Apaydin 2011; Chad 2013).
In this way, understanding the intentions of the donors has gained relevance for the
professionals of the nonprofit sector (Ranganathan and Henley 2008), because identifying what drives individuals to donate to Nonprofit Organizations is relevant for the
formulation of marketing strategies that wake in people favorable behavior to attitude
toward charity (Kashif et al. 2015).
2.5 Attitude toward charity
In the literature there are studies that investigated attitudes towards charity in different
situations, such as Webb et al. (2000), Dean (2002), Barone et al. (2007), Ranganathan
and Henley (2008) and Bennett (2015). Webb et al. (2000) sought to measure the
attitudes of individuals in relation to helping others and charitable organizations. They
identified that people with positive attitudes toward nonprofits tend to support such
organizations and see them as a suitable way to help others. The study by Dean (2002)
sought to assess the immediate effect of fictitious corporate support for charitable
events, observing the perceptions of the community related to the sponsoring company.
The results showed that sponsoring charitable events results in a significant improvement in consumer attitudes and community relations with the company.
In his study, Bennett (2015) investigated the intrinsic types of emotions which are
most strongly felt by people when they notice a charity advertisement. The objective
was to perceive its consequences in the attitude toward the marketing of these
organizations and in the donation intention. The author identified that the emotions

360

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

of the respondents are determinant to both the attitude towards the advertising of these
organizations and the donation intention.
Smith and McSweeney (2007) aimed to identify latent sociopsychological factors
that influence the decision to donate money to Nonprofit Organizations. Among other
factors, the authors noticed that attitudes significantly precede donation intentions.
Thus, measuring people’s attitudes toward charity is relevant. This is due to the fact
that such measures can be used to create and analyze theories of donation behavior, in
addition to helping to allocate resources to these organizations and to contribute in the
elaboration of marketing strategies capable of attracting and keeping donors (Webb
et al. 2000; Bennett 2003).
In this sense, Lwin and Phau (2014) mention that attitudes towards Nonprofit Organizations significantly motivate donation intention. Smith and McSweeney (2007) and Briggs
et al. (2010) state that people’s attitudes toward charities precede their intentions of giving;
that is, those who have positive attitudes towards these organizations are more inclined to
donate (Teah et al. 2014; Gorczyca and Hartman 2017). Although the literature (e.g., Webb
et al. 2000; Dean 2002; Bennett 2003; Smith and McSweeney 2007; Lwin et al. 2014;
Gorczyca and Hartman 2017) indicates the influence of the attitude toward charity in
donation intention, it was not identified the testing of this hypothesis in emerging markets,
which is the novelty of this hypothesis specifically. For this reason, this study aimed to to test
said hypothesis in the researched context to ensure that such a relationship is also observed in
that context. Thus, it was proposed:
H1: Attitude toward charity positively influences donation intention.
2.6 Brand orientation
As mentioned, Ewing and Napoli (2005) developed a scale to measure brand orientation in Nonprofit Organizations. This scale has 3 dimensions: orchestration, interaction
and affect. These constructs are related to each other, as they are part of the larger
construct brand orientation, but they are independent and this allows them to be tested
separately, checking the influence of each one on the others. It is noteworthy that it is
not possible to test the relationships between the constructs, as they make up a highorder construct.
The orchestration dimension analyzes the capacity of Nonprofit Organizations to
develop activities capable of communicating the same image of the organization to its
internal and external stakeholders, allowing nonprofit brand managers to act appropriately and perform their activities better (Hankinson 2001; Ewing and Napoli 2005). In
this sense, the literature points out that a greater agreement in the perception of the
stakeholders usually improves the attitudes of the clients toward the organizations and
influences their purchase intentions (Ellen et al. 2006; Barone et al. 2007). In other
words, orchestration can be understood as an antecedent of the attitude towards charity
and the donation intention, responsible for ensuring that the communication activities
of Nonprofit Organizations are reflected externally in society (Paço et al. 2014), which
comprises current and potential donors. Thus, the following hypotheses were proposed:
H2a: The orchestration dimension positively influences attitude toward charity.
H2b: The orchestration dimension positively influences the donation intention.
The interaction dimension enables the creation of dialogue with stakeholders,
providing an indication of the understanding of an organization’s ability to respond

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

361

to changes in the market in which it operates and to the needs of its target audience
(Ewing and Napoli 2005). Russell and Russell (2010) mention that a closer relationship
between organizations and their stakeholders often interfere favorably in their behavior.
Thus, broad interaction between a Nonprofit Organization and its public will certainly
lead to better service delivery, increasing performance (Napoli 2006), which will
possibly influence people’s attitude toward charity and donation intention. In this study,
it is assumed that the interaction of Nonprofit Organizations with their stakeholders can
have an impact on the behavior of actors connected to the organization (internally and
externally), which in turn can be reflected in positive behaviors of current and potential
donors (Zhang et al. 2019), especially in their attitudes towards charity and donation
intention. Therefore, interaction is, in this case, an antecedent of these two constructs.
Based on the evidence presented, it was proposed:
H3a: The interaction dimension positively influences attitude toward charity.
H3b: The interaction dimension positively influences donation intention.
The affect dimension allows the development of detailed knowledge by the Nonprofit Organizations on what their stakeholders like and what they do not like in their
brands (Ewing and Napoli 2005). According to Urde et al. (2013), it is necessary for
brand-oriented organizations to perceive how their brand-related activities are understood externally by their stakeholders. Webb et al. (2000) affirmed that identifying the
preferences of the target public of Nonprofit Organizations can influence future
attitudes toward these organizations and consequently impact donation intention. In
this study, it was assumed that the knowledge which Nonprofit Organizations develop
about their stakeholders tends to be reflected in society, including current and potential
donors (Kylander and Stone 2012). Thus, the affect dimension tends to be an antecedent of individual behaviors, such as attitude and intention. For this reason, considering
evidence presented, it was proposed:
H4a: The affect dimension positively influences the attitude toward charity.
H4b: The affect dimension positively influences donation intention.
In summary, brand orientation represents a tool which tends to enable a strategic
growth of Nonprofit Organizations (Kylander and Stone 2012). After all, it can provide
adequate communication with the press, volunteers, donors and public managers,
contributing to the construction of a favorable public opinion and to the achievement
of greater confidence from the society (Hankinson 2000). The novelty here is to
analyze each dimension of the brand orientation separately. This can be a facilitating
factor for the brand management by managers of Nonprofit Organizations, because, by
knowing the influences of each dimension on the attitude towards charity and the
donation intention, managers can direct their resources properly, instead of executing
the brand orientation as one inseparable block. By specifying the influences of the
tested dimensions, there can be a cost reduction in investments in Nonprofit Organizations’ brands.

3 Methods
In order to verify the effect that the constituent factors of brand orientation exert on the
attitude toward charity and donation intention, the target population of this research
were Brazilians who know Nonprofit Organizations and are, therefore, potential

362

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

donors. As it is not possible to measure the universe of Brazilians who know Nonprofit
Organizations, a non-probabilistic sampling was used.
It was opted the collection of primary data through the application of a questionnaire
made available in an electronic medium. To ensure that the respondent understood the
issues and was thus part of the research target audience, they were presented with a text
explaining what a Nonprofit Organization is and containing known examples of this
type of organization. Next, a control question was added, in which the respondent
declared to know some Nonprofit Organization.
Thus, the questionnaire was initiated with the question of population control (do you
know any Nonprofit Organization?) and then the affirmations referring to the constructs
were arranged. The first affirmations comprised the dimensions which form the brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations according to the scale developed by Napoli
(2006) containing 12 items (5 of orchestration, 5 of interaction and 2 of affect). The
second construct was donation intention, evaluated by a scale containing 3 items
adapted from the study by Wang et al. (2004). The third construct, attitude towards
charity, was measured through a scale adapted from Dean (2002), which consisted of 4
items. This scale, employed by the author to measure the attitude towards Special
Olympics, an event for people with disabilities, was used because it was the one whose
object of analysis resembled the most the object of this study. In order to understand the
profile of the sample, it was inserted questions to identify gender, age, schooling and
income of the interviewees.
The questionnaire was elaborated in an online platform and sent as pre-test to 20
respondents, ask them about the difficulties of understanding it. With no difficulties
being reported in the interpretation of the affirmations, the link of the questionnaire was
sent through electronic mail, WhatsApp, Messenger and Facebook. In an attempt to
increase the number of respondents and make the questionnaire available to Brazilians
from all over the country, it was used an advertisement on Facebook. Data collection
occurred between February and August 2018.
It was obtained a sample of 365 respondents, 25 of whom were excluded from the
analysis because they answered NO in the question of population control. According to
the data collected in relation to the sociodemographic profile, it was verified that the
respondents were mostly female (67.8%) and the ages ranging from 16 to 25 years
(36.9%) and 26 to 35 years (31.3%) were predominant. The most frequent levels of
education in the sample were high school/technical (55.9%) and complete undergraduate (20.3%). Concerning the income brackets of the interviewees, most earned
between 1 and 4 minimum wages (74.7%).
The researched sample was considered valid, as it represented the target population
of the study considering the general donor characteristics found in other studies (for
example, Michel and Rieunier 2012; Laurett and Mainardes 2018). It was also observed
that the Brazilian donor, sample of this investigation, has a similar profile compared to
the donor found in the international literature on donation (for example, Smith and
McSweeney 2007; Alhidari et al. 2018) with the exception of some characteristics
inherent to the Brazilian population such as lower age and education level.
In order to evaluate the proposed model, it was first performed the Confirmatory
Factor Analysis (CFA), which presented the factor loadings matrix, Average Variance
Extracted (AVE) and Composite Reliability (CR) of the analyzed constructs. Such
measures made it possible to verify the convergent validity.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

363

In order to ascertain the discriminant validity of the constructs, the factor loadings
matrix andthe criterion by Fornell and Larcker (1981), which makes a comparison of
the square root of the AVE of each variable with the correlations between the other
constructs, were verified. In order to have discriminant validity, the square root of the
AVE must be greater than the value of these correlations (Hair Jr et al. 2014). As a
technique to analyze relations and test the hypotheses, Structural Equation Modeling
(SEM) with partial least squares (PLS) was used. This technique allows a set of
dependency relations between the constructs to be verified simultaneously (Hair Jr
et al. 2014).

4 Analysis and discussion of results
4.1 Validation of the structural model
To validate the structural model, the CFA was firstly carried out to verify the factor
loadings of the variables measured. It was verified that most of the variables were
significant, reaching a value equal to or greater than 0.60 in their factor loadings (Hair
Jr et al. 2014). However, the variables OR1, OR3 and IN1 were excluded from the
analysis because they did not present sufficient factor loadings (lower than 0.60), and a
new CFA was performed without these items (Table 1).
Based on Table 1, also it was noticed that the factor loadings of the variables were
higher in the construct itself, which shows the convergent validity, since the variables
converge to the construct (Hair Jr et al. 2014). In addition, the distribution of factor
loadings indicated the presence of several constructs, evidencing the discriminant
validity.
From Table 2, it can be seen that the CR of the constructs obtained values above
0.70, demonstrating the robustness of the measures and indicating convergent validity
of the constructs (Hair Jr et al. 2014). Regarding the AVE, all the constructs showed
measurements greater than 0.50, which means that there is an adequate level of
convergent validity.
In terms of the discriminant validity, the criterion by Fornell and Larcker (1981)
were employed. It was identified, as highlighted in Table 2, that the square root of the
AVE presented was greater than the value of the correlations between the other
constructs. Based on this, the discriminant validity of the measurement model was
confirmed. Therefore, based on the analysis of the convergent validity and the discriminant validity of the constructs, it was verified that the measurement model used in this
research appears to be appropriate, showing adequacy between the adopted theory and
the study’s data (Hair Jr et al. 2014). In addition, as a final validation, the VIF (Variance
Inflation Factor) of the indicators that remained after the exclusions was checked. The
results varied between 1.2 and 3.4, within the limits indicated by the literature (Hair Jr
et al. 2014).
4.2 Hypothesis analysis and discussion
Based on the objectives of this study, the analysis of the significance of the relationships suggested by the hypotheses developed was carried out, verifying that the

364

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

Table 1 Factor Loadings Matrix
Constructs

Variables

AC

Attitude toward
charity (AC)

AC1 I admire Nonprofit Organizations

0.85

AC2 I have respect for Nonprofit Organizations

0.84

AF

OR

DI

IN

AC3 Nonprofit Organizations act with worthy causes 0.81
AC4 The objectives of Nonprofit Organizations are
relevant
Affect(AF)

AF1 Nonprofit Organizations seek to know what
people disapprove in their services

0.87

AF2 Nonprofit Organizations seek to know what
people like in their services

0.90

Orchestration(OR) OR1 I am directly encouraged by the marketing
activities of Nonprofit Organizations to use
their services and donate time, money and/or
goods to the organizations themselves;

Donation
Intention (DI)

Interaction (IN)

0.69

DRP

OR2 I believe that the brand of Nonprofit
Organizations represents their activities;

0.76

OR3 I am encouraged by the marketing activities of
the Nonprofit Organizations to promote and
disclose their services;

DRP

OR4 The marketing programs of Nonprofit
Organizations convey consistent messages
about their brands and activities;

0.84

OR5 I realize and understand well what brands of
Nonprofit Organizations represent;

0.69

DI1

I intend to use the services and/or donate time,
money and/or goods to Nonprofit Organizations;

0.80

DI2

Whenever I can, I recommend to others the
services of the Nonprofit Organizations that I
know.

0.80

DI3

I intend to maintain a close and long-term relationship with the Nonprofit Organizations I
know;

0.84

IN1

I have had positive experiences with the services
provided by the Nonprofit Organizations;

DRP

IN2

Nonprofit Organizations usually have ways to
receive suggestions from their target audience;

0.69

IN3

The adequate investments made by the Nonprofit
Organizations to improve the delivery of their
services makes me attribute more value to
these organizations;

0.78

IN4

When I need it, Nonprofit Organizations meet
my needs;

0.70

IN5

I consider that Nonprofit Organizations have
deep knowledge of the sector in which they
operate.

0.76

Caption: DRP = Drooped

365

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...
Table 2 Ave, Composite Reliability and Correlation Between Contructs
Constructs

AVE

CR

AC

AF

OR

DI

Attitude toward charity (AC)

0.64

0.88

0.80

Affect(AF)

0.79

0.88

0.34

Orchestration(OR)

0.58

0.81

0.49

0.39

Donation Intention (DI)

0.66

0.85

0.49

0.37

0.28

0.81

Interaction (IN)

0.51

0.80

0.52

0.49

0.55

0.46

IN

0.91
0.76
0.71

Caption: AVE – Average Variance Extracted; CR – Composite Reliability
Note: The values highlighted on the main diagonal correspond to the square roots of the AVE from each
construct

majority was significant (Fig. 2). Then, the findings of this research were compared
with the results of similar studies on brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations,
attitude toward charity and donation intention.
The logic proposed by the model employed in this study was that the dimensions of
brand orientation (orchestration, interaction and affect) are positioned as antecedents of
the attitude towards charity and the donation intention. Recognizing which dimensions
influence both constructs can facilitate the targeting of Nonprofit Organizations’
resources when developing their brand orientation strategy. As shown in the sequence,
dimensions behave differently.
Out of the 3 dimensions tested, only 2 influence the attitude towards charity
(orchestration and interaction) and 2 influence the donation intention (interaction and
affect). The interaction is the only one which influences both constructs and consequently should receive the attention of the managers of Nonprofit Organizations. The
affect influences only the donation intention, which indicates that investing in the
elements which make up the affect dimension does not tend to generate an attitude
towards charity and, for this reason, such an investment can be a waste of resources.
Orchestration, on the other hand, only influences the attitude towards charity, which

Fig. 2 Results of proposed model

366

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

indicates that investing in the aspects that make up orchestration to obtain donations
directly may not have the expected result, as it will be necessary to generate attitude
towards charity beforehand. The details of the analysis and discussion of each hypothesis can be seen below.
Based on the results presented in fig. 2, it was verified that the hypothesis H1, which
suggests the positive influence of attitude towards charity in the donation intention, was
supported (β = 0.343, p value<0.01). The result of this research, as expected,
strengthens previous findings (for example Webb et al. 2000; Bennett 2003; Smith
and McSweeney 2007; Lwin et al. 2014; Teah et al. 2014), pointing out that the
respondents’ attitude toward charity tends to influence donation intentions. In other
words, it was identified that the attitude to charity tends to lead them to use the services
provided by the Nonprofit Organizations, to make donations of time, money and/or
goods and to recommend the services provided by those organizations to other people.
Moreover, it tends to favor their intention to maintain a close and lasting relationship
with the Nonprofit Organizations they know. This means that if attitudes towards
charity are encouraged in people, it can result in donation intentions, which is the main
antecedent of donation behavior (Mainardes et al. 2017). The next step would be to
analyze what can stimulate the attitude towards charity; more specifically, in this study,,
if the dimensions of the brand orientation stimulate such an attitude as well as the
intention to donate, which was observed in the other hypotheses.
Hypothesis H2a, which dealt with the orchestration dimension positively influencing the
attitude toward charity, was supported (β = 0.273, p value<0.01). This result points out that a
greater harmony in the perception of the stakeholders usually improves the attitudes of the
individuals towards the organizations, resulting in more resources (Ellen et al. 2006; Barone
et al. 2007). Therefore, it is evident that the orchestration of the brand of Nonprofit
Organizations - that is, the representation of its activities by means of the brands, the
transmission of consistent messages about their brands and activities through marketing
programs - tends to favor the attitude towards charity. Thus, among other things, orchestration may influence the admiration and respect that these individuals have towards Nonprofit
Organizations. In this way, developing a brand orientation that clearly demonstrates the
activities of Nonprofit Organizations can stimulate an attitude towards charity in people.
Moreover, the marketing and brand management programs should be carried out professionally and taken seriously by Nonprofit Organizations. The orchestration can enable nonprofit organizations to develop activities capable of communicating the same internal and
external image, which helps them to better perform their services and achieve their goals.
The hypothesis that suggests the positive influence of orchestration on donation
intention (H2b) has been rejected (β = −0.086, p value>0.05). Thus, unlike previous
studies (for example, Hankinson 2001; Ewing and Napoli 2005), which pointed out that
the orchestration of nonprofit brand orientation may result in more donation intention,
the findings of this investigation suggest that the fact that these organizations send the
same image to their internal and external stakeholders does not tend to directly impact
the intention to donate time, money and/or goods to these organizations nor the use of
the services they offer. This relationship may be mediated through other factors, which
needs to be verified in future investigations. In other words, the proper communication
of the image of a Nonprofit Organization through the orientation of its brand does not
guarantee intentions of donation, but other elements, such as the attitude towards
charity itself, may influence the donation intentions.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

367

In relation to the interaction dimension, both hypotheses were supported: H3a (β =
0.340, p value<0.01), related to the interaction exerting positive influence on the
attitude towards charity, and H3b (β = 0.248, p value<0.01), which proposed that the
interaction positively influences the donation intention. Therefore, it is suggested that a
closer relationship between Nonprofit Organizations and their stakeholders can stimulate attitudes towards charity and this can be accomplished through the orientation of
the organizations’ brand, which is characterized by the availability of channels through
which people can provide suggestions and by the appropriate use of the resources that
these organizations have, can stimulate attitudes towards charity (Napoli 2006; Russell
and Russell 2010). In addition, the results expand the understanding of the contributions of the interaction dimension, indicating that it tends to help Nonprofit Organizations understand the needs of its target audience, enabling them to respond adequately
to the transformations of the market in which they operate. Therefore, guiding Nonprofit Organizations’ brands to interact with society can result in attitudes towards
charity, and that requires a specific effort from the managers of this type of
organization.
Furthermore, it was observed that the interaction dimension exerts a positive
influence on donation intention (H3b). It is evident that the motivation to make
different types of donations for Nonprofit Organizations as well as to use the services
they provide and recommend their services to others tends to be influenced by the
interaction of the brand with the stakeholders of these organizations. The results show
that the interaction can influence attitudes and intentions (Napoli 2006; Russell and
Russell 2010), hence indicating that this dimension can offer significant benefits for
Nonprofit Organizations by allowing them to better manage the relationship with their
stakeholders. Undoubtedly, the main benefit may be the intention to donate, which
tends to result in effective donations (Mainardes et al. 2017). This means that, when
orienting the Nonprofit Organization brand, the manager can focus on interaction with
society, since the expected effect tends to be favorable to the organization itself.
Still based on the findings presented in Fig. 2, the hypothesis which suggested the
positive influence of the affect dimension on attitude toward charity (H4a) was rejected
(β = 0.172, p value>0.05). This result appears to be in disagreement with the findings
by Webb et al. (2000), Napoli (2006) and Urde et al. (2013), which point out that
seeking to know the preferences of the stakeholders tends to influence the attitudes of
these individuals and the performance of Nonprofit Organizations in a positive way. In
this sense, it is evident that the affect, represented by the effort of these organizations in
finding out what people approve or not in their services, tends not to exert an influence
on the attitude toward charity. Such results suggest that the fact that non-profit
organizations seek to know what individuals like or dislike in their services does not
tend to be enough for people to perceive the causes defended by Nonprofit Organizations as worthy and their goals as relevant, and to have respect and admiration for these
organizations. Therefore, differently from what was expected, taking people’s opinions
about Nonprofut Organizations into account when orienting their brand tends not to
have an effect on people’s attitude towards charity. Other elements positively impact
the attitude towards charity (as seen here, orchestration and interaction), but this is not
the case with affect.
Unlike H4a, hypothesis H4b (β = 0.169, p value<0.01), which suggested the positive influence of the affect dimension on donation intention, was supported. It was

368

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

evident that the donation intention to Nonprofit Organizations tends to be motivated by
the search of what the stakeholders approve or disapprove in their brands and services,
as suggested by Webb et al. (2000) and Napoli (2006). Thus, the affect dimension of
Nonprofit Organizations brand tends to influence the intention to make donations and
may motivate, among other things, the intentions of these individuals to donate time,
money and/or goods. Although it does not influence the attitude towards charity, the
affect dimension of Nonprofit Organizations’ brand orientation can directly influence
donation intention. For this reason, it is important that organizations of this type know
their stakeholders in depth, as donations have been one of the main means of subsistence for them (Mainardes et al. 2017). This finding points out the importance of
Nonprofit Organizations’ managers getting closer to their stakeholders and developing
the orientation of their brands focusing on this aspect.
The determination coefficient (R2) was used in order to measure to what extent
the attitude toward charity and donation intention can be explained by the
orchestration, interaction and affect dimensions. The attitude towards charity
obtained R 2 = 0.34, which indicates that the orchestration and interaction
dimensions of the brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations explain in 34%
the construct attitude toward charity. The donation intention construct presented
R2 = 0.32, which suggests that it is explained in 32% by the dimensions of
interaction, attitude toward charity and affect. In this context, it can be noted
that the relevance of Nonprofit Organizations being brand oriented, that is, that
they create, develop and maintain their brands (Liu et al. 2015), knowing that this
provokes in people attitudes favorable to charity and influences them to make
donations, which consequently helps these organizations to perform better and
achieve their objectives (Kylander and Stone 2012).
In summary, it is considered that developing and correctly transmitting the dimensions of brand orientation (orchestration, interaction and affect) can help Nonprofit
Organizations obtain competitive advantages even in an increasingly competitive
scenario, because this tool can favorably influence donor behavior (Kylander and
Stone 2012; Sargeant 1999). Based on the results presented, it was noted that the use
of marketing mechanisms related to brands, specifically to brand orientation, can offer
significant benefits to the Nonprofit Organizations, allowing them to better manage the
relationship with their stakeholders and thus, perform their role better. Therefore, in
order to raise more funds and achieve better results in the dynamic context in which
they operate, Nonprofit Organizations can make use of these tools (Apaydin 2011;
Laidler-Kylander et al. 2007).
Thus, this study concluded that the brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations, as
well as the adequate development of marketing programs, can be fundamental for the
managers of Nonprofit Organizations. Among other things, it can provide these
organizations with greater trust, admiration, respect and support from their target
audience, thus increasing the fundraising and attraction of volunteers, which contributes to the achievement of a better organizational performance and satisfactory fulfillment of its mission (Kylander and Stone 2012). In this context, since brand orientation
plays a significant role in the elaboration of strategies and results in significant
advantages for Nonprofit Organizations(Hankinson 2001; Venable et al. 2005), it can
be concluded that the absence of a solid brand orientation could jeopardize the survival
of these organizations.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

369

5 Conclusions
The objective of this study was to verify the effects that dimensions of the brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations (orchestration, interaction and affect) exert in
the attitude toward charity and donation intention. Additionally, it aimed to verify the
influence of the attitude toward charity in donation intention. The results indicated that
the dimensions of brand orientation can influence in different ways the attitude toward
charity and the donation intention. Moreover, it pointed out that the donation intention
of these individuals tends to be positively influenced by the attitude toward charity, as
expected.
For this reason, it is recommended that Nonprofit Organizations seek to understand
and encourage people’s attitude towards charity, and, based on this, to establish
marketing strategies to attract donations of time, money and/or goods. It is also
suggested that these organizations be strongly brand oriented internally and externally
in order to create and maintain cohesive and consistent brands, which are capable of
positively affecting the attitude toward charity and the donation intention and of
contributing to their permanence in the market.
Brand orientation can represent a competitive differential for Nonprofit Organizations in the scenario in which they act, because it allows them to communicate the same
image of their brands both internally and externally, develop better communication
with their target audience and know their preferences, thus generating attitude toward
charity and donation intention. This occurs from a greater understanding of the
activities of the Nonprofit Organizations, aligning their brands to the activities that
they execute, developing means to receive suggestions from their stakeholders and
identifying their approvals and disapprovals regarding the services delivered, thus
providing orchestration, interaction and affect towards these individuals.
The present research contributed theoretically regarding the brand of Nonprofit
Organizations, advancing studies in this area by developing and testing a model capable
of indicating the relationship between the factors that compose the their brand orientation (orchestration, interaction and affect) with the attitude toward charity and the
donation intention. This enables a better understanding of brand contributions to the
charity sector and identifies their influences on factors external to these organizations.
This study also contributes theoretically as it is the first one to investigate how the
brand orientation of Nonprofit Organizations influences the attitude toward charity and
the donation intention, because no previous studies were found in the scientific
literature which proposed and tested such relationships. Thus, this research shows
how marketing practices similar to those employed in the commercial sector can be
attractive to the charity sector, identifying how brand orientation motivates people to
donate to Nonprofit Organizations and influences their attitude towards charity.
As a practical contribution, the results of this research provide the managers of Nonprofit
Organizations with a broader view of the benefits of brand orientation for their organizations,
since it provides information on how attitude toward charity and people’s donation intention
are influenced by the dimensions of brand orientation. Therefore, managers can check
whether their brands have the dimensions presented and develop strategies that can lead
their organizations to achieve greater support from society, thus obtaining more resources,
attracting more volunteers and improving the services rendered, which will certainly
guarantee them advantages for a better social performance.

370

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

It should be mentioned, as limitations of the study, the fact that the sample had a
small number of respondents, which does not allow the results to be generalized.
Despite this limitation, the results provide evidence of behaviors that can be confirmed
in future studies. Another limitation concerns the model proposed in the study, which is
summarized in the analysis of the influences of the brand orientation of Nonprofit
Organizations by only two factors (attitude toward charity and donation intention). It is
recommended that further studies be developed with models which identify the effects
of brand orientation on other factors external to Nonprofit Organizations, thus increasing the understanding of this subject in this sector.
For future research, it can be suggested research comparing the influence of brand
orientation of Nonprofit Organizations on the attitude toward charity and donation
intention of Brazilians with people from other countries, such as the United States,
Canada, the United Kingdom and Australia. Finally, it is recommended the development of research which identifies the influence of the brand orientation dimensions on
attitude toward charity and donation intention according to the segment of the Nonprofit Organizations in order to identify if the type of organization interferes in the
results, increasing or decreasing the effects of brand orientation on people’s attitude
toward charity and their donation intentions to such organizations.
Acknowledgements This research was supported by Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq/Brazil), project 304209/2018-0, by Foundation for Research Support of
Espírito Santo (FAPES/Brazil), projects 84513772 (599/2018) and 85395650 (228/2019), by Portuguese
Science Foundation (FCT/Portugal) through NECE (Núcleo de Estudos em Ciências Empresariais), project
UID/GES/04630/2020, and by IFTS (Instituto Fucape de Tecnologias Sociais), project 2018-2021.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
interest.

On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of

References
Ajzen, I. (1991). Theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50,
179–211.
Alhidari, I. S., Veludo-de-Oliveira, T. M., Yousafzai, S. Y., & Yani-de-Soriano, M. (2018). Modeling the
effect of multidimensional trust on individual monetary donations to charitable organizations. Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 47(3), 623–644.
Anees-ur-Rehman, M., Wong, H. Y., & Hossain, M. (2016). The progression of brand orientation literature in
twenty years: A systematic literature review. Journal of Brand Management, 23(6), 612–630.
Apaydin, F. (2011). A proposed model of antecedents and outcomes of brand orientation for nonprofit sector.
Asian Social Science, 7(9), 194–202.
Baghi, I., & Gabrielli, V. (2013). Co-branded cause-related marketing campaigns: The importance of linking
two strong brands. International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 10(1), 13–29.
Barone, M. J., Norman, A. T., & Miyazaki, A. D. (2007). Consumer response to retailer use of cause-related
marketing: Is more fit better? Journal of Retailing, 83(4), 437–445.
Bennett, R. (2003). Factors underlying the inclination to donate to particular types of charity. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 8(1), 12–29.
Bennett, R. (2015). Individual characteristics and the arousal of mixed emotions: Consequences for the
effectiveness of charity fundraising advertisements. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, 20(2), 188–209.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

371

Briggs, E., Peterson, M., & Gregory, G. (2010). Toward a better under standing of volunteering for nonprofit
organizations: Explaining volunteers’ pro-social attitudes. Journal of Macromarketing, 30(1), 61–76.
Cannière, M. H., Pelsmacker, P., & Geuens, M. (2009). Relationship quality and the theory of planned
behavior models of behavioral intentions and purchase behavior. Journal of Business Research, 62(1),
82–92.
Chad, P. (2013). Implementing market orientation in charities: A necessity for survival. Marketing Theory,
13(3), 303–322.
Chad, P., Kyriazis, E., & Motion, J. (2013). Development of a market orientation research agenda for the
nonprofit sector. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 25(1), 1–27.
Curran, R., Taheri, B., MacIntosh, R., & O’Gorman, K. (2016). Nonprofit brand heritage: Its ability to
influence volunteer retention, engagement, and satisfaction. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
45(6), 1234–1257.
Dean, D. H. (2002). Associating the corporation with a charitable event through sponsorship: Measuring the
effects on corporate community relations. Journal of Advertising, 31(4), 77–87.
Ellen, P. S., Webb, D. J., & Mohr, L. A. (2006). Building corporate associations: Consumer attributions for
corporate socially responsible programs. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(2), 147–157.
Ewing, M. T., & Napoli, J. (2005). Developing and validating a multidimensional nonprofit brand orientation
scale. Journal of Business Research, 58(6), 841–853.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50.
Freitas, F., & Almeida, V. M. C. D. (2017). Theoretical model of engagement in the context of brand
communities. Brazilian Business Review, 14(1), 86–107.
Gorczyca, M., & Hartman, R. L. (2017). The new face of philanthropy: The role of intrinsic motivation in
millennials’ atitudes and intente to donate to charitable organizations. Journal of Nonprofit & Public
Sector Marketing, 29(4), 415–433.
Hahn, I. S., Scherer, F. L., Basso, K., & dos Santos, M. B. (2016). Consumer trust in and emotional response
to advertisements on social media and their influence on brand evaluation. Brazilian Business Review,
13(4), 49–71.
Hair Jr., J. F., Sarstedt, M., Hopkins, L., & Kuppelwieser, V. G. (2014). Partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) an emerging tool in business research. European Business Review, 26(2),
106–121.
Hankinson, P. (2000). Brand orientation in charity organisations: Qualitative research into key charity sectors.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 5(3), 207–219.
Hankinson, P. (2001). Brand orientation in the charity sector: A framework for discussion and research.
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 6(3), 231–242.
Hassay, D. N., & Peloza, J. (2009). Building the charity brand community. Journal of Nonprofit & Public
Sector Marketing, 21(1), 24–55.
Holdershaw, J., Gendall, P., & Wright, M. (2011). Predicting blood donation behaviour: Further application of
the theory of planned behaviour. Journal of Social Marketing, 1(2), 120–132.
Hyde, M. K., & White, K. M. (2009). To be a donor or not to be? Applying an extended theory of planned
behavior to predict posthumous organ donation intentions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39,
880–900.
Iyer, P., Davari, A., & Paswan, A. (2018). Determinants of brand performance: The role of internal branding.
Journal of Brand Management, 25(3), 202–216.
Kashif, M., Sarifuddin, S., & Hassan, A. (2015). Charity donation: Intentions and behaviour. Marketing
Intelligence and Planning, 33(1), 90–102.
Knowles, S. R., Hyde, M. K., & White, K. M. (2012). Predictors of young people's charitable intentions to
donate money: An extended theory of planned behavior perspective. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 42(9), 2096–2110.
Kumar, V., Jones, E., Venkatesan, R., & Leone, R. P. (2011). Is market orientation a source of sustainable
competitive advantage or simply the cost of competing? Journal of Marketing, 75(1), 16–30.
Kylander, N., & Stone, C. (2012). The role of brand in the nonprofit sector. Stanford Social Innovation
Review, 10(2), 35–41.
Laidler-Kylander, N., & Simonin, B. (2009). How international nonprofits build brand equity. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 14(1), 57–69.
Laidler-Kylander, N., Quelch, J. A., & Simonin, B. L. (2007). Building and valuing global brands in the
nonprofit sector. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 17(3), 253–277.
Laurett, R., & Mainardes, E. W. (2018). Fatores pessoais que motivam a doação de dinheiro e/ou bens para
fins filantrópicos. Administração Pública e Gestão Social, 10(3), 188–198.

372

L. da Conceição Silva et al.

Lee, D., & Markham, P. (2015). Fundraising-related market orientation among non-profit organisations in
Hong Kong: A literature review and research agenda. Hong Kong Community College Working Paper
Series, 7(3), 1–9.
Lee, Z. (2013). Rebranding in brand-oriented organisations: Exploring tensions in the nonprofit sector.
Journal of Marketing Management, 29(9–10), 1124–1142.
Liu, G., Chapleo, C., Ko, W. W., & Ngugi, I. K. (2015). The role of internal branding in nonprofit brand
management: An empirical investigation. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 44(2), 319–339.
Liu, Y., Yuan, P., Lu, H., & Ju, F. (2019). The effect of power on donation intention: A moderated mediation
model. Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal, 47(10), 1–12.
Lwin, M., & Phau, I. (2014). An exploratory study of existential guilt appeals in charitable advertisements.
Journal of Marketing Management, 30(13–14), 1467–1485.
Lwin, M., Phau, I., & Lim, A. (2014). An investigation of the characteristics of Australian charitable donors.
Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 26(4), 372–389.
Macedo, I. M., & Pinho, J. C. (2006). The relationship between resource dependence and market orientation:
The specific case of non-profit organisations. European Journal of Marketing, 40(5/6), 533–553.
Mainardes, E. W., Laurett, R., & Degasperi, N. C. P. (2016). What motivates the women donate money and/or
goods?.Revista de. Gestão Social e Ambiental, 10(3), 32–50.
Mainardes, E. W., Laurett, R., Degasperi, N. C. P., & Lasso, S. V. (2017). External motivators for donation of
money and/or goods. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 22(2), e1568.
Michel, G., & Rieunier, S. (2012). Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving.
Journal of Business Research, 65(5), 701–707.
Mittelman, R., & Rojas-Méndez, J. (2018). Why Canadians give to charity: An extended theory of planned
behaviour model. International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing, 15(2), 189–204.
Modi, P. (2012). Measuring market orientation in nonprofit organizations. Journal of Strategic Marketing,
20(5), 447–460.
Modi, P., & Mishra, D. (2010). Conceptualising market orientation in non-profit organisations: Definition,
performance, and preliminary construction of a scale. Journal of Marketing Management, 26(5–6), 548–
569.
Mulyanegara, R. C. (2011). The relationship between market orientation, brand orientation and perceived
benefits in the non-profit sector: A customer-perceived paradigm. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 19(5),
429–441.
Napoli, J. (2006). The impact of nonprofit brand orientation on organisational performance. Journal of
Marketing Management, 22(7–8), 673–694.
Paço, A., Rodrigues, R. G., & Rodrigues, L. (2014). Branding in NGOs-its influence on the intention to
donate. Economics & Sociology, 7(3), 11–21.
Pope, J. A., Isely, E. S., & Asamoa-Tutu, F. (2009). Developing a marketing strategy for nonprofit
organizations: An exploratory study. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 21(2), 184–201.
Ranganathan, S. K., & Henley, W. H. (2008). Determinants of charitable donation intentions: A structural
equation model. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 13(1), 1–11.
Russell, D. W., & Russell, C. A. (2010). Here or there? Consumer reactions to corporate social responsibility
initiatives: Egocentric tendencies and their moderators. Marketing Letters, 21(1), 65–81.
Sargeant, A. (1999). Charitable giving: Towards a model of donor behaviour. Journal of Marketing
Management, 15(4), 215–238.
Schuyt, T. N., Bekkers, R. H. F. P., & Smit, J. H. (2010). The philanthropy scale: A sociological perspective in
measuring new forms of pro social behaviour. Social Work & Society, 8(1), 121–135.
Sheeshka, J. D., Woolcott, D. M., & MacKinnon, N. J. (1993). Social cognitive theory as a framework to
explain intentions to practice healthy eating behaviors. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 23(19),
1547–1573.
Smith, J. N. (2018). The social network? Nonprofit constituent engagement through social media. Journal of
Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 30(3), 294–316.
Smith, J. R., & McSweeney, A. (2007). Charitable giving: The effectiveness of a revised theory of planned
behaviour model in predicting donating intentions and behavior. Journal of Community & Applied Social
Psychology, 17(5), 363–386.
Stebbins, E., & Hartman, R. L. (2013). Charity brand personality: Can smaller charitable organizations
leverage their brand's personality to influence giving. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, 18(3), 203–215.
Teah, M., Lwin, M., & Cheah, I. (2014). Moderating role of religious beliefs on attitudes towards charities and
motivation to donate. Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, 26(5), 738–760.

Brand orientation of nonprofit organizations and its relationship...

373

Urde, M., Baumgarth, C., & Merrilees, B. (2013). Brand orientation and market orientation – From alternative
stosynergy. Journal of Business Research, 66(1), 13–20.
Valaskova, K. (2019). Financing principles of non-profit organisations: A case of Slovakia. Global Journal of
Business, Economics and Management: Current Issues, 9(2), 55–62.
Van der Linden, S. (2011). Charitable intent: A moral or social construct? A revised theory of planned
behaviour model. Current Psychology, 30(4), 355–374.
Vázquez, R., Álvarez, L. I., & Santos, M. L. (2002). Market orientation and social services in private nonprofit organisations. European Journal of Marketing, 36(9/10), 1022–1046.
Veldhuizen, I., Ferguson, E., de Kort, W., Donders, R., & Atsma, F. (2011). Exploring the dynamics of the
theory of planned behavior in the context of blood donation: Does donation experience make a
difference? Transfusion, 51(11), 2425–2437.
Venable, B. T., Rose, G. M., Bush, V. D., & Gilbert, F. W. (2005). The role of brand personality in charitable
giving: An assessment and validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33(3), 295–312.
Wang, Y., Po Lo, H., Chi, R., & Yang, Y. (2004). An integrated framework for customer value and customerrelationship-management performance: A customer-based perspective from China. Managing Service
Quality: An International Journal, 14(2/3), 169–182.
Webb, D. J., Green, C. L., & Brashear, T. G. (2000). Development and validation of scales to measure
attitudes influencing monetary donations to charitable organizations. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 28(2), 299–309.
Weerawardena, J., & Mort, G. S. (2008). Guest editorial: Nonprofit competitive strategy. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 13(2), 103–106.
White, K. M., Poulsen, B. E., & Hyde, M. K. (2017). Identity and personality influences on donating money,
time, and blood. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 46(2), 372–394.
Wymer, W., Gross, H. P., & Helmig, B. (2016). Nonprofit brand strength: What is it? How is it measured?
What are its outcomes? Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 27(3),
1448–1471.
Zhang, Y., Lin, C., & Yang, J. (2019). Time or money? The influence of warm and competent appeals on
donation intentions. Sustainability, 11(22), 6228.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Affiliations
Leonilde Conceição da Silva 1 & Emerson Wagner Mainardes 1,2 & Arilda Magna
Campagnaro Teixeira 1,2 & Lindemberg Costa Júnior 3
1

FUCAPE Business School, Maranhão, Av. dos Holandeses, Quadra 08, n. 01, 2° Andar, Ed. Biadene,
Ponta do Farol, São Luís, MA 65077-635, Brazil

2

FUCAPE Business School, Av. Fernando Ferrari, 1358, Boa Vista, Vitória, ES Zip code: 29.075505, Brazil

3

Federal Institute of Maranhão - Advanced Campus Porto Franco/Brazil, Rua Custódio Barbosa, n° 09,
Centro, Porto Franco, MA, Brazil

