Consumer preferences towards animal-friendly
fashion products: an application to the Italian
market

Mohamed Akli Achabou
Department of Marketing, Ipag Business School, Paris, France
Sihem Dekhili
CNRS, BETA, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, and
Anna Paola Codini
Department of Economy and Management, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy

Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to examine consumer preference for ethical fashion products by focusing on the importance of animal welfare attribute. To
explain the attitude-behavior gap, this research proposes to explore the costs and sacriﬁces associated with the adoption of responsible behaviors.
Design/methodology/approach – To analyze in which manner the animal welfare attribute impacts the consumer preference, the authors carried
two quantitative studies in the Italy context. The ﬁrst one (n = 224) proposes to measure the importance of this attribute in the case of luxury vs
accessible fashion. The second study (n = 101) examines how the attention given to animal welfare information could vary between prosocials and
proselfs. Conjoint analyses that consider “proportion of real fur”; “information about animal treatment” and “price” attributes have been realized.
To take into account the individuals characteristics, cluster analysis helped to identify different proﬁles of consumers.
Findings – The results reveal that even if consumers continue to prefer products made entirely from animal fur, they are sensitive to the information
on the animal treatment conditions. Also, the animal welfare is not the most important criterion in explaining preference for a fashion product. This
result varies, however, regarding the consumers’ social value orientation. Individuals with a high level of prosocial values give more importance to
the animal welfare attribute and are less reluctant to the reduction of the proportion of real fur in the clothes. Proself consumers associate a higher
sacriﬁce with the consumption of animal-friendly fashion products.
Research limitations/implications – This research enriches the limited literature on the consumers’ response to animal-friendly products. By
considering the consumers’ social value orientation, it provides a better understanding of the attitude-behavior gap in animal-friendly fashion
consumption. However, further studies should focus on the way of adapting communication on eco-products to the consumer proﬁle. Moreover, it
seems interesting to explore how the integration of innovative environmentally friendly materials can be accepted by the target. Replicating this
research with representative consumer samples from different countries is also necessary.
Practical implications – From a practical point of view, this research offers implications for managers operating in fashion apparel industry by
giving insights on the consumers’ preference for animal friendly fashion.
Social implications – This study gives recommendations to help convincing consumers about the importance of animal welfare attribute and to
increase their preference for animal-friendly fashion products.
Originality/value – Despite the extensive use of animal ﬁbers, fur and skins in the production of textiles, the few researchers who have shed the
light on the consumers’ response to animal-friendly products have considered mainly the case of food. Also, the marketing literature gives little
explanation of the attitude-behavior gap in ethical fashion consumption. By examining the consumers’ social value orientation, this study provides a
better understanding of this gap.

Keywords Fashion industry, Animal welfare, Conjoint analysis, Consumers’ preference, Proselfs, Prosocials

Paper type Research paper

1. Introduction

Globalization conducted to more complex supply chains that
become increasingly dispersed across the world. The fashion

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald
Insight at: https://www.emerald.com/insight/0736-3761.htm

industry is particularly concerned with this trend; many
companies have chosen to relocate their production to
developing countries to beneﬁt from lower costs. Laudal
(2010) notes that around 70% of clothes used in the European
Union come from developing countries. This movement has
led to the emergence of new social issues. In recent years, a
number of accidents in clothing factories have been the subject

Journal of Consumer Marketing
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 0736-3761]
[DOI 10.1108/JCM-10-2018-2908]

Received 18 October 2018
Revised 8 June 2019
12 March 2020
Accepted 20 May 2020

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

of extensive media coverage due to their magnitude. For
instance, in 2012, a ﬁre at a clothing factory in Karachi
(Pakistan) killed more than 300 workers; and in 2013, the
collapse of Rana Plaza in Bangladesh killed 1,100 people
(Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen, 2014).

In addition, there have been several scandals involving
animals in recent years:
for example, newspaper articles
(Bolton, 2015) have shown videos of animal cruelty in
crocodile farms particularly in Texas and Zimbabwe. Such
scandals have forced brands to react through two kinds of
strategic actions. On the one hand, some companies have
maintained their use of raw animal materials in production but
have included some initiatives in their supply chain. For
instance, the Italian textile brand Loro Piana, as part of its
commitment since 1994 to protect the vicuña, created the ﬁrst
nature reserve in Peru in 2008. Other companies have taken
more effort by opting for vertical integration. This is the case
with LVMH and Hermès, which have bought crocodile farms
in Australia. On the other hand, some brands like Stella
McCartney have decided to replace animal leather with an
environmentally friendly raw material.

The different strategic actions that aim to ensure animal
welfare may raise questions about their impact on business
performance. According to De Jonge and Van Trijp (2013),
from a long-term perspective, taking into account the animal
welfare issue offers different advantages: improving market
access when there are strict retailer demands, enhancing
production efﬁciency and providing added value to the
products. However, other authors (Vaarst and Alrøe, 2012)
pointed out that, in practice, creating a farming system in which
animals are able to satisfy their natural behavior involves a lot of
investment. In the same way, De Jonge and Van Trijp (2013)
argued that this choice could be a source of signiﬁcant
uncertainty, especially in terms of consumer’s willingness to
pay a premium for the animal welfare attribute. Animal welfare
could be deﬁned based on three levels: the animals should feel
well, they should function well and they should lead a natural
life (express their natural behavior). Animal suffering occurs
when animals “experience something difﬁcult or painful that is
too prolonged and too severe to cope with, as induced by
human subjectivity” (Plannthin, 2016, p. 62).

To our knowledge,

little research has examined the
consumer response to the animal welfare information, hence
the relevance of this study. More particularly, our research aims
to determine the consumer preference for animal-friendly
products, in the speciﬁc case of fashion industry.

Recent studies (Reimers et al., 2016) suggest that animal
welfare has a strong inﬂuence on the consumer perception of
ethical fashion, especially in the case of accessible brands. This
raises the question of whether the consumer sensitivity for the
animal welfare is also important in the luxury sector where the
use of animal raw materials is a generalized practice. This issue
is of major concern to the luxury clothing industry as the use of
sustainable substitute materials (e.g. synthetic fur) may
decrease the perceived quality and the ostentatious value of
luxury products (Dekhili et al., 2019), and thus could be
associated to a high perceived sacriﬁce for the consumer.

The costly signaling theory (Zahavi, 1975) with social values
orientation approach (Messick and McClintock, 1968) shed
useful light on the question. Following this theory, consumers

engaging in responsible behavior

can accept to purchase responsible luxury products, even
perceived of lower quality, to satisfy their need for status
(Griskevicius et al., 2010). According to Zabkar and Hosta
(2013),
is generally
synonymous of higher costs for the consumer as such, it can, on
one hand, act as a communicative signal of a persons’ capacity
to pay high prices, and on the other hand, be used as a means of
signaling that the person is “prosocial”, rather than a “proself”.
The combined use of the literature on costly signaling theory
and that on social values orientation will contribute to a better
understanding of consumer perception of animal welfare
attribute. In particular, it will give new insights into the costs
and sacriﬁces notions associated with the adoption of
responsible behavior (De Groot and Steg, 2009; Cameron
et al., 1998).

In view of the complexity of ethical clothing consumption
(Jägel et al., 2012), addressing in this article the animal welfare
issue could help explain the attitude-behavior gap that is
usually observed in this product category (Joergens, 2006).

2. Literature review

2.1 Emergence of slow fashion and importance of
animal welfare in consumer preference
“Fast fashion” refers to goods that are mass-produced, cheap,
fashionable and with a fast stock turnaround (Henninger et al.,
2015). This production model, introduced by Inditex Group
and H&M, adopts a philosophy of just-in-time and rapid
response to frequently renew the fashion offer and thus
maintain strong market growth. It is based on the principle of
planned obsolescence, which
regular
emergence of new styles and thus stimulates the consumer to
buy new products (Kim and Hall, 2015). Fast fashion model
also encourages more rapid disposal of
fashion apparel
(Nagurney et al., 2015). The average weight of clothing that is
rejected by a typical American each year is about 30 kg (Ha-
Brookshire and Hodges, 2009).

encourages

the

The fashion industry is also generally held responsible for
major social issues causing the death of more than 50 million
animals a year (Born Free USA, 2014). It is strongly associated
with the intensive use of animal ﬁbers (e.g. skin and fur)
(Sneddon et al., 2010). In addition, most mass-market retailers,
such as H&M, Nike and Zara procure their materials from
developing countries where social production conditions are
unfavorable. For instance, the monthly wage in 2013 of a
worker in the fashion industry remains very low (39$ per month
in Bangladesh, 80$ in Cambodia, 71$ in India, 79$ in Pakistan,
73$ Sri Lanka and 78$ in Vietnam) (Haque and Azmat, 2015).
In contrast to fast fashion, which focuses on aesthetic values
(self-oriented values), ethical
fashion considers extrinsic
factors, such as the conditions of clothing factory workers and
the
fashion
“incorporates fair trade principles with sweatshop-free labor
conditions while not harming the environment or workers by
using biodegradable and organic cotton” (Joergens, 2006,
p. 361).

environment. Ethical

protection

the

of

Some authors (Henninger et al., 2015) use the term of “slow
fashion”, which encompasses all the “sustainable”, “eco”,
“green” and “ethical” fashion movements. This new model not
the slowing down of production and
only encourages

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

consumption processes but also advocates the protection of
workers, communities and the environment (Ertekin and Atik,
2015).

animal welfare and slow fashion attributes, and conﬁrmed that
animal welfare exerts the strongest inﬂuence.

Ethical fashion nevertheless remains a very small part of the
fashion sector, representing approximately 1% of the world
supply (Phau et al., 2015). This weak development can be
explained by several factors:
(cid:1)

the incompatibility between the principles of CSR and the
low-cost economic model on which a large number of
fashion brands are based (Doorey, 2011);
the difﬁculty to implement CSR among suppliers in
developing countries (Stabile, 2000); and
the gap between the increasing social and environmental
Western consumers’ concerns and their purchasing
behavior (Achabou and Dekhili, 2015).

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Regarding the latter, consumers still not willing to sacriﬁce
products’ functional attributes in favor of the ethical ones. A
recent empirical study conducted on the French market
(Achabou and Dekhili, 2015) conﬁrmed that ethical attributes
are not an important differentiation factor in the fashion
market. In this vein, Eder-Hansen et al. (2012) have shown that
there is a widespread belief that sustainable garments are
neither elegant nor fashionable, and that the design and
appearance of eco-garments are outdated or even frumpy.
Globalization has distanced people from the environmental and
social consequences of the products they consume (Ertekin and
individuals can be unwilling to adopt
Atik, 2015). Thus,
environmentally friendly behaviors because of
feeling too
physically and culturally distanced from the problems caused
(Lyon, 2006).

If the literature on sustainability has placed the issue of
human well-being and environmental footprint at the center of
its concern, animal welfare has long been ignored. According to
Plannthin (2016, p. 51):

[. . .] those who have been highlighting the issues about animal welfare have
been ridiculed as emotional activists and extremists or are simply ignored by
an industry that has chosen to turn a blind eye to a subject that is far more
complicated to deal with due to traditions, cultures, and a lack of industrial
awareness.

The few researchers who have shed the light on the consumers’
response to animal-friendly products have considered mainly
the case of food (De Jonge and Van Trijp, 2013; Verbeke,
2009), and it is surprising to note the lack of academic
contributions on this subject in the case of apparel items.

Some authors (Hustvedt et al., 2008) argue that animal
welfare is of little importance to consumers when purchasing
clothes. Individuals seek for selﬁsh beneﬁts and take into
consideration personal and ﬁnancial needs, such as social
recognition and self-respect. Consumers are less likely to
associate the health of ﬁber-producing animals to the quality of
the animal ﬁber products they buy. Also, they give more
importance to other responsible attributes, such as child labor,
employee mistreatment or imprisonment and minimum wage
(Hustvedt et al., 2008). Leire and Thidell (2005) argue that the
proximity of the product to the consumer’s body or personal
activities is a crucial factor in the use of ethical information.

However, in a recent study, Reimers et al. (2016) identiﬁed
four factors that inﬂuence consumers’ perceptions of ethical
clothing items: environmental responsibility, employee welfare,

improving breeding conditions

2.2 The animal welfare issue in the luxury fashion
industry
luxury brands have been the most
In the fashion sector,
criticized by animal rights activists, who actively communicate
via shock campaigns and videos spread on social networks. In
response to these critics, some luxury companies have chosen
raw materials while taking
to continue to use animal
responsible actions
(e.g.
Hermès), others have decided to stop using these materials
(e.g. Calvin Klein, Stella McCartney, Ralph Lauren, Giorgio
Armani, Hugo Boss, Burberry, Gucci). This latter strategic
option was welcomed by animal rights activists. Nevertheless,
luxury brands that are willing to consider sustainability have to
face an important challenge, that of preservation of perceived
superior quality. Indeed, a contradiction between “luxury” and
“sustainability” could be perceived, leading to a decrease of the
quality of eco-luxury products (Dekhili et al., 2019). According
to Dekhili and Achabou (2016), while luxury is synonymous of
irreproachable quality, sustainability is linked to rationalization
and lower quality. Some research works (Griskevicius et al.,
2010) precise, however, that responsible luxury products, even
when perceived of lower quality, may fulﬁl the consumer’s need
for status. By preferring an eco-product of lower quality than a
conventional one,
they are
ﬁnancially able and willing to incur the cost of helping someone
even in the absence of any direct beneﬁt to themselves.

the consumers express that

The costly signaling theory (Zahavi, 1975) could help to
better understand the trade-off between costs and beneﬁts
associated with a purchase decision. It states that individuals
often engage in behaviors that are costly as a way of signaling
information about themselves. A study by McAndrew (2019)
that focuses on capitalistic societies indicates that the most
readily observable form of costly signaling is wasteful spending
on luxury goods that by deﬁnition are not essential for survival
in daily life. A person displaying luxury products signals that he/
she is wealthy and of a high social status (Berger, 2017). This
leads to an advantageous treatment of the signaler in social
interactions. For example,
individuals wearing expensive
branded clothing are more likely to achieve compliance to their
requests, be recommended for jobs, and they are more
successful when soliciting charitable donations from others
(McAndrew, 2019).

As an extension of the luxury-signaling approach, it has been
suggested that public prosociality,
such as conspicuous
generosity or environmentally friendly behavior, works in an
analogous way (Berger, 2017). The results obtained by Chance
et al. (2011) show that donating to a cause led to individuals
reporting higher subjective wealth, as the donation signaled to
others their prosperity. In the case of environmentally friendly
consumption, a typical example of a green signal that has often
been cited in the recent literature is that of the hybrid car
Toyota Prius. Compared to fuel-powered models in the same
price segment, Toyota Prius offers less comfort. This is the cost
that makes the signal reliable: only an individual who truly cares
about the environment is willing to forgo comfort for the sake of
the planet (Berger, 2017). In the same way, Griskevicius et al.
(2010) assert that by purchasing a Toyota Prius a consumer can

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

signal to others that he/she is a prosocial and not proself
individual. Consequently, the authors refer to “self-sacriﬁce”
concept when describing this behavior.

The acceptance to sacriﬁce certain beneﬁts related to luxury
goods (comfort, superior quality, etc.) is nevertheless not
guaranteed in the case of fashion products. As indicated by
Niinimäki and Hassi, 2011), fashion consumers differ from
consumers of other product categories when making ethical
consumption decision. For instance, Achabou and Dekhili
(2013) showed that the replacement of virgin raw materials by
recycled ones in a Hermès shirt affects negatively consumers’
preference. Recycling does not appear to be associated with
“prestige”. Moreover, consumers perceive luxury branded
products
they are
to be handmade and authentic as
manufactured by artisans using time honoured traditions and
natural ingredients (Cheah et al., 2016). In line with this idea,
Lee and Watkins (2016) argue that to be considered as
“luxury”, brands should contain luxury features (e.g. high
and provide
quality, prestige, high price,
psychological and emotional values.

exclusivity)

With this in mind, the limitation of the rate of animal raw
materials to include in luxury products, or their replacement by
other less prestigious materials, could conduct to negative
perceptions. Consequently, we may assume that in the textile
industry, the importance of the animal welfare attribute is less
important in the case of luxury fashion items. The following
hypothesis has been therefore formulated:

H1. The consumer preference for animal welfare attribute is
less important in the case of luxury fashion brands than
in the case of accessible brands.

2.3 The effect of social value orientation on consumer
preference for ethical products
Social value orientation (SVO) is “a central personality trait
that is closely related to social preferences and prosocial
tendencies and that can predict diverse forms of cooperative
behavior” (Yanyan et al., 2020, p. 1).

Depending on the importance people attribute to their own
and others’ outcomes, diverse types of SVO have been
identiﬁed, among which individualistic, competitive and
prosocial orientations are most common in daily life (Messick
and McClintock, 1968). Individualists tend to maximize self-
interests with no (or very little) regard for other’s outcomes;
and competitors tend to maximize their relative advantage over
others
Individualists and
competitors are often taken together as “proselfs”, because
both assign more weight to own than to other’s outcomes
(Steinel, 2015).

(Van Prooijen et al., 2008).

Prosocials persons, however,

tend to maximize joint
outcomes and equality in outcomes between themselves and
others. In comparison with proselfs, prosocials exhibit more
cooperation toward others, expect greater cooperation from
others, and tend to interpret others’ behavior more strongly in
terms of morality and fairness (Van Prooijen et al., 2008). In the
same vein, Yanyan et al. (2020) indicate that in simulated
business
levels of
concession and make more sacriﬁces. According to Stenstrom
et al. (2018), prosocial behavior has long perplexed researchers

relationships, prosocials

show greater

because it seems irrational to give one’s scarce resources away
for someone else’s beneﬁt. Some scholars have questioned the
existence of “true” altruism (behavior driven by authentically
selﬂess motives), whereas others have argued that individuals
experience psychological beneﬁts from prosocial behavior
(Johnson and Chattaraman, 2019). Stenstrom et al. (2018)
indicate, for their part, that people are generally motivated to
reciprocate an act of generosity. Committing a prosocial
behavior toward a speciﬁc individual could be an effective
means of obtaining their future support.

Pro-environmental and social initiatives (donating to charity,
contributing money to environmental organizations, signing
petitions against environmental harm, etc.) constitute a real-life
examples of social dilemmas[1] (Bogaert et al., 2008; Garling
et al., 2003). Acting pro-environmentally involves that people
beneﬁt others or the environment, while often these behaviors
do not provide any direct individual beneﬁt (De Groot and
Steg, 2009).

An environmental issue that is receiving a lot of attention in
the literature is the choice a mean of transportation (car vs
public transportation) (Bogaert et al., 2008). This choice
involves a trade-off between immediate self-interest (travel
time, ﬂexibility and convenience) and long-term collective
beneﬁt (pollution, public health). Researches mobilizing the
SVO approach indicate that prosocials usually prefer public
transportation whereas proselfs opt for traveling by car. When
evaluating a plan related to transportation pollution reduction,
proselfs perceive higher personal costs associated with the
program and show fewer support compared to prosocials.
The results obtained by Cameron et al. (1998), who focused on
the peoples’
to environmental
programs, conﬁrmed the same trend. Proself participants are
more inclined to send letters opposing the program because of
their
focus on personal costs, while prosocial
individuals are more likely to send letters of support. According
to De Groot and Steg (2009), people with a proself value
orientation tend to consider costs and beneﬁts of pro-
environmental behavior
them personally: when the
perceived beneﬁts exceed the perceived costs they perform an
environmentally friendly behavior and vice versa. In contrast,
people with strong altruistic values base their decision on
behaving pro-environmentally or not on perceived costs and
beneﬁts for other people.

(vs opposition)

stronger

support

for

Based on the theoretical elements presented above, we

postulate the following hypothesis:

H2. The animal welfare information has a stronger impact on
consumer preference when consumers have prosocial (vs
proself) value orientation.

3. Methodology and results

To obtain a comprehensive overview of how animal welfare
attribute affects the consumer preference of fashion products,
we conducted two quantitative studies. The ﬁrst one (Study 1),
by including two product categories, proposes to measure the
importance of this attribute in the case of luxury vs accessible
fashion (H1). The second one (Study 2), by considering social
value orientation (SVO), examines how the attention given to

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

animal welfare information could vary between prosocials and
proselfs (H2).

3.1 Study 1
3.1.1 Method
To test the hypothesis (H1), we carried out conjoint analysis.
This technique is among the most popular for measuring
consumer preference (Green and Srinivasan, 1990) and is
applied to a number of environmental issues (Achabou and
Dekhili, 2013).

3.1.2 Selection of attributes, products and brands
Green and Srinivasan (1990) recommend including no more
than six attributes in the deﬁnition of product proﬁles in
conjoint analysis and limiting the number of levels for each
attribute. In our study, we considered three attributes: ﬁrst, the
“proportion of real fur”; the question here is whether the
reduction in the use of animal fur in clothes could be positively
perceived by consumers. Our choice for animal fur can be
justiﬁed by the fact that it remains a raw material strongly
mobilized in the fashion sector, and that its use is especially
strongly criticized.

Second, the “information about animal treatment”. To
ensure good control over the production of animal raw
materials, several luxury brands have launched plans for the
creation or purchase of animal farms. These include a python
farm developed by Kering, a crocodile breeding farm set up by
LVMH and Hermès, and an animal welfare certiﬁcation
introduced by the Saga Furs auction house in Finland.
Through the mobilization of this attribute, we propose to
explore whether the display of commitment by fashion brands
towards animal welfare is perceived positively by the consumers
and whether it reassures them.

The third attribute is “price”. This is a determining factor in
the choice of responsible products. Overall,
the existing
literature shows that consumers are willing to pay premium
prices, only when the perceived quality of eco-products is
satisfactory (Gam et al., 2010).

Data have been collected in Italy,

the world’s most
fashionable country thanks to the many big fashion houses
located within its territory (Gucci, Versace, Valentino, Armani,
etc.). Our experimental design involves two brands with
different market positioning: “Kenzo”, a luxury brand; and
“Zara”, a more affordable one. The brands selected belong to
two leading groups in the fashion sector in Italy. In effect,
Inditex group (parent company of Zara) is ranked ﬁrst, with a
turnover of e1.131bn, while LVMH (parent company of
Kenzo) is ranked second, with a turnover on the Italian market
of e855m (Crivelli, 2016). In addition,
the two brands
considered have different level of commitment toward animal
welfare. Kenzo’s efforts in favor of sustainability emerge from
its recent “No ﬁsh no Nothing” campaign,
launched in
partnership with the Blue Marine Foundation,
the
for
protection of marine life, use of sustainable methods of ﬁshing
and creation of maritime reserves.

For its part, Zara is one of the most associated brands with
social scandals in the global fashion value chain (Perry and
Towers, 2013). In recent years, to improve its image, Zara has
included sustainability among its main values. With regard to

animal welfare, the Inditex group adopts a policy based on
three principles:
(cid:1) Goods of an animal origin used in the items supplied to
the Group shall come from species reared in farms to
obtain meat

(cid:1) Under no circumstances shall animal products deriving
from animals slaughtered exclusively to sell their skins,
shell, horn, bone, feather or down, be used

(cid:1) All animals used in such activity shall be treated in an
ethical and responsible manner” (Inditex, 2015, p. 5).

3.1.3 Product proﬁle design
The fashion product selected for the conjoint analysis is the
“jacket”, as this product is sold for both men and women. It is
also the product that most often uses animal fur. We assume
that consumers may have different preferences depending on
the proportion of real
fur used in the selected product.
Consequently, we distinguished among three different options:
jacket made entirely of real fur (100% real fur), jacket with a
high rate of real fur (70% real fur) and jacket with a low rate of
real
fur). To help consumers distinguish
percentages, we added a verbal description mentioning that
30% real fur corresponds to real fur inserts in speciﬁc parts of
the clothe (on the cuffs and on the neck); and that 70% real fur
means that more parts of the jacket were produced by using this
material (on the front and on the back).This description, more
tangible for the respondents, corresponds to the brands’
practices.

fur (30% real

In addition, we included two levels regarding animal
treatment attribute: presence of information on the responsible
treatment of animals used in the product; absence of
information on this attribute.

Finally, we chose three price ranges corresponding to the
price levels operated on the Italian market by Kenzo and Zara
brands. The attribute levels selected for the analysis are shown
in Table 1.

To reduce the number of alternatives we adopted a fractional
factorial design using R software. We thus implemented 11
alternatives for each brand, each of them resulting from a
different combination of
the
information on animal treatment and the price level. These
alternatives were presented to the respondents in the form of
labels (Figure 1). Respondents were asked to assign to each of

the proportion of real

fur,

Table 1 The levels of the attributes tested

Attributes

Levels

Proportion of
real fur

Animal
treatment

Price

Jacket made entirely of real fur (100% real fur)
Jacket with real fur inserts on the front and on the
back (70% real fur)
Jacket with real fur inserts on the cuffs and on the neck
(30% real fur)
The animal-derived materials used come from
responsibly raised animals
No information
Kenzo
820.00 e
1,560.00 e
2,400.00 e

Zara
49.99 e
79.99 e
149.99 e

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

Figure 1 Examples of tested labels

Table 2 Socio-demographic characteristics of
n = 224)

respondents (Study 1,

Kenzo jacket  

Zara jacket  

Made entirely of real fur 

With real fur inserts on the 
front and on the back 

The animal-derived 
materials used come from 
responsibly raised animals  

The animal-derived 
materials used come from 
responsibly raised animals  

€ 2,400.00 

€ 49.99 

the 11 alternatives a rating using a Likert scale from 1 (I don’t
like it at all) to 9 (I like it a lot).

Finally, respondents answered questions on their consumption
habits, concerns about environmental and social issues and socio-
demographic characteristics. All items for the survey was adapted
from established scales measured on a ﬁve-point Likert scale
ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. In terms of
“environmental concern”,
it was measured using the scale
developed by Thøgersen et al. (2010). The scale is derived from
the work of Grob (1995) and contains ﬁve items showing a
satisfactory reliability indicator of approximately 0.80.

To measure social concern, Shen et al.’s (2012) six-sitem

scale was used. A reliability index of 0.82 was observed.

3.1.4 Samples
After a pre-test with 138 Italian respondents (n Kenzo = 71;
n Zara = 67), the questionnaires were submitted online via the
Quick Survey website.
Individuals were contacted from
December 2015 to May 2016. We opted for a heterogeneous
sample including various ages, professions, income levels and
ecological concerns. This was facilitated by the fact that the two
brands tested are largely diffused.

The total completed questionnaires considered was 224
(n Kenzo = 118; n Zara = 106). The sample size is satisfactory as it
fulﬁlls the minimum size of 100 required in the conjoint
analysis (Cattin and Wittink, 1982).

In total, 54% of the participants in Zara survey were women
(vs 64% in Kenzo case), 36% (vs 34% in Kenzo case) were ofﬁce
workers, 13% (vs 10% in Kenzo case) self-employed, 12% (vs
8% in Kenzo case) manual laborers and 5% (vs 7% in Kenzo
case) retired. In terms of income, 63% of the respondents in Zara
survey (vs 54% in Kenzo case) earned less than 20000e annually,
nearly one-third of the participants (same rate in Kenzo case)
earned between 20000 and 40000e, and 8% of the sample (vs
14% in Kenzo case) earned more than 40000e (Table 2).

3.1.5 Results
Based on the output of the conjoint analysis conducted, we
calculated the relative importance of each attribute, using the
following formula:

½

IRj ¼ Max UjWji
Xk
ð
½
Max UjWji

½
(cid:3) (cid:4) Min UjWji

(cid:3)

Þ

½
(cid:3) (cid:4) Min UjWji

(cid:3)

(1)

i¼1

where IRj is the relative importance of the j attribute; k is the
number of the attributes included in the analysis; Max [UjWji]

Variables

Gender

Male
Female
Profession

Student
Ofﬁce worker
Manual laborer
Manager
Self-employed
Unemployed
Retired
Other
Yearly income
< 20,000 e
20,000 – 40,000 e
> 40,000 e
Total number of
respondents

No.of respondents
Kenzo survey

No. of respondents
Zara survey

42
76

0
40
10
9
12
4
9
34

64
38
16

48
58

19
39
13
0
14
8
5
8

67
31
8

118

106

is the maximum utility value associated with the Wji level of the
“j” attribute of the “i” product proﬁle; Min [UjWji] is the
minimum utility value associated with the Wji level of the “j”
attribute of the “i” product proﬁle.

In the case of Kenzo, the percentage importance of the three
attributes “proportion of real fur”, “animal treatment” and
“price” are 28.36, 29.98 and 41.67%, respectively. For Zara,
the percentage importance is 27.56, 26.96 and 45.48%,
respectively. The price is the attribute with the highest level of
importance in the case of both brands.

We then examined the utility values of the attribute levels.
The respondents’ perceptions are positive in the case of the
highest real fur rate (utility value = 10.087 for Kenzo and
10.056 for Zara). In contrast when the proportion of real fur
decrease, the perceptions of jackets became negative (utility
value = (cid:4)0.028 for Kenzo and (cid:4)0.031 for Zara in the case of a
30% rate; (cid:4)0.058 for Kenzo and (cid:4)0.025 for Zara in the case of
a 70% rate).

With regard to the information on animal treatment, the
results show that its presence is perceived positively by the
respondents (utility estimates = 10.249 for Kenzo and 10.223
for Zara), while the absence of information on animal treatment
is associated with a negative level of utility (utility estimate =
(cid:4)0.249 for Kenzo and (cid:4)0.223 for Zara).

As expected, the lowest prices (e820.00 in the case of Kenzo;
e49.99 and e79.99 in the case of Zara) corresponded to the
highest level of utility (utility value = 10.190; 10.164 and
10.065 respectively), while the highest prices (e2,400.00 and
e1,560.00 in the case of Kenzo; e149.99 for Zara) were
associated with a negative level of utility (utility value =
(cid:4)0.153; (cid:4)0.037 and (cid:4)0.229, respectively).

The results above indicate no major difference between the
two brands in terms of consumer preference for the animal
welfare attribute. Therefore, H1 is rejected.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

To explore the differences in consumer preference for the
social attribute tested regarding the individuals’ proﬁle, we
carried out a cluster analysis using the k-means technique.
The variables used to identify the appropriate number of clusters
were the utility estimates assigned by the 224 respondents to each
product proﬁle. Based on elaboration using R Project software,
we retained two clusters (within cluster sum of squares by cluster:
2148.243 1360.04; between_SS/total_SS = 75.4%).

Table 3 presents the relative importance of the attributes in
the selected two clusters (Cluster 1: 100 respondents; Cluster
2: 124 respondents).

While for both segments the most important attribute is still
the price (relative importance 40.65% for Cluster 1 and
45.75% for Cluster 2), the clusters reveal some differences.
Indeed, while the ﬁrst cluster assigns the greatest importance to
information on animal
treatment (relative importance of
34.06%, against 24.10% for Cluster 2), the second cluster gives
more importance to the proportion of real
fur (relative
importance of 30.15% against 25.29% for Cluster 1).

For further insight into these ﬁndings, we examined the
utility values of the attribute levels in the two clusters (Table 4).
The ﬁrst cluster assigns higher utility values to the proportion
of real fur (utility value for 100% real fur = 0.100 vs 0.049 in
the case of Cluster 2) and to animal treatment (utility value =
0.378 vs 0.123 in the case of Cluster 2).

The results clearly suggest that consumers in Cluster 1
support the continued use of animal fur in clothing and are
reassured by the fact that fur is coming from animals treated
responsibly. In Cluster 2, the low values given to the percentage
of real fur could be explained by consumers’ desire to reduce
in clothing. The information on
the use of this material
responsible farming does not
seem to convince them
completely.

Table 3 Relative importance of the attributes in the two clusters selected
(Study 1)

Attributes

Proportion of real fur
Animal treatment
Price

Cluster 1

25,29%
34,06%
40.65%

Cluster 2

30.15%

24,10%

45,75%

Table 4 Utility values of the attributes in the two clusters (Study 1)

Attributes

Levels

Cluster 1 Cluster 2

Proportion of
real fur

Animal
treatment

Price

Intercept

100% real fur
70% real fur
30% real fur
The company declares that the
animal-derived materials used
come from responsibly raised
animals
No information
Low
Medium
High

0.100
(cid:4)0.052
(cid:4)0.048
0.378

0.049
(cid:4)0.035
(cid:4)0.014
0.123

(cid:4)0.378
0.148
0.094
(cid:4)0.242
5.821

(cid:4)0.123
0.202
(cid:4)0.055
(cid:4)0.146
1.614

Moreover, the analysis of the consumer declarations on the
importance they attach to choice criteria when purchasing a
fashion product reveals some differences between clusters.
Cluster 1 seems to give more importance to the brand (average
score: 3.2 vs 2.5 for Cluster 2), while Cluster 2 considers more
the made-in and ecolabel (average scores: 3.5 and 3.3 vs 2.8
and 2.7, respectively for Cluster 1).

Finally, regarding the socio-demographic features, the two
clusters are similar in terms of average age (38.7 years old in
Cluster 1 and 35.8 in Cluster 2). However, Cluster 2 is mostly
composed of women (74% vs 42% in Cluster 1).

3.2 Study 2
3.2.1 Method and sample
To examine the effect of consumers social value orientation on
the importance of animal welfare attribute when purchasing
fashion products, we conducted a conjoint and a cluster
analysis. Study 2 replicated Study 1, testing the differences
between prosocials and proselfs.

As Study 1 showed no difference between the two brands
tested (luxury vs affordable), we took in Study 2 only one
product into consideration: Kenzo jackets. Indeed,
luxury
fashion industry is the largest user of animal raw materials,
including those very scarce (Dekhili et al., 2019).

After evaluating the 11 Kenzo product proﬁles used in Study
1, the participants to Study 2 answered questions concerning
their social value orientation and perceived sacriﬁce, in addition
to those related to socio-demographic characteristics and
consumers’ environmental and social concerns. All items for
Study 2 was adapted from established scales measured on a
ﬁve-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to
“strongly agree”.

To measure prosocial orientation, Webb et al.’s (2000) four-
item scale was adopted. Proself values were measured using
Eastman et al.’s (1999) ﬁve-item scale. In terms of perceived
sacriﬁce, it was measured using the four-item scale developed
by Rodier et al. (2012).

The questionnaires were submitted online via the Quick
Survey website from November 2019 to January 2020, and
involved Italian consumers. After eliminating uncompleted
responses, the total number of respondents considered was 101.
The characteristics of the sample are summarized in Table 5.

3.2.2 Results
The percentage importance of the three attributes “proportion
of real fur”, “animal treatment” and “price” are 27.94, 30.19
and 41.87%, respectively.

We observe that a luxury-clothing product made entirely
from real fur is perceived positively by consumers (utility
value = 10.074). When the real
fur rate decreases, the
perceptions became negative (utility value = (cid:4)0.023 in the case
of a 30% rate; (cid:4)0.052 in the case of a 70% real fur rate). In
addition, the presence of information on animal treatment is
perceived favorably (utility value = 10.310). As expected, the
lowest price corresponds to the highest level of utility (utility
value = 10.205).

To test the effect of prosocial and proself values, we carried
out a cluster analysis using the k-means technique. The
variables used to identify the appropriate number of clusters
were the utility estimates assigned by the 101 respondents to

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

Table 5 Socio-demographic characteristics of
n = 101)

respondents (Study 2,

Table 7 Utility values of the attributes in the two clusters (Study 2)

Attributes

Levels

Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Variables

Gender

Male
Female
Profession

Student
Ofﬁce worker
Manual laborer
Manager
Self-employed
Unemployed
Retired
Other
Yearly income
< 20,000 e
20,000 – 40,000 e
> 40,000 e
Total number of respondents

No. of respondents

36
64

15
51
2
3
19
1
3
7

31
51
19
101

each product proﬁle. Based on elaboration using R Project
software, we retained two clusters (within cluster sum of
squares by cluster: 1121.3766 697.0486; between_SS/
total_SS = 64%). Table 6 indicates the relative importance of
the attributes in the two clusters (Cluster 1: 48 respondents;
Cluster 2: 53 respondents).

Cluster 1 considers price as very important (45.05%), while
animal treatment and proportion of real fur are quite important
(28.73 and 26.22%, respectively). In Cluster 2, even though
price is important, its relative importance is lower than in
Cluster 1 (39.03%). Animal treatment and proportion of real
fur gain 31.49 and 29.48%, respectively.

We now examine the utility values of the attribute levels in

the two clusters considered (Table 7).

Table 7 shows that Cluster 2 is more sensitive to the presence
of information on animal treatment (utility value = 10.320 vs
10.299 for Cluster 1). Also, consumers in Cluster 2 valorize
lesser clothes made entirely from animal fur (utility value=
10.058 vs 10.092 for Cluster 1) and are less reluctant to the
reduction of real fur in luxury jackets (utility values= (cid:4)0.043 in
the case of 70% real fur; (cid:4)0.015 in the case of 30% real fur vs
(cid:4)0.061 and (cid:4)0.031, respectively, for Cluster 1).

The examination of consumers’ values in the two clusters will
help to determine the link between the consumers’ preference
for animal welfare and their social orientation. As indicated in
Table 8, the individuals in Cluster 2 expressing a higher
preference for animal welfare and ethical clothes are more
prosocials than their counterparts in Cluster 1 (MProsocial values

Table 6 Relative importance of the attributes in the two clusters selected
(Study 2)

Attributes

Proportion of real fur
Animal treatment
Price

Cluster 1

26.22%
28.73%
45.05%

Cluster 2

29.48%
31.49%
39.03%

Proportion of
real fur

Animal
treatment

Price

Intercept

100% real fur
70% real fur
30% real fur
The company
declares that the
animal-derived
materials used come
from responsibly
raised animals
No information
Low
Medium
High

0.092
(cid:4)0.061
(cid:4)0.031
0.299

0.058
(cid:4)0.043
(cid:4)0.015
0.320

(cid:4)0.299
0.182
0.125
(cid:4)0.308
5.462

(cid:4)0.320
0.225
(cid:4)0.108
(cid:4)0.117
1.795

Cluster2 = 4.28 and MProsocial values Cluster1 = 3.62; p < 0.05). In
the same sense, proself values are less important in Cluster 2
compared to Cluster 1 (MProself values Cluster2 = 2.15 and MProself
values Cluster1 = 3.08; p < 0.05). In addition, Table 8 highlights a
lesser perceived sacriﬁce in the case of Cluster 2 (MPerceived
sacriﬁce Cluster2 = 2.48 and M Perceived sacriﬁce Cluster1 = 3.03; p <
0.05), which is in line with the importance this group gave to
the price (Table 6: Cluster 2 is less sensitive to the price of
animal-friendly fashion products).

Based on the costly signaling theory, this indicates that
individuals in Cluster 2 are more willing to sacriﬁce other
beneﬁts (e.g. quality, comfort, status . . .) in favour of animal-
friendly fashion consumption.

These results allow us to accept H2.
In our analysis, we also measured consumers’ sustainable
concerns. Not surprisingly, individuals in Cluster 2 show a
higher
sensitivity Cluster2 = 4.18 and MSoc
sensitivity Cluster1 = 3.61; p < 0.05) and environmental (MEnv
sensitivity Cluster2 = 4.14 and MEnv sensitivity Cluster1 = 3.42; p <
0.05) sensitivity.

(MSoc

social

Finally, looking at the socio-demographic characteristics, the
two clusters are similar in terms of average age (35.7 years old
in Cluster 1 and 36.7 in Cluster 2). However, and as in Study 1,
Cluster 2 comprises a majority of women (72% vs 54% in
Cluster 1).

4. Discussion and theoretical contributions

research includes

several major ﬁndings. First,

This
it
contributes to the limited literature on the inﬂuence of animal
welfare information on consumer preferences for fashion
products. The results obtained indicate that the price remains a
decisive selection criterion in the case of textile items, which is
more important than social characteristics. Such ﬁndings
support the conclusions of Pookulangara and Shephard (2013)
who state that, although fashion consumers show a positive
attitude toward the protection of the planet, they rarely
transform such attitude into eco-fashion consumption; instead,
they continue to seek cheap and fast fashion. In the same line as
Verbeke (2009), we assume that consumers of fashion products
consider the animal welfare attribute only as a supporting
beneﬁt. In addition, because of the lack of transparency of most

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

Table 8 Consumers’ social value orientation and perceived sacriﬁce in the two clusters (Study 2)

Prosocial values
People should be willing to help others who are less fortunate
Helping troubled people with their problems is very important to me
People should be more charitable toward others in society
People in need should receive support from others
Proself values
I would buy a product just because it has status
I am interested in new products with status
I would pay more for a product if it had status
The status of a product is irrelevant to me
A products is more valuable to me if it has some snob appeal
Perceived sacriﬁce
I doubt the effectiveness of eco-fashion products
I am suspicious of the performance of eco-fashion products
I have doubts about the level of performance of eco-fashion products
Eco-fashion are not of the same quality as conventional products

fashion ﬁrms, consumers are not aware of the problems of
animal cruelty associated with the textile industry. Indeed, the
adoption of a responsible consumption requires certain level of
consumer knowledge (Gardetti, 2017).

Second, the investigation of the consumer behavior towards
animal-friendly fashion products contributes to the costly
signaling theory as it demonstrates that, globally, consumers
continue to prefer products made entirely from animal fur.
They do not seem willing to sacriﬁce their need for appearance
and ostentation (cost of the signal) in favor of an individual
prosocial status. According to Woodside (2012), in the fashion
sector, several consumers seek principally to fulﬁll their need
for conspicuousness. More particularly, fur is one of the
material that best meets this need:

When you wear fur, you have to assume it right through to the end, but
without vulgarity . . .. You have to wear fur like Alexis in Dynasty or
Samantha in Sex and The City, by totally assuming its conspicuous nature
(Ricou, 2014).

However, our result does not concur with the conclusions of
Griskevicius et al. (2010) suggesting that altruistic acts could be
used to signal prosocial value, rather than proself value of the
individual.

Third, by considering the contributions of the literature on
social value orientation (Study 2), our research provides a
better understanding of the attitude-behavior gap in animal-
friendly fashion consumption. Individuals with a high level of
prosocial values (low level of proself values) give more
importance to the animal welfare attribute and are less
reluctant to the reduction of the proportion of real fur in the
clothes. Proself consumers associate a higher sacriﬁce with the
consumption of animal-friendly
fashion products. The
perceived sacriﬁce/cost is greater in the particular case of luxury
products because of their important role as a social marker.
These results are consistent with the assumption of De Groot
and Steg (2009) mentioning that proself values play an
important role especially in the case of high behavioral costs
related to responsible actions.

Alpha

0.951

Cluster 1
Mean

3.62

SD

0.86

Alpha

0.920

Cluster 2
Mean

4.28

SD

0.765

0.920

3.08

1.06

0.915

2.15

1.126

0.920

3.03

0.903

0.929

2.48

1.000

Fourth, our ﬁndings suggest that the mention of information on
animal treatment reassures consumers and contributes to the
than self-sacriﬁce
development of
self-indulgence rather
(Johnson et al., 2018). The consumers consider that, as long as
the fur comes from well-treated animals, they can continue to
use products made entirely from animal raw materials and thus
meet their dual needs: aesthetics expectation and the need to be
perceived as a socially responsible person. Information on
satisfactory farming conditions allows consumers to neutralize
information on behavior considered unethical – the purchase of
products made entirely from animal raw materials – (Haug and
Busch, 2016). Thus, this research contributes to the cognitive
dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957) through illustrating the
trivialization mode of dissonance reduction (Simon et al.,
1995). To reduce the discomfort related to a dissonant
consumption situation (here the desire to consume clothes
from real fur is in contradiction with a responsible behavior),
individuals tend to devalue the problematic behavior. In this
way, our result refers to the concept of individualization that
supports self-expressive consumption (Sudbury and Böltner,
2011). As Bennett and Chakravarti (2008) have emphasized,
the valorization of green products is determined not only by
their social beneﬁts but also by their self-signaling potential.

Finally, our research conﬁrm that women are less reluctant
to the reduction of real fur in clothes than men. In this regard,
there is a consensus in the literature that women are globally
more sensitive to environmental and social issues. Dekhili and
Achabou (2014) asserted that women have a better
understanding and greater knowledge of responsible products.
In the speciﬁc case of textile products, Niinimäki and Hassi
(2011) argued that women are more concerned by ethical
issues. In this vein, Griskevicius et al. (2010) conﬁrmed that
men are generally more concerned about status-striving and are
more likely to engage in “show off” displays than women.
Similarly, Truong (2010) indicated that men are more
inﬂuenced than women by social prestige,
image, wealth
display and social recognition.

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

for

animal-friendly

5. Practical implications
Our results conﬁrmed that social attributes still constitute a
secondary decisive selection criterion. To convince consumers
about the importance of animal welfare attribute and increase
fashion products,
their preference
companies have several strategic options. First, the partners of
the company should be chosen with caution. In this way, Stella
McCartney is a very illustrative example: the brand, with a
business model founded on ethics, signed a partnership with
Adidas, involved in sweatshop controversy, to provide the UK
kit for the 2012 London Olympics (Marati, 2012). Within a
context of consumer skepticism toward ecological discourse,
fashion companies should ensure that the brand projects a
consistent ethical image (Phau et al., 2015).

Second, it is in the best interests of fashion brands to review
their relationships with suppliers in developing countries.
Textile companies have to be aware that the country of origin of
raw materials could damage brand image through a negative
publicity (Cheah et al., 2016). For instance, the scandal of
animal cruelty involving the wool supplier “Estancia La
Librun” may call into question the sincerity of the ethical
commitment of Stella McCartney and Patagonia. Fashion
companies can no longer simply impose codes of conduct as the
coordination model can lead to deviant behavior by suppliers to
avoid the costs associated with compliance to environmental
and social standards (Lim and Phillips, 2008). Thus, fashion
brands are encouraged to develop close relationships with their
suppliers and help them to adopt ecological standards by
strengthening their management capacities and cooperating
with local resources in developing countries (Lund-Thomsen
and Lindgreen, 2014).

Moreover, vertical integration is a viable option. It has been,
for example, considered by Hermès and LVMH, that bought
crocodile farms in Australia, giving them better control over the
quality of the raw material supplied, as well as over the animal
husbandry conditions.

In Italy, some initiatives have been adopted. For instance, the
Camera Nazionale della Moda Italiana (National Chamber of
Italian Fashion) published in 2012 a ten-point guide for the
development of responsible management models along the
entire value chain of the fashion industry “Sustainability
Manifesto for Italian Fashion”. This guide includes speciﬁc
indications on choosing materials derived from traceable crops
that have a lower environmental impact (for vegetable ﬁbers)
and that respect animals’ welfare (for animal ﬁbers, hides and
ﬁne materials).

through their

could develop,

from responsible

Third, a strategy of labelling to promote favorable animal
treatment conditions would be effective. In particular, luxury
trade union
companies
organizations (e.g. Comité Colbert in France), a label certifying
that the raw materials of animal origin used in their products
come
are
increasingly suspicious of environmental displays, the strong
luxury brands can reassure them regarding the
image of
credibility of ecolabels
(Dekhili and Achabou, 2014).
Consumers trust brands with good reputation because they
consider that known companies cannot risk damaging their
advantageous images by adopting greenwashing practices.

farms. While

consumers

Fourth, enterprises should consider the consumer egoistic
motivation to enhance the value of products comprising
sustainable substitute materials. In the case of companies that
cannot control animal husbandry conditions and therefore
choose to replace animal raw materials with, for example,
synthetic materials, we believe that marketers should associate
products with status. As Griskevicius et al. (2010) have
emphasized, the activation of status motives might produce
prosocial/pro-environmental tendencies. Relating to this point,
the selling prices of products using substitutes to animal raw
materials must be high. In accordance with the costly signaling
theory, purchasing expensive green products can strengthen
persons’ ability to signal wealth (Johnson et al., 2018).

Fifth, to promote their products containing substitute raw
luxury
materials,
in particular among proself consumers,
companies should adopt persuasion messages that reduce
perceptions of the personal cost induced by social actions (e.g.
the decrease of perceived quality in the case of replacement of
animal raw materials), rather than focus principally on the
expected social beneﬁce. This idea is in line with Cameron
et al.’s (1998) recommendation in the case of transportation
sector. The authors found that messages highlighting the
environmental beneﬁts are less effective in supporting
transportation pollution-reduction programs than messages
focusing on personal beneﬁts of carpooling (e.g. reduced
transportation costs, extra personal time during the commute).
In the luxury sector, an interesting example of reducing the
consumer’s perception of a sacriﬁce/cost related to the use of
new substitute raw materials is that of Stella McCartney. The
Founder of the brand highlights the importance to consider
intrinsic attributes (e.g. style, prestige) when offering an
animal-friendly product:

I think one of the biggest compliments is when I know people go in and buy
a Falabella bag or a pair of shoes, or a faux leather skirt, and they have no
idea they’re not real leather. I think that’s really where it becomes sexy.
Where you’re not just providing an alternative. . .you’re creating a great
product (Stella McCartney, ofﬁcial website).

Finally, our research reveals the importance of educating
consumers about animal welfare issue. Although some
respondents mention their awareness of the animal abuse in the
fashion industry, this does not appear to inﬂuence signiﬁcantly
their purchase decision. To reduce the attitude-behavior gap,
we believe that emotion-based communication could better
help to raise individual awareness compared to rationality and
morality arguments. Eckhardt et al. (2010) indicated that
television documentaries on child exploitation in carpet
manufacturing in developing countries have increased the
ethical sensitivity of Swedish and German persons.

6. Limitations and future avenues of research

several

research provides

theoretical and
Although this
managerial contributions, it has some limitations that offer
perspectives for future investigations. First, the study used
convenience sample, and considered Italian consumers only,
whereas the consumption of fashion products depends on the
individuals’
research with
representative consumer samples from different countries is
necessary. Then, even if the pre-test mentioned the need to give
participants precised information regarding the percentage of
70 and 30 of real fur in addition to the products’ proﬁles, we

culture. Replicating

this

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

kind

other

responses. Consequently,

this information may have biased the
can assume that
consumers’
of
presentations reducing the differences between the various
percentages should be set up. Moreover, given that the animal
welfare effect remains little studied to date in the marketing
literature, one new line of research would be to explore how the
integration of innovative environmentally-friendly materials
can be accepted by the target. The example of textile made of
Pinatex, a pineapple leaf ﬁbres that constitutes an alternative to
animal leather, seems interesting to be examined.

Another

limitation is that only one product category
(clothing) was tested. To enhance the external validity of our
results, further studies should determine the extent to which
the low valorization of the social dimension identiﬁed in the
case of jackets could cover other product categories.

Finally, a promising line of research would be to seek new
insights into the way of adapting communication on eco-
products to the consumer proﬁle. Our results conﬁrmed that
animal welfare information has a stronger impact on preference
when individuals have prosocial (vs proself) value orientation.
In this sense, 4.0 technologies could help to optimize the
information to provide to consumers. It would thus be useful to
investigate the example of smart ecolabels as they could offer
ﬁltered information. Prosocials may be exposed, for instance, to
information on production conditions and animal treatment
conditions when they read the smart ecolabel, while proselfs
could have access to speciﬁc information as the product quality.

Note

1 Social dilemmas are situations in which people are
confronted with a choice between personal and collective
beneﬁts (Kaiser and Byrka, 2011).

References

Achabou, M.A. and Dekhili, S.

sustainable development:
Business Research, Vol. 66 No. 10, pp. 1896-1903.

(2013), “Luxury and
is there a match?”, Journal of

Achabou, M.A. and Dekhili, S. (2015), “Constraints and
drivers of growth in the ethical fashion sector: the case of
France”, in Choi, T. and Cheng, T. (Eds), Sustainable
Fashion Supply Chain Management, Springer, pp. 167-181.
Bennett, A. and Chakravarti, A. (2008), “Self and social
signaling explanations for consumption of CSR associated
products”, Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 35, pp. 1010.
Berger, J. (2017), “Are luxury Brand labels and green labels
costly signals of social status? An extended replication”,
PLoS One, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 1-17.

Bogaert, S., Boone, C. and Declerck, C. (2008), “Social value
orientation and cooperation in social dilemmas: a review and
conceptual model”, British Journal of Social Psychology,
Vol. 47 No. 3, pp. 453-480.

Bolton, D. (2015), “Jane birkin asks hermès fashion house to
rename luxury birkin bags after animal cruelty concerns”,
The Independent, Tuesday 28 July.

Born Free, U.S.A. (2014), “Get the facts: ten fast facts about
fur”, available at: www.bornfreeusa.org/facts.php?blog=9&
more=1&paged=3 (accessed 20 March 2017).

Cameron, L.D., Brown, P.M. and Chapman, J.G. (1998),
take
of Applied Social

“Social
and
proenvironmental
Journal
Psychology, Vol. 28 No. 8, pp. 675-697.

orientations
action”,

decisions

value

to

Cattin, P. and Wittink, D.R. (1982), “Commercial use of
conjoint analysis: a survey”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 46
No. 3, pp. 44-53.

Chance, Z., Norton, M.I., Gino, F. and Ariely, D. (2011),
“Temporal view of the costs and beneﬁts of self-deception”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 108
No. 3, pp. 15655-15659.

Cheah, I., Zainol, Z. and Phau, I. (2016), “Conceptualizing
country-of-ingredient authenticity of luxury brands”, Journal
of Business Research, Vol. 69 No. 12, pp. 5819-5826.

Crivelli, G. (2016), “Moda, l’Italia fa volare i conti dei gruppi
esteri: inditex primo per ricavi, lvmh al secondo posto”,
available
at: www.ilsole24ore.com/art/moda/2016-09-20/
italia-volano-i-gruppi-esteri–121024.shtml?uuid=ADMWc2M
B&refresh_ce=

De Groot, J.I.M. and Steg, L. (2009), “Mean or green: which
values can promote stable pro-environmental behavior?”,
Conservation Letters, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 61-66.

De Jonge,

J. and van Trijp, H.C.

(2013), “Meeting
heterogeneity in consumer demand for animal welfare: a
reﬂection on existing knowledge and implications for the
meat sector”, Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics,
Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 629-661.

Dekhili, S. and Achabou, M.A. (2014), “Eco-labelling Brand
strategy: independent certiﬁcation versus self-declaration”,
European Business Review, Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 305-329.

Dekhili, S.

and Achabou, M.A.

et
développement durable: quelles sources de dissonance”,
Décisions Marketing, No. 83, pp. 97-121.

(2016),

“Luxe

Dekhili, S., Achabou, M.A. and Alharbi, F. (2019), “Could
sustainability improve the promotion of luxury products?”,
European Business Review, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 488-511.

Doorey, D.J. (2011), “The transparent supply chain: from
resistance to implementation at nike and Levi-Strauss”,
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 103 No. 4, pp. 587-603.

Eastman, J.K., Goldsmith, R.E. and Flynn, L.R. (1999),
“Status
scale
development and validation”, Journal of Marketing Theory
and Practice, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 41-52.

consumption

consumer

behavior:

in

Eckhardt, G.M., Belk, R. and Devinney, T.M. (2010), “Why
don’t consumers consume ethically?”, Journal of Consumer
Behaviour, Vol. 9 No. 6, pp. 426-436.

Eder-Hansen, J., Kryger, J., Morris, J., Sisco, C., Watson, D.,
Kiørboe, N., Dahlgren Petersen, S., BangLarsen, K. and
(2012), “The nice consumer. Research
Burchardi,
summary and discussion paper:
toward framework for
sustainable fashion consumption in the EU”, Danish Fashion
Institute, p. 58.

I.

Ertekin, Z.O. and Atik, D. (2015), “Sustainable markets:
motivating factors, barriers, and remedies for mobilization of
slow fashion”, Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 35 No. 1,
pp. 53-69.

Festinger, L. (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford

University Press, Stanford.

Gam, H.J., Cao, H., Farr, C. and Kang, M. (2010), “Quest for
the eco-apparel market: a study of mothers’willingness to

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

children”,
purchase organic
International Journal of Consumer Studies, Vol. 34 No. 6,
pp. 648-656.

cotton clothing fortheir

Gardetti, M.A. (2017), “Sustainability in the textile and
fashion industries: Animal ethics and welfare”, in Muthu, S.
S. (Ed.), Textiles and Clothing Sustainability, Springer Science
and Business Media, Singapore, pp. 47-73.

social

effects of

Garling, T., Fujiib, S., Garlinga, A. and Jakobsson, C. (2003),
value orientation on
intention”,

“Moderating
determinants of proenvironmental behavior
Journal of Environmental Psychology, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 1-9.
Green, P.E. and Srinivasan, V. (1990), “Conjoint analysis in
marketing: new developments with implications for research
and practice”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54 No. 4, pp. 3-19.
Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J.M. and Van den Bergh, B. (2010),
“Going green to be seen: status, reputation, and conspicuous
consumption”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Vol. 98 No. 3, pp. 392-404.

Grob, A. (1995), “A structural model of environmental
of Environmental

and behaviour”,
attitudes
Journal
Psychology, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 209-220.

Ha-Brookshire, J.E. and Hodges, N.N. (2009), “Socially
responsible consumer behavior? Exploring used clothing
donation behavior”, Clothing and Textiles Research Journal,
Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 179-196.

Haque, M.Z. and Azmat, F. (2015), “Corporate social
responsibility,
economic globalization and developing
countries a case study of the ready made garments industry in
Bangladesh”, Sustainability Accounting, Management and
Policy Journal, Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 166-189.

Haug, A. and Busch, J. (2016), “Towards an ethical fashion
framework”, Fashion Theory, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 317-339.
Henninger, C.E., Alevizou, P.J., Oates, C.J. and Cheng, R.
(2015), “Sustainable supply chain management in the slow-
fashion industry”,
in Choi, T. and Cheng, T. (Eds),
Sustainable Fashion Supply Chain Management, Springer
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 129-153.

Hustvedt, G., Peterson, H.H. and Chen, Y.J.

(2008),
and
impact”, International Journal of Consumer

animal welfare

“Labelling wool products
environmental
Studies, Vol. 32 No. 5, pp. 427-437.

for

Inditex (2015), “Annual report 2015”, available at: www.

inditex.com/about-us/our-brands/zara.

Jägel, T., Keeling, K., Reppel, A. and Gruber, T. (2012),
“Individual values and motivational complexities in ethical
clothing consumption: a means-end approach”, Journal of
Marketing Management, Vol. 28 Nos 3/4, pp. 373-396.

Joergens, C. (2006), “Ethical fashion: myth or future trend”,
of Fashion Marketing and Management: An

Journal
International Journal, Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 360-371.

Johnson, O. and Chattaraman, V. (2019), “Conceptualization
and measurement of millennial’s social signaling and self-
signaling for socially responsible consumption”, Journal of
Consumer Behaviour, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 32-42.

Johnson, C.M., Tariq, A. and Baker, T.L. (2018), “From
Gucci to green bags: conspicuous consumption as a signal for
pro-social behavior”, Journal of Marketing Theory and
Practice, Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 339-356.

Kaiser, F.G. and Byrka, K. (2011), “Environmentalism as a
trait: gauging people’s prosocial personality in terms of

environmental
Psychology, Vol. 46 No. 1, pp. 71-79.

engagement”,

International

Journal

of

Kim, H.S. and Hall, M. (2015), “Green Brand strategies in the
fashion industry: Leveraging connections of the consumer,
Brand, and environmental sustainability”, in Choi, T. and
(Eds), Sustainable Fashion Supply Chain
Cheng, T.
Management, Springer
International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 31-45.

Laudal, T. (2010), “An attempt

to determine the CSR
potential of the international clothing business”, Journal of
Business Ethics, Vol. 96 No. 1, pp. 63-77.

Lee,

J.E. and Watkins, B. (2016), “YouTube vloggers’
inﬂuence on consumer luxury Brand perceptions and
intentions”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 69 No. 12,
pp. 5753-5760.

Leire, C.

(2005),

and Thidell, A.

“Product-related
environmental information to guide consumer purchases - a
review and
perceptions,
understanding and use among nordic consumers”, Journal of
Cleaner Production, Vol. 13 Nos 10/11, pp. 1061-1070.

research

analysis

on

of

Lim, S.J. and Phillips, J. (2008), “Embedding CSR values: the
global footwear industry’s evolving governance structure”,
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 81 No. 1, pp. 143-156.

Lund-Thomsen, P. and Lindgreen, A. (2014), “Corporate
social responsibility in global value chains: where are we now
and where are we going?”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 123
No. 1, pp. 11-22.

Lyon, S. (2006), “Evaluating fair trade consumption: politics,
defetishisation and producer participation”, International
Journal of Consumer Studies, Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 452-464.

McAndrew, F.T. (2019), Costly Signaling Theory, Springer

Nature, Switzerland AG.

Marati, J. (2012), “Behind the label: is stella McCartney a
sustainable Brand?”, available at: http://ecosalon.com/behind-
the-label-is-stella-mccartney-a-sustainable-brand/
(accessed
10 February 2017).

Messick, D.M. and McClintock, C.G. (1968), “Motivational
basis of choice in experimental games”, Journal
of
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 1-25.

Nagurney, A., Yu, M. and Floden, J. (2015), “Fashion supply
chain network competition with ecolabeling”, in Choi, T.
and Cheng, T. (Eds), Sustainable Fashion Supply Chain
Management, Springer
International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 61-84.

Niinimäki, K. and Hassi, L. (2011), “Emerging design
strategies in sustainable production and consumption of
textiles and clothing”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 19
No. 16, pp. 1876-1883.

Perry, P. and Towers, N. (2013), “Conceptual framework
development: CSR implementation in fashion supply
chains”, International Journal of Physical Distribution &
Logistics Management, Vol. 43 Nos 5/6, pp. 478-501.

Phau, I., Teah, M. and Chuah, J. (2015), “Consumer attitudes
towards luxury fashion apparel made in sweatshops”, Journal
of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International
Journal, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 169-187.

Plannthin, D.K. (2016), “Animal ethics and welfare in the
in Muthu, S.S. and

fashion and lifestyle industries”,
Gardetti, M. (Eds), Green Fashion, Springer, pp. 49-122.

Application to the Italian market

Journal of Consumer Marketing

Mohamed Akli Achabou, Sihem Dekhili and Anna Paola Codini

Pookulangara, S. and Shephard, A. (2013), “Slow fashion
movement: understanding consumer perceptions - An
exploratory study”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Services, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 200-206.

Reimers, V., Magnuson, B. and Chao, F. (2016), “The
academic conceptualization of ethical clothing: could it
account for the attitude behavior gap?”, Journal of Fashion
Marketing and Management: An International Journal, Vol. 20
No. 4, pp. 383-399.

la

porter

Ricou, L. (2014), “Interview “karlvousparle”/shouroukrhaiem:
“ilfaut
ostentation,
fourrure
commesamanthadans sex and the city”, cheek magazine,
available at: http://cheekmagazine.fr/mode/shourouk-rhaiem-
il-faut-porter-la-fourrure-avec-ostentation-comme-samantha-
dans-sex-and-the-city/ (accessed January 25, 2019).

avec

Rodier, F., Boivin, C. and Durif, F. (2012), “Impact de la
valeur sur la consommation de produits alimentaires dits «
responsables ”, 28th AFM Congress, mai 9-11, 2012, Brest.
Shen, B., Wang, Y., Lo, C.K.Y. and Shum, M. (2012), “The
impact of ethical fashion on consumer purchase behavior”,
Journal
of Fashion Marketing and Management: An
International Journal, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 234-245.

Simon, L., Greenberg, J. and Brehm, J. (1995), “Trivialization:
the forgotten mode of dissonance reduction”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 68 No. 2, pp. 247-260.
(2010), “An
exploration of ethical consumers’ response to «animal
friendly» apparel labelling”, Journal of Research for Consumers,
Vol. 18, pp. 1-10.

J.A. and Souta, G.N.

Sneddon,

J., Lee,

Stabile, C.A. (2000), “Nike, social responsibility, and the
hidden abode of production”, Critical Studies in Media
Communication, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 186-204.

Steinel, W. (2015), “Social value orientation and deception: are
proselfs liars?”, Current Opinion in Psychology, Vol. 6, pp. 211-215.
Stenstrom, E.P., Saad, G. and Hingston, S.T. (2018),
“Menstrual cycle effects on prosocial orientation, gift giving,
and charitable giving”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 84,
pp. 82-88.

Sudbury, L. and Böltner, S. (2011), “Fashion marketing and
the ethical movement versus individualist consumption:
analysing the attitude behaviour gap”, in Bradshaw, A.,
Hackley, C., and Maclaran, P. (Eds), European Advances in
Consumer Research, Association for Consumer Research,
Duluth, MN, Vol. 9, pp. 163-168.

Thøgersen,

(2010),
J., Haugaard, P. and Olesen, A.
“Consumer responses to ecolabels”, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 44 Nos 11/12, pp. 1787-1810.

Truong, Y. (2010), “Personal aspirations and the consumption
of luxury goods”, International Journal of Market Research,
Vol. 52 No. 5, pp. 655-673.

Vaarst, M. and Alrøe, H.F. (2012), “Concepts of animal health
and welfare in organic livestock systems”, Journal of
Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, Vol. 25 No. 3,
pp. 333-347.

Van Prooijen, J.W., et al. (2008), “The egocentric nature of
procedural justice: social value orientation as moderator
of reactions to decision-making procedures”, Journal of
5,
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol.
pp. 1303-1315.

44 No.

Verbeke, W. (2009), “Market differentiation potential of
country-of-origin, quality and traceability labeling”, The
Estey Centre Journal of International Law and Trade Policy,
Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 20-35.

Webb, D.J., Green, C.L. and Brashear, T.G.

(2000),
“Development and validation of scales to measure attitudes
inﬂuencing monetary donations to charitable organizations”,
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28 No. 2,
pp. 299-309.

Woodside, A.G. (2012), “Economic psychology and fashion
marketing theory appraising veblen’s theory of conspicuous
consumption”, Journal of Global Fashion Marketing, Vol. 3
No. 2, pp. 55-60.

Yanyan, Q., et al. (2020), “Empathy or schadenfreude?
Social value orientation and affective responses
to
gambling results”, Personality and Individual Differences,
Vol. 153.

conscious

consumer behaviour:

Zabkar, V. and Hosta, M. (2013), “Willingness to act and
environmentally
can
prosocial status perceptions help overcome the gap? ”,
International Journal of Consumer Studies, Vol. 37 No. 3,
pp. 257-264.
Zahavi, A.M.

(1975), “Mate selection: a selection for
handicap”, Journal of Theoretical Biology, Vol. 53 No. 1,
pp. 205-214.

Corresponding author
Sihem Dekhili can be contacted at: sihem.dekhili@unistra.fr

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com