This article was downloaded by: [Memorial University of Newfoundland]
On: 03 August 2014, At: 01:16
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Services Marketing Quarterly
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wsmq20

Employee Based Brand Equity: A Third
Perspective
a

Ceridwyn King & Debra Grace

b

a

Department of Tourism, Leisure, Hotel and Sport Management,
Griffith Business School , Griffith University , Southport,
Queensland, Australia
b

Department of Marketing, Griffith Business School , Griffith
University , Southport, Queensland, Australia
Published online: 23 Mar 2009.

To cite this article: Ceridwyn King & Debra Grace (2009) Employee Based Brand Equity: A Third
Perspective, Services Marketing Quarterly, 30:2, 122-147, DOI: 10.1080/15332960802619082
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15332960802619082

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

Services Marketing Quarterly, 30:122–147, 2009
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1533-2969 print=1533-2977 online
DOI: 10.1080/15332960802619082

Employee Based Brand Equity:
A Third Perspective

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

CERIDWYN KING
Department of Tourism, Leisure, Hotel and Sport Management, Griffith Business School,
Griffith University, Southport, Queensland, Australia

DEBRA GRACE
Department of Marketing, Griffith Business School, Griffith University, Southport,
Queensland, Australia

Despite academics and practitioners alike promoting the positive
outcomes of employees being aware of the organization’s brand
in the context of their work environment, there appears to be no
evidence thus far to understand the impact of such brand building
efforts from an employee perspective. This article promotes that
there is, in fact, a third perspective of brand equity, that being
Employee Based Brand Equity (EBBE). In particular, a framework
of EBBE dimensions is developed herein, thus representing a significant contribution to the marketing literature and holding strong
relevance for service organizations around the globe. The benefits
derived from such a framework and, thereby, delivering value to
the organization are manifested in brand citizenship behaviors,
employee satisfaction and intention to stay with the organization,
as well as positive employee word of mouth. This article sets the
scene for future research within this important, but neglected,
research domain.
KEYWORDS brand equity, brand management, employee-based
brand equity, employees, service branding

Address correspondence to Debra Grace, Ph.D., Department of Marketing, Griffith
Business School, Griffith University, PMB 50, Gold Coast Mail Centre 9726, Queensland,
Australia. E-mail: d.grace@griffith.edu.au
122

Employee Based Brand Equity

123

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

INTRODUCTION
Organizations, in today’s competitive marketplace, continue in their struggle
to find the ‘holy grail’ of competitive advantage. In many cases, this struggle
has manifested itself in the provision of exceptional service, regardless of
whether the organization’s core product is a physical good or a service in
its own right (Henkoff, 1994). Thus, we see a shift in thinking toward the
new dominant logic for marketing, one in which the service provision (as
opposed to the provision of physical goods) is the basis for economic
exchange. Therefore, the new challenge for marketers resides within the
inherent difficulty in replicating something that is provided largely as a result
of human capital, that is employees (Sundaram & Webster, 2000). As such,
while traditionally the management of employees is delegated to the human
resources department, the fact that employees have been acknowledged as
representing an essential organizational asset in the realization of organizational goals (see for example Gronroos, 1979), suggests an urgency for
increased awareness on behalf of marketers with respect to the role of
employees in realizing their marketing strategies. Therefore, in order to
advance their quest for the elusive competitive advantage, astute marketers
may be wise to focus their energies towards harnessing the power of the
employee.
Consistent with the provision of exceptional service, investment in the
organization’s brand is considered to be a strategic weapon in the quest
for an edge over competitors (Kim, Kim, & An, 2003; Pappu, Quester, &
Cooksey, 2005). As a means by which to define themselves in contrast to
the competitors, organizations invest heavily in their brand. In doing so, a
bundle of benefits are promoted to consumers with an implied promise that
the organization will deliver. Therefore, just as it is the responsibility of the
employee to deliver the appropriate service, it is also the responsibility of
the employee to ensure that the brand promise is delivered in the manner
intended. This means that employees must understand the organization’s
brand and what it means to them in relation to their roles and responsibilities.
As such, internal brand management has taken on increased prominence,
given the pivotal role that employees play in the deliverance of the brand.
Brand building efforts are driven by a desire to build and maintain
strong brands so as to obtain a definite competitive advantage (Kim et al.,
2003; Pappu et al., 2005). Therefore, brand equity, as representing a measure
of such efforts, has interested academics and practitioners for several years.
However, despite internal brand building efforts being promoted in the
literature, conceptualization of the benefits of such an investment from an
internal perspective is lacking. While the literature currently stands
divided on the conceptualization of brand equity from a financial versus
consumer perspective, this debate is considered here to be incomplete. No

124

C. King and D. Grace

consideration has been given to understanding the ‘‘added value’’ attributed
to an organization’s brand as a result of employee based brand building
efforts. Therefore, this article promotes a third perspective upon which brand
equity should be considered and measured, that being employee based
brand equity (EBBE).

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

WHY A THIRD PERSPECTIVE OF BRAND EQUITY?
Brand management has emerged as a significant priority for both
management and academics, due to the growing realization that brands
are one of the most valuable intangible assets an organization can possess
(Keller & Lehmann, 2006). Through their ability to identify a source of a
product, assign responsibility to product maker, reduce consumer search
and risk costs, establish a promise, signify quality, and provide a symbolic
attachment (Keller, 1998), brands are considered to present advantages, both
economically and symbolically for consumers. In turn, financial benefits
can be realized by the owners of such brands (i.e., organizations) provided
that they are consistently able to deliver what is promised. It is for this
reason that brands are considered to be value generators for businesses
(Interbrand, 2007).
Successful brands are classified as such based on their ability to exhibit
high levels of brand equity. Papasolomou and Vrontis (2006) advocate high
brand equity as being evident to the extent that organizations exhibit characteristics such as higher brand loyalty, name awareness, perceived quality,
strong brand associations and credibility. Such non-financial measures or
consumer-based perspectives of brand equity are often combined with
financial measures, such as future earnings or market share, to gauge the
success, or otherwise, of organizations’ brand management activities (de
Chernatony & Cottam, 2006). With increasing academic and practitioner
interest in measuring the impact of brand management as manifested in
brand equity (e.g. Pappu et al., 2005; Srinivasan, Park, & Chang, 2005), de
Chernatony and Cottam (2006) suggest that rather than one comprehensive
methodology to evaluate brand success, there are a range of financial and
non-financial measures that collectively provide the necessary insight. Such
a multiple perspective is believed to be beneficial given that it reflects a number of different stakeholders’ perspectives (i.e. customers and shareholders).
However, in consideration that central to service brand management is the
employee, the brand equity literature falls short of accounting for another
stakeholder’s perspective, that being the employee. As organizations are
increasingly encouraging employees to embrace their role as brand ambassadors, given that they are considered key to the brand building process (de
Chernatony, Cottam, & Segal-Horn, 2006), brand equity research from an
employee perspective is warranted.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

125

With the marketing literature promoting the need for increased
understanding of the impact of brand building efforts, as encapsulated in
brand equity, in order to enrich future practices of brand management
(Pappu et al., 2005; Atilgan, Aksoy, & Akinci, 2005), such a measure is also
considered a requirement for sustained internal brand management
practices. Furthermore, with a growing emphasis on senior management
accountability and better marketing measures (Srinivasan et al., 2005), the
brand equity concept needs to extended internally in line with the adoption
of a balanced (internal and external) approach to brand management.
A review of the literature identifies a variety of definitions or views
(Keller, 1998; Kim et al., 2003) with respect to brand equity. While brand
equity is retained by, and therefore enhanced for, the brand’s owner (Ambler
et al., 2002), there are generally considered two perspectives, namely
financial or consumer (Kim et al., 2003). It is from either of these approaches
that the definition of brand equity is articulated. Supporters of the financial
perspective define brand equity as the ‘total value of a brand which is a
separable asset–when it is sold or included in a balance sheet’ (Atilgan
et al., 2005, p. 238). Measurement of brand equity, from this point of view,
is articulated solely in monetary terms. Another term for this perspective is
financial based brand equity. Conversely, customer based brand equity
(CBBE), represents the consumer perspective of brand equity and can be
defined as ‘‘the differential effect that brand knowledge has on consumer
response to the marketing of that brand’’ (Keller, 1998, p. 45).
Despite the shift in both the marketing literature and in marketing
practice towards a more balanced, internal=external approach to marketing
and, more specifically, brand management, the brand equity literature is still
strongly dominated by these two externally directed perspectives. This is
somewhat surprising given the emphasis afforded to the service-profit
relationship in the literature (see for example Zeithaml, Berry, &
Parasuraman, 1993; Heskett, Jones, Loveman, Sasser, & Schlesinger, 1994).
In particular, Heskett et al. (2001) developed a service-profit chain to
illustrate the relationships between employees, customers and profitability.
This model clearly depicts a chain reaction that begins with high quality
internal support services and policies and moves through to employee
satisfaction and loyalty, customer satisfaction and loyalty, and resulting in
organizational profit and growth (Heskett et al., 1994). In doing so, the
service-profit chain clearly demonstrates that satisfied, loyal and productive
employees act as catalysts for profitability maximization. So beyond the ‘nice
to have’ reasons to be good to your employees, there is a very real edge or
financial reason to do so also. However, no attempt, to date, has been made
to conceptualize the employee link from a brand equity perspective.
Consequently, the view promoted within the brand equity literature that
customer based brand equity is the driving force for financial based brand
equity (e.g. Lassar, Mittal, & Sharma, 1995) is believed to be too narrow.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

126

C. King and D. Grace

Consistent with the service-profit literature, the brand equity literature needs
to broaden its perspective. Recognition must be given to the benefits that are
derived from internal brand management as encapsulated in EBBE. Such an
investment contributes to consumer based brand equity, which in turn
underpins financial based brand equity (as shown in Figure 1). Conceptualization of EBBE, therefore, provides for a more comprehensive approach to
brand equity.
Being able to interpret marketing strategies and assessing the value of a
brand internally affords a measurable appreciation of various brand management efforts. It is from this perspective that the conceptualization of a third
perspective of brand equity is worthy of research. Strong, successful brands
are realized through positive employee behavior and given the paucity of
employee research currently in the area of internal brand management, this
conceptualization is justified on the grounds of filling this gap in the extant
literature.

SERVICE THINKING
In contrast to physical goods, the role of the employee in a consumer’s
evaluation of a service product is vitally important. In fact, ‘‘researchers point
out that for many services the experience itself is the key perceptual event
from the customer’s point of view’’ (Padgett & Allen, 1997, p. 52). The limited
physical evidence in a service often means that the service experience is an
outcome of the culture of the organization as well as the training and
attitudes of its employees (de Chernatony & Segal-Horn, 2003). Not only
the employee’s expertise, but also their ability to build and maintain relationships with customers, becomes an inseparable part of the service offering.
The significance of such thinking is further magnified in the context
of the new dominant logic for marketing, namely, the service-centered
dominant logic, promoted by Vargo and Lusch (2004a). This evolution of
traditional, tangible and transaction based marketing thinking was aptly summarized by Gummeson (1995, p. 250–251, as cited in Vargo & Lush, 2004a)
in saying ‘‘customers don’t buy goods or services: they buy offerings which
render services which create value . . . activities render services, things render
services.’’ In other words, customers don’t buy the hardware, the ‘bricks and

FIGURE 1 Components of brand equity.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

127

mortar’ of a television, rather they buy the service (i.e. entertainment) that
the television renders after the purchase takes place. As such, marketing is
being encouraged to move from a goods-dominant view, where the focus
is on discrete transactions and tangible output, towards a customer centric,
service-dominant view, in which intangibility, exchange process and relationships are central (Vargo & Lusch, 2004a). This being the case, the role of
employees, as being the gatekeeper for performing processes, exchanging
skills=and or services, in which value is derived for the consumer, is
amplified.
While the services marketing literature promotes alternate service
delivery modes, such as self service technologies (Meuter, Bitner, Ostrom,
& Brown, 2005), as a means by which to enhance the service encounter,
the significance of the employee role in the provision of service quality is
not negated. While technology developments can enhance service quality
and deliver financial benefits to the organization, such ‘enhancements’ can
also be less than profitable. In fact one company reportedly projected $40
million in savings as a result of online billing and servicing, yet realized an
actual $16 million loss (Meuter et al., 2005). This result was specifically
attributed to limited customer use, which, according to Bitner (2001), is
because customers do not always want technology to replace the interpersonal, employee-customer, exchanges. While there can be no denying
that the application of technology can provide new ways of delivering a
service and realize improved service quality levels for employees and
customers, consideration must also be given to the potential down side such
as loss of human contact (Bitner, 2001). It is for these reasons that Bitner
(2001, p. 376) identifies ‘‘many companies are coming full circle and now
offer human contact as the ultimate form of customer service.’’
Irrespective of whether a service is premised by human exchange or
facilitated by technology applications, the complexity for organizations to
meet customer expectations is magnified in a service encounter. This is
attributed to consumers struggling to articulate their expectations. Because
of the inherent characteristics of services, the formation of pre-purchase
expectations are complicated and increases the consumer’s perceived risk
when judging the performance of the service (Zeithaml & Bitner, 1996). While
Solomon, Surprenant, Czepiel, and Gutman (1985) argue that specific short
term goals of service encounters are clearly defined and agreed upon by
society, the roles of each participant are not always clearly defined,
particularly in a competitive and fragmented marketplace. In accordance
with role theory, whereby the behavior of an individual is evaluated as being
appropriate (or not) as determined by the reactions of other related
individuals, it becomes paramount that employees and customers read from
a common script (Solomon et al., 1985). In a desire to simplify this process,
organizations develop brands. In doing so, brands serve to shape both consumer and employee comprehension as to their role in the service encounter.

128

C. King and D. Grace

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Service Branding
While conceptually a brand is the same for a good or service (Vargo & Lusch,
2004b), branding plays a particularly significant role in the services arena
(Berry, 2000). This is attributed to the identified need to build trust and
confidence in consumers of a service due to the invisible nature of the
purchase (de Chernatony & Dall’Olmo Riley, 1999; Goldstein, 2003) as well
as the variability of the service encounter. Strong service brands are only
realized, however, when the communicated brand promise is consistent to
the brand experience delivered. Consumer’s perception of the service brand,
while initially formed by the marketing department in the form of external
communication, ultimately depends on employee–consumer interaction
and the consistency of service delivery (McDonald, de Chernatony, & Harris,
2001). As such, employees represent a powerful medium for building brand
meaning and brand equity (Berry, 2000). It is for this reason that internal
brand management practices are emerging as an integral part of an organization’s overall brand management strategy (e.g. Google, Starbucks, Virgin
Blue, and Southwest Airlines).
Through the adoption of internal brand management practices,
organizations can align their internal systems, network, and organizational
culture in order to realize customer expectations that are derived from the
organizations brand (Vallaster, 2004). Furthermore, Solomon et al. (1985,
p. 109) argues that ‘‘the setting the organization provides, together with
the implicit and explicit cues it gives service employees, helps to determine
the content of the employee role.’’ As such, it is from this perspective that the
organization’s brand can be considered the common script from which both
customers, and employees, read from, in order to determine the behaviors
appropriate for the service encounter. However, just as organizations cannot
expect to have all customers familiar with their role in the service encounter,
given that ideally the business is continually acquiring new customers
(Bateson, 2002); organizations cannot expect all employees to be familiar
with their role. Therefore, from an employee perspective, internal brand
management helps bridge the employee knowledge gap and, in doing so,
aligns customer brand expectations with employee performance. It is from
this perspective that Jacobs (2003) asserts that a brand represents the
relationship an organization has with its employees just as much as it
represents the relationship that it has with its customers.
Through the internalisation of the brand, employees are better
equipped to fulfil the explicit and implicit promises inherent in the brand
(Miles & Mangold, 2004). This is because the desired brand values, practices,
and behaviors are clarified and defined, providing a clear direction for all
organizational efforts (Tosti & Stotz, 2001). Without such internalisation,
the ability for employees to deliver the appropriate customer experience is
unlikely. In situations such as this, any external brand-building program is

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

129

likely to be unsuccessful (Jacobs, 2003). There is an inherent power in having
an informed workforce that is both able and committed to delivering the
brand promise (Aurand, Gorchels, & Bishop, 2005). Without such brand
knowledge, employees are unable to transform the brand vision into the
brand reality (Berry, 2000; Miles & Mangold, 2005). As such, it is imperative that marketers understand firstly, how to ensure employees’ posses the
required brand knowledge and secondly, how they can measure their internal branding efforts to ensure subsequent development and investment. It is
from these perspectives that the ensuing discussion seeks to define EBBE,
and in doing so, articulate the dimensions that underpin the definition as well
as provide measurable indicators of internal brand management efforts.

EMPLOYEE BASED BRAND EQUITY
Background
Given the commonly held view that Consumer Based Brand Equity (CBBE)
is the foundation upon which financial brand equity is obtained, it is appropriate to first consider how CBBE is built in the quest to further understand
employee-based brand equity. Drawing on the CBBE literature and, in particular, Keller’s (1993) conceptualization of CBBE, is relevant because having
knowledge of the brand is considered to be the driving force or the key to
creating brand equity. According to Keller (1998), brand knowledge consists
of a brand node in the memory with a variety of associations linked to it.
How these brand nodes are organized in one’s memory has a significant
influence on how individuals will recall information about a brand, which
ultimately influences their consumption behavior, as well as brand-related
decisions. While Keller (1993, 1998) relates brand knowledge to the
consumer, it is equally relevant to the employee. Alternatively, the key to
employees being able to deliver the brand promise is brand knowledge.
Consistent with the consumer view, if employees are void of brand knowledge, they are not able to behave in the manner desired by the organization
nor are they able to make brand-related decisions.
However, the idea of developing an employer brand, which runs as a
separate identity parallel to the external brand, albeit consistently, is invalid
(Backhaus & Tikoo, 2004). Employees do not exist within a bubble that
enables them to separate external information from the internally generated
information. The desire to build ‘an identifiable and unique employer
identity’ (Backhaus & Tikoo, 2004) in an existing, or potential, employee’s
mind needs to be considered in the broader context of the existing,
externally-formed, brand knowledge structures. That is, there is only one
organization brand and it is from this single brand identity that various manifestations of it are formed depending on the outcome desired. The different

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

130

C. King and D. Grace

outcomes are embedded in the behaviors that an organization wants
consumers, versus employees, to exhibit as a result of having this knowledge. From a consumer perspective, the organization wants to engender a
consumption behavior that is long term. In contrast, from an employee
perspective, the behavior is a work-related behavior, centred around
delivering on the brand promise. Regardless of how these behaviors are
manifested, the fact remains that the information source from which these
behaviors originate is the same.
EBBE, therefore, is not so much concerned with the creation of a brand
identity, as organizations create this as a matter of course in their pursuit of a
competitive advantage. Rather, EBBE, which can be defined as the differential effect that brand knowledge has on an employee’s response to their work
environment, requires the translation of the brand identity in a way that is
meaningful to the employee in the context of their roles and responsibilities.
Through this process, appropriate employee brand knowledge structures are
created that enable the attraction and retention of, as well as motivation for,
employees to deliver the brand promise. Organizations need to make the
brand meaningful and relevant for the consumers to see value and, in turn,
exhibit positive consumption behaviors. They also need to make the brand
meaningful and relevant for the employees to see value, in order to exhibit
positive work-related behaviors, which in turn manifest itself in brand equity.
Appropriate brand knowledge structures are an important distinction.
This is so because employees coming into an organization will already have,
to varying degrees, knowledge of the brand. What differentiates appropriate
brand knowledge from pre-existing brand knowledge, with respect to an
employee, is that the former is a prerequisite for the employee to be able
to translate the brand promise into brand reality. For example, an individual
gets a job at Disneyland. They are aware of the majestic castle logo, Mickey
Mouse and the ‘Where dreams come true’ tag line, as well as associate the
place with a magical and enchanted world. However, as a new ride attendant
responsible for the latest and greatest attraction, employees must translate
this brand identity into what it means for them as an employee and how they
conduct themselves in the context of their work environment. Furthermore,
organizations need to be confident that in such situations, the employee’s
output is actually contributing to the realization of the brand promise as
evaluated by the consumer, as opposed to detracting from it. It is from this
perspective that knowledge management, on behalf of the organization with
respect to its employees, is considered a valuable resource for competitive
advantage (Bhardwaj & Monin, 2006).

Brand Knowledge
In contrast to procedural or explicit knowledge, which an organization formally communicates to employees often through systems and procedures,

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

131

brand knowledge, as reflected above, can be considered a form of tacit
or subjective knowledge that is difficult to formalise and, therefore, communicate. However, according to Bhardwaj and Monin (2006), such tacit knowledge is the starting point from which all other knowledge, such as explicit
knowledge, emanates and, therefore, has particular relevance to subsequent
organizational benefit. While explicit or procedural knowledge remains
largely consistent, or unchanged, in the communication transition process,
tacit knowledge is dependant on practical skills or experience (Murray &
Peyrefitte, 2007). As a result, tacit knowledge is more complex than explicit
knowledge which results in the need for consideration to be given to the
transferability of such knowledge. For example, tacit knowledge, in this case
an employee’s knowledge of their organization’s brand, can be difficult to
identify, explain and therefore influence or shape. This is attributed to the
limited understanding employees (external to the marketing department)
have with respect to what is a brand and also because such brand knowledge
incorporates the employee’s own accumulated experience, intuition, and
judgement (Murray & Peyrefitte, 2007). Therefore sharing such tacit knowledge, while a prerequisite for organizational success may, in turn, give rise
to multiple interpretations. Influencing such tacit knowledge formation,
therefore, as manifested in appropriate employee brand knowledge, requires
consideration being given to the means by which such organizational knowledge sharing is enabled. Because management are the primary source for
organizational information (Schappe, 1996) that informs employee knowledge structures, it is critical that managers understand how their internal
brand management efforts affect employee learning and subsequent realization of EBBE benefits. A review of the marketing and management literature
reveal several dimensions that are considered to be contributors to realizing
EBBE as a result of employees holding appropriate brand knowledge. To
enable management to have a comprehensive understanding of how to
realize such internal brand equity, the following discussion explores each
dimension in turn.

Internal Brand Management
As stated previously, EBBE is not concerned with the creation of a unique
employer identify that is separate to the identity that resides in the customers
mind. Rather, it reflects an awareness of the existing brand knowledge that
employees hold as being active participants in the market and seeks to transform that brand knowledge in a manner that enables employees to be
successful. In other words, to enable employees to hold appropriate brand
knowledge so as to be able to deliver the brand promise. It is from this perspective that information generation is concerned with guiding organizational actions through enhanced understanding of existing employee brand
knowledge structures. Conversely, at a knowledge dissemination level, the

132

C. King and D. Grace

focus is on translating brand information in a manner that is relevant
and meaningful to the employee’s job. Such facilitation of information is
considered essential for employees to be able to understand their role in
delivering the brand promise.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

INFORMATION GENERATION
In order to formulate effective internal messages that ultimately bring about a
change in employee behavior, it is appropriate for organizations to have an
understanding of employee capabilities as well as their needs and wants
(Lings, 2004). Information generation allows the organization to develop
internal products and services, which employees perceive to be meaningful
and relevant to them with respect to fulfilling their roles and responsibilities.
For example, conducting employee research provides organizations with
insight as to the state of the organizational climate, employee skills, or lack
thereof, as well as acts as an informant with respect to customer satisfaction.
From such insight, organizations are able to respond to the needs of the
internal market through such initiatives as improved internal systems and
procedures, targeted training and development and enhanced products
and services for the benefit of the end consumer. Therefore, information
generation is considered to play an important role in internal brand management, as, consistent with effective external brand management practices,
having an appreciation of how the target market rationalises and, therefore,
responds to brand management efforts allows for informed decision making
to be realized. As a result, organizations are in a better position to mould,
structure, and present brand information (knowledge dissemination)
pertinent for effective employee behavior that is considerate and therefore
aligned with the capabilities and desires of the internal market.
KNOWLEDGE DISSEMINATION
Knowledge dissemination is concerned with providing the context
with which the brand identity is made relevant to each employee (Lings &
Greenley, 2005). That is, to enable employees to exhibit positive attitudes
and be capable of delivering the articulated brand promise, information must
be provided to them that demonstrates the linkage between the externally
promoted brand identity, or promise, and their roles and responsibilities.
Further to the dissemination of external marketing information, employees,
to enhance their comprehension of organizational expectations of them, also
draw upon additional information sources. Such information sources include
training and development and personnel management whereby both of
these human resources functions communicate information to employees
with respect to their roles and responsibilities. Therefore, it is imperative that
they are developed in the context of facilitating employee capabilities with

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

133

respect to delivering the brand promise. Drawing on the content provided by
the organization’s brand identity provides a context for the development of
training and development and personnel management initiatives. Furthermore, using the brand identity as a reference point for internal systems
and procedures also enables a consistency of message with respect to what
employees need to do to deliver on customer expectations versus what
support and systems the organizations provide to facilitate this.
Information generation and knowledge dissemination represent the
encoding and transmitting phases of the communication process necessary
for employees to be provided with brand information that is needed for them
to deliver the brand promise. However, the provision of meaningful and
relevant information doesn’t, necessarily, mean that employees will respond
to that information as the organization intends. Employees must also be
motivated or have a genuine desire to willingly deliver the brand promise.

Motivation and Ability to Be a Brand Performer
According to Corace (2007), the vast majority of an organization’s employees
is aware of what their organization expects of them and, therefore, goes
about their daily duties in a responsible manner. However, he questions
whether this level of activity is consistent with the employees’ actual level
of capability, suggesting that there is ‘untapped’ discretionary work effort that
resides within these employees. The importance of being able to tap into this
discretionary work effort or behavior lies in the fact that, particularly within a
service setting, not all brand related behaviors and actions can be predetermined. Therefore, organizations need employees to not only be cognisant of
what their role entails, but just as importantly, have the confidence and the
motivation=desire to call on this discretionary work effort as required. Such
confidence and motivation is realized when employees can internalise or
identify with the organizational values.
Therefore, it is considered a requirement for effective internal brand
management that recognition be given to information generation and knowledge dissemination, which are both transactional in nature, needing to be
supplemented by additional components that enhance employee performance. According to Corace (2007) the ‘secret formula’ to realising engaged
employees, which is a necessity for employee brand knowledge to realize
organizational benefits, is the ability for organizations to treat their employees with respect and dignity. Such an approach to employee management is
believed, here, to engender employees that are receptive to organizational
dialogue (openness) and who perceive their organization treats them like a
human being e.g. with respect, is cooperative, communicates well,
encourages working towards a common goal (the ‘H’ factor). Through such
practices, satisfaction of the ‘what’s in it for me’ (WIIFM) employee requirement for discretionary work effort (Corace, 2007), should be realized.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

134

C. King and D. Grace

Furthermore, consistent with the thinking promoted earlier, that
employee brand knowledge is considered to be tacit knowledge, Murray
and Peyrefitte (2006) promote the need for ‘rich media’ or personal, faceto-face communication to be employed to share tacit knowledge given the
potential for misinterpretation. This is attributed to employees preferring
such ‘rich media’ to be used for ambiguous communications as it provides
the opportunity for rapid feedback, allowing communicators to apply
multiple cues so that a shared understanding is realized. Such consideration
as to the appropriate use of mediums to transfer tacit brand knowledge
amongst employees, combined with the need for employees to appreciate
WIIFM in order to internalise and exhibit brand aligned attitudes and
behavior, gives rise to internal brand management practices incorporating
higher order, relational components of openness and the ‘H’ factor.
OPENNESS
For information to be transmitted effectively and interpreted as the sender
intended, the receiver (in this case, the employee) must be prepared to
receive the information. Openness, therefore, represents aspects of the organizational climate that are considered important contributors to employees
being responsive to both the organization and, subsequently, the organization’s customers. This dimension of internal brand management is considered to be unique to this conceptualization. The dimension’s unique
qualities are underpinned by the fact that in appreciating openness as an
internal brand management dimension, several aspects of the marketing
and management literature collectively contribute to defining it. For example,
the role of management, and in particular management support, is considered to be important in creating an open environment given the close proximity in working relationships with employees. As such, management support
is considered essential for successful employee outcomes (see for example
Holtzhausen, 2002; Naude, Desai, & Murphy, 2003; Bell, Menguc, & Stefani,
2004) and, therefore, a necessary aspect of the openness dimension.
Furthermore, organizational socialization, or the process by which
employees gain an appreciation for the values and beliefs of the organization
and the subsequent expectations of them by the organization (Naude et al.,
2003), is also considered to be an important factor to enhance employee
responsiveness. This is because such socialization has been found to lead
to greater motivational effort and organizational commitment on behalf of
the employee (Kelley, 1992). Employee attitude towards their job is believed
to be another significant contributor to minimising distortion in the communication process, given that employee attitude, which is influenced by how
they feel they are treated as a member of an organization (Naude et al.,
2003), influence an employee’s overall job satisfaction. The extent to
which an employee is satisfied with their job is believed to influence their

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

135

receptivity towards organizationally generated information. Given that
employees must be willing to receive organizationally generated information
if appropriate brand knowledge is to be realized, a positive employee
attitude towards their job is significant. Furthermore, it is also conceptualized
here that employee involvement or participation is important for the creation
of an environment that is open or receptive to organizational driven
information. Employee involvement is concerned with the extent to which
employees actively, given the opportunity, participate in organizational
initiatives such as providing feedback or helping shape consumer-based
decisions. Such involvement is perceived to strengthen the employee’s
organizational commitment (Conduit & Mavondo, 2001) and, therefore,
increase their receptivity for such information.
THE ‘H’ FACTOR
Underpinning all of the internal brand building exchanges, however, are
people, who, through human nature, bring their own perceptions and expectations to the exchange table. Successful exchanges, therefore, are premised
by the need to consider elements that have been promoted in the relationship marketing literature as being drivers of successful relationships. Such
drivers of successful relationships include shared goals, trust, attachment or
bonding, respect=reciprocity or empathy and cooperation. Without due
consideration being given to the drivers of successful relationships, any
attempt to realize successful organizational outcomes as enabled through
internal relationships, is likely to be futile. As such, the human factor or
the ‘H‘ factor is concerned with organizations treating employees like human
beings e.g. with respect, is cooperative, communicates well, is trustworthy,
encourages working towards a common goal. From the perspective of
this conceptualization, the ‘H’ factor is the conduit through which profitable
organization–employee exchanges are realized.
Despite the fact that such a consideration can be perceived to be
common sense and occurring naturally within relationships, it represents a
significant oversight in the literature, particularly the internal communication
and early internal marketing literature, when considering a comprehensive
approach to influencing employee behavior. Furthermore, from a practitioner perspective, the assumption that people will work together harmoniously and that senior management promote collaboration (Tjosvold,
Meredith, & Wellwood, 1993), is impeded, amongst other things, by the
territorial nature of individuals to preserve their own domain (Ballantyne,
2000). As such, to assume consideration is given to aspects of relational
exchanges is thought to be insufficient to realize positive employee behavior.
Rather the realization of a successful exchange between employer and
employee requires the articulation of such an intent coupled with the
identification, and subsequent measurement, of the drivers of positive

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

136

C. King and D. Grace

relationships, as mentioned previously. As a result, the ‘H’ factor is
considered to be an essential dimension of internal brand management.
The previous discussion introduces the four dimensions believed to be
necessary in the adoption of a successful internal brand management strategy
and these are depicted in Figure 2. The whole premise upon which such
internal brand management components (i.e. information generation, knowledge dissemination, openness and the ‘H’ factor) are employed is to ensure
that employees have appropriate brand knowledge so that they can deliver
the brand promise. Brand knowledge, therefore, and consistent with the
external perspective, is considered to be the key to realising brand equity.
Without knowledge of the brand, the employee is unable to behave in the
manner to which the organization intends.

Employee Brand Knowledge Effects
While employee brand equity benefits are manifested in employee intentions
and actions, understanding the reasons and decisions behind these ‘observable actions‘ is considered just as significant as appreciating the actual benefits
themselves (Schiffman et al., 2001). Therefore, the identification of the

FIGURE 2 Dimensions of employee based brand equity.

Employee Based Brand Equity

137

knowledge effects that are endowed to an employee as a result of being
provided with brand knowledge is deemed to be relevant to the EBBE
conceptualization. In particular, this conceptualization proposes that as a
result of such brand knowledge, employees’ role clarity and commitment
to the brand, will increase and, therefore, are considered an important,
outcome of internal brand management (see Figure 2).

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

ROLE CLARITY
Providing employees with clear guidance and direction, as premised through
the provision of appropriate brand knowledge, has the potential for role
conflict and confusion to dissipate. As a result increased job satisfaction
and organizational commitment is realized (Siguaw, Brown, & Widing II,
1994; Jones, Busch, & Dacin, 2003). If an employee believes that information
that is important to fulfilling their performance expectations is not widely
distributed, the employee’s role ambiguity increases (Babin & Boles, 1996).
Given that employees having brand knowledge is considered to be important
for providing them with the direction to be successful in their role (King &
Grace, 2005), role clarity is considered a relevant means through which
employee brand knowledge can be assessed.
BRAND COMMITMENT
In order to ensure employees have a genuine desire to deliver the brand
promise, the level of employee commitment becomes an important prerequisite for realising EBBE, also. In recognition of the relational or exchange
association that exists between the employee and the organization, the
importance placed on such a relationship from an employee’s perspective
is commensurate to the effort desired to maintain it (Morgan & Hunt,
1994). In other words, if the employee perceives the relationship with the
organization to be a positive one, worthy of maintaining, then the employee
has a high level of commitment to the organization. Commitment, in this
sense, is considered to be a key variable in determining organizational
success (Morgan & Hunt, 1994), as an employee’s feeling of belonging
influences their ability to go above and beyond the call of duty in order to
achieve the organization’s goals (Castro, Armario, & Sanchez del Rio, 2005).
While there are three perspectives of organizational commitment,
namely affective, continuance, and normative, the former is the dimension
promoted in this article. Both continuance commitment, which infers that
employees are consciously aware of the costs associated with leaving an
organization and normative commitment, which reflects a feeling of obligation (Castro et al., 2005) are driven by external consequence. In contrast,
affective or attitudinal commitment is more an internalised perspective,
representing the strength of the individual’s attachment to the organization

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

138

C. King and D. Grace

and the extent to which they internalise or adopt the values, characteristics,
perspectives and beliefs of the organization (O’Reilly & Chatman, 1986;
Iverson, McLeod, & Erwin, 1996; Castro et al., 2005). This perspective of
commitment is consistent with the higher order brand resonance that Keller
(2001) believes is the pinnacle in external brand building and, therefore,
essential for the creation of brand equity. Brand resonance, consistent with
affective or attitudinal brand commitment component, refers to the relationship customers have with a brand and the extent to which they feel in synch
with that brand (Keller, 2001). The attainment of such brand resonance or
commitment engenders not only behavioral loyalty and attitudinal attachment but also has the ability to create a sense of community amongst those
that are also associated with the brand (Keller, 2001). In turn, an internally
driven affiliation with the organization is realized.
As a result of the provision of brand knowledge internally, an
employee’s clarity with respect to organizational expectations of
them increases. Furthermore, the opportunity for employees to gain an
appreciation of the organization’s brand values and intentions is believed,
here, to have the potential to engender a level of employee attachment
to the organization that results in the employee holding synergistic values
worthy of maintaining. Such role clarity and affective employee attachment
to the organisation is believed to derive measurable organizational benefits,
namely EBBE benefits.

EBBE Benefits
As is evidenced from the previous discussion, internal brand management is
a facilitator of employee brand knowledge, which in turn, is believed to be
the precursor for organizations to realize measurable benefits. In the context
of this conceptualization, the benefits that are coveted by organizations that
adopt internal brand management practices lie in the attitudinal and subsequent behavioral intentions exhibited by employees. This is because behavioral intentions are considered indicators that signal the likelihood of a
positive relationship with the organization continuing (Zeithaml, Berry, &
Parasuraman, 1996; Bloemer & Odekerken-Schröder, 2006). The significance
of identifying EBBE benefits lies in the fact that such benefits are considered
to be the foundation upon which customer satisfaction and financial performance is enhanced (see for example Loveman, 1998; Heskett et al., 2001). In
other words, the ability to identify and measure the results of internal brand
management not only provides an indication of the level of success of such
efforts, but more importantly, informs the organization as to whether the first
link in the service profit chain (i.e., employees) is strong enough to sustain
the subsequent links (i.e. customer satisfaction and profit realization).
The strongest affirmation of a connection between the brand and
the intended recipient is in actual fact, the recipient’s active engagement

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

139

(Keller, 2001) in the brand experience. It is from this perspective that
employees’ exhibiting brand citizenship behavior (BCB) is considered to
be the first construct that contributes to organizational benefits derived from
EBBE. A precursor, however, to positive employee behavioral intentions and
subsequent behavior as manifested in BCB, and consistent with consumer
behavior research, is satisfaction (Heskett et al., 1994; Loveman, 1998). In fact,
Pearson (1991) emphasises that decreased job satisfaction leads to a greater
probability of withdrawal behavior, which is in direct conflict to the positive
employee behaviors coveted by organizations. As such, employee satisfaction
is also included as a dimension of EBBE benefits. Employee satisfaction is
considered to be an end state of the application of internal service quality
initiatives such as communications, teamwork, resource allocation and perceived quality of senior management (Heskett et al., 1994; Loveman, 1998).
Furthermore, employee satisfaction is linked to retention of employees
(Boselie & van der Wiele, 2002; Rust, Stewart, Miller & Pielack, 1996) and
positive word of mouth communication (Shinnar, Young, & Meana, 2004).
It is from this perspective that Loveman’s (1998) employee loyalty construct
is measured by expressed commitment and length of employment, which
parallel Bloemer and Odekerken-Schröder’s (2006) positive word of mouth
and intention to stay constructs. Such consistency of thinking underpins
employee intention to stay and positive employee word of mouth, as benefits
realized as a result of EBBE. EBBE benefits, therefore, which can be defined
as employee exhibition of brand consistent intentions and actions, incorporates brand citizenship behavior, employee satisfaction, employee intention
to stay and positive employee word of mouth (see Figure 2).
One important reason for considering EBBE benefits as being multidimensional is to embed an objective focussed outcome that allows for organizational confidence with respect to interpreting the impact of internal
brand management. As such, employee loyalty, which, on the surface, could
be considered an appropriate benefit of EBBE given the belief that it is an
important determinant of customer loyalty and, in turn, the financial successes of the organization (Heskett et al., 1994; Loveman, 1998; Bloemer &
Odekerken-Schröder, 2006), is not incorporated within this model. This is
because the word ‘loyalty’ is subjective in its interpretation (Hajdin, 2005).
For example, in a business sense, customer loyalty is realized when customers repeatedly buy a product from a particular business. Therefore, according to Hajdin (2005) purchasing the same toothpaste out of a thoughtless
habit is classified as loyalty. Furthermore, an employee who stays with an
organization for a long time solely to receive certain entitlements could be
considered loyal if the only indication is tenure. Both of these perspectives
illustrate very pragmatic and somewhat unconscious decisions that are not
driven out of a sense of allegiance to the organization, rather out of necessity.
In the absence of a clear definition and understanding of what loyalty
actually is, more specific and, therefore, measurable benefits need to be

140

C. King and D. Grace

identified. It is for this reason that Zeithaml et al. (1996) believe loyalty to be
manifested in several ways. As such, consideration of employee behavioral
intentions in a one-dimensional way is believed to lack sufficient insight.
Therefore, it is from this perspective that benefits of EBBE are considered
to be collectively represented by several, rather than one, dimension.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

DISCUSSION
In seeking to provide a solid foundation upon which practioners and
academics alike can consider a third, yet equally relevant, perspective of brand
equity, the proposed EBBE framework (see Figure 2) provides for a comprehensive conceptualisation of not only how to measure EBBE, but just as importantly, what dimensions contribute to such equity. Therefore, it is the intention
of this article that the EBBE framework enables enhanced internal brand management practices. The necessity for enhanced internal brand management
practices is embedded in the fact that while customers gain awareness of
the brand from external brand building efforts, it is the actual experience with
the brand that dominates customer brand perceptions, of which employees
play a major role. Regardless of how well a brand is presented, nothing will
salvage a weak brand experience (Berry, 2000). Therefore, by conceptualizing
EBBE, this article provides an increased level of awareness with respect to how
to maximize positive consumer brand experiences.
In particular, the conceptualisation of EBBE accounts for the unique
relationship that exists between the employee and the organization. The goal
of internal brand management is to influence employee behaviour to deliver
the organization’s brand promise, however to do this successfully, more effort
is required on behalf of marketers than simply giving the employee brand
related information. While traditional organizational structures allocate the
management of the human resources function to the human resources department, there has been an increased emphasis on employee management have
a balanced (i.e. internal [human resource] and external [marketing]) market
perspective in order to satisfy customer expectations (de Chernatony et al.,
2003; Ling, 2004; Herington, Johnson, & Scott, 2006). In recognition of this,
both the management and marketing literature formed the basis of this conceptual article as it was believed that managers’ comprehension and adherence to both marketing and human resource philosophies would ensure a
positive employee experience. In fact, Tosti and Stotz (2001) argue that such
coordination not only optimizes the impact of the marketing strategy but also
enables a systematic and comprehensive approach to consider all factors
(internal and external) that influence organisational performance.
Furthermore, such a mutli-disciplined perspective to conceptualize
brand equity from an employee perspective also afforded an extension to
Keller’s (1998) cognitive psychology approach to brand equity, beyond that

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

141

of connectionism thinking. From Keller’s (1998) perspective, brand
knowledge consists of a brand node in the memory with a variety of associations linked to it, that will ultimately affect not only how consumer’s recall
brand information but also respond (behave) towards the brand. Keller’s
(1998) conceptualization is represented in the cognitive psychology literature
as a connectionist approach, concerned with units in the brain being linked
to other units that depict certain information (Galotti, 2004). The significance
of brand equity being conceptualized within a cognitive psychology framework is that it accounts for how the brain processes information (Groome
et al., 2006), which ultimately affects the way people behave. However,
the connectionist approach does not account for the environment in which
such cognitive processes occur. That is, it is more concerned with how the
information is processed in the brain and not on what has influenced the
information i.e. the context, prior to brain processing (Galotti, 2004). Such
a limitation is apparent in Keller’s (1998) conceptualization as he did not
account for the influence of brand experience in the realization of
brand equity.
Acknowledging that brand knowledge is the key to realising brand
equity, the conceptualization of the EBBE framework is cognizant of the
importance of maintaining a cognitive psychology framework. However,
the EBBE framework builds on Keller’s work by attempting to address the
‘environmental’ deficit, and adopting a more context-based cognitive psychology paradigm promoted by Galotti (2004), that being the ecological
approach. Galotti (2004) argues that as ‘‘cognition does not occur in isolation
from larger cultural contexts; all cognitive activities are shaped by the culture
and by the context in which they occur’’ (p. 33).
As such, comprehension as to the context within which the cognitive
processes occur enables a more ‘real world’ approach to understanding
how people process information. In accounting for the two dimensions that
are believed to facilitate or influence the meaning employees ascribe to
brand information, namely openness and the ‘H’ factor, which are reflective
of the organization’s culture, this article is proposed to build on existing
theory as it relates to the application of cognitive psychology in the context
of the brand equity literature.
Through the introduction of the concept of EBBE, this article has
endeavoured to provide both justification, as well as prescriptive discussion,
to stimulate active debate in both academic and practitioner arenas. The conceptualization has been driven by the need for measurable benefits (brand
citizenship behavior, employee satisfaction, employee intention to stay,
positive employee word of mouth) to enable continued investment in
internal brand management. Furthermore, in recognition that the
employer-employee relationship is an exchange process, the conceptualization has endeavored to emphasize the need for effective internal relationship
management (openness and the ‘H’ factor) to be a precursor for the

142

C. King and D. Grace

traditional transaction based internal marketing initiatives (information
generation and knowledge dissemination) to realize the full potential.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Future Research Considerations
Given the conceptual qualities of this article and, in particular the proposed
dimensions for building and measuring EBBE (see Figure 2), further research
are necessary. Future research will not only allow for the refinement of the
dimensions as they currently stand, but will also afford the ability to empirically explore relationships between variables. In particular, in consideration
of the definition of EBBE, (i.e. the differential effect that brand knowledge
has on an employee’s response to their work environment) it is appropriate
that further research explore the relationship between the internal brand
management dimensions (i.e. information generation, knowledge dissemination, openness and the ‘H’ factor) and how they influence the proposed
brand knowledge effects (i.e., role clarity and brand commitment). In turn,
consideration should then be given to exploring the relationship between
the brand knowledge effects and EBBE benefits. Such research will provide
insight into what influences positive employee behaviour and, in doing so,
inform marketers as to a comprehensive framework upon which to build
an internal brand management strategy.
Furthermore, whilst several of the dimensions promoted in Figure 2 are
evident in the extant literature (e.g., role clarity) and therefore have existing
measures, there are also dimensions that are considered to be unique to this
framework (e.g., openness). Given that the latter’s origins have linkages
within the literature (e.g., management support), future research would
allow new measures to be developed for such dimensions. Ultimately, with
each dimension being able to be measured, research can evaluate the performance qualities of the EBBE model in its entirety.
While this article conceptualizes EBBE in the context of a service industry,
consideration could also be given to research applications in a manufacturing
based industry. Undertaking research in both industries would afford comparative data that would contribute to the debate as to whether there is actually a
distinction between services and goods marketing. Finally, broader implications
of EBBE should be explored in the context of its relationship to both customer
and financial brand equity. While a relationship is promoted in the literature between employees, customers and the financial outcomes for an organization (see for example Service Profit Chain) (Heskett et al., 1994), validating
such a link via brand equity has previously not been possible give the absence
of employee brand equity. Provided future research validates the EBBE conceptualization, research efforts can extend the analysis to incorporate the three
perspectives of brand equity, namely employee, customer and financial.
Finally, in consideration of areas for future research, it is important to
note that this conceptualization was premised by the need to be able

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

143

measure the success, or otherwise, of internal brand management
investments. Given that what defines success in an organization is context
specific, it is not the intention of this conceptualization to provide a definitive
of what employee brand equity should be. The level of employee brand
equity coveted by organizations will vary across business units, across organizations and across industries. For example, the difference between a high
contact service and a low contact service may result in different levels of
brand equity being considered as appropriate. Furthermore, in appreciating
the differences in organizational context, it has not been the intention of this
conceptualization to identify incentives to enhance employee brand equity.
This is because what is considered an incentive for one employee group
may be very different from another. While not dismissing the power of an
incentive-driven workforce, this conceptualization seeks to bring to the
attention of marketers, via the dimensions of openness and the ‘H’ factor, that
a precursor for internal brand management success is satisfying the WIIFM
(what’s in it for me) criteria, of which a range of incentives (e.g. financial,
emotional and social) would underpin.
Having said this, in order to further comprehend effective internal brand
management practices, the dimensions of the EBBE framework could be
explored in a case study style setting. This would afford greater insight into
how specific organizational actions and cultures influence the performance
of the dimensions. For example, how does a conservative brand such as
Lloyd TSB with traditional organizational structures and a strong emphasis
on systems and procedures, communicate their brand values to realize the
same level of role clarity and brand commitment as a more modern brand
such as Virgin Atlantic. While the end-state maybe the same, how each organization achieves such internal alignment may in fact be very different.

CONCLUSION
The increasing application of internal brand management practices demands
that brand equity be extended to account for the internal or employee
perspective for two reasons. Firstly, effective brand management is premised
by the need for increased comprehension as to the impact of various brandbuilding activities as realized through brand equity (Pappu et al., 2005;
Atilgan et al., 2005). Secondly, there is an increased demand for management
accountability (Srinivasan et al., 2005). The ability to measure brand equity
from an employee perspective enables such accountability for managers
responsible for internal brand management. Therefore, through the introduction of an employee perspective of brand equity, this conceptual article has
sought to stoke the academic and practitioner fires towards further enquiry
into this currently under explored, yet important area. The conceptualization
here in, provides another means by which to model brand equity and, in
doing so, seeks to expand on existing theory.

144

C. King and D. Grace

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

REFERENCES
Ambler, T., Bhattacharya, C. B., Edell, J., Keller, K. L., Lemon, & Mittal, B. (2002).
Relating brand and customer perspectives on marketing management. Journal
of Service Research, 5 (1), 13–25.
Atilgan, E., Aksoy, S., & Akinci, S. (2005). Determinants of the brand equity: A
verification approach in the beverage industry in Turkey. Marketing Intelligence
& Planning, 23 (2=3), 237–248.
Aurand, T. W., Gorchels, L., & Bishop, T. R. (2005). Human resource management’s
role in internal branding: An opportunity for cross-functional brand message
synergy. The Journal of Product and Brand Management, 14 (2=3), 163–169.
Babin, B. J. & Boles, J. S. (1996). The effects of perceived co-worker involvement and
supervisor support on service provider role stress, performance and job
satisfaction. Journal of Retailing, 72 (1), 57–75.
Backhaus, K. & Tikoo, S. (2004). Conceptualizing and researching employer
branding. Career Development International, 9 (4=5), 501–517.
Ballantyne, D. (2000). Internal relationship marketing: A strategy for knowledge
renewal. The International Journal of Bank Marketing, 18 (6), 274–286.
Bateson, J. (2002). Are your customers good enough for your service business?
Academy of Management Executive, 16 (4), 110–120.
Bell, S. J., Menguc, B., & Stefani, S. L. (2004). When customers disappoint: A model of
relational internal marketing and customer complaints. Academy of Marketing
Science Journal, 32 (2), 112–126.
Berry, L. L. (2000). Cultivating service brand equity. Academy of Marketing Science
Journal, 28 (1), 128–137.
Bhardwaj, M. & Monin, J. (2006). Tacit to explicit: An interplay shaping
organizational knowledge. Journal of Knowledge Management, 10 (3), 72–85.
Bitner, M. J. (2001). Service and Technology: Opportunities and paradoxes.
Managing Service Quality, 11 (6), 375–379.
Bloemer, J. & Odekerken-Schröder, G. (2006). The role of employee relationship
proneness in creating employee loyalty. International Journal of Bank
Marketing, 24 (4), 252–264.
Boselie, P. & van der Wiele, T. (2002). Employee perceptions of HRM and TQM,
and the effects on satisfaction and intention to leave. Managing Service Quality,
12 (3), 165–172.
Castro, C. B., Armario, E. M., & Sanchez del Rio, M. E. (2005). Consequences of
market orientation for customers and employees. European Journal of
Marketing, 39 (5=6), 646–675.
Conduit, J. & Mavondo, F. T. (2001). How critical is internal customer orientation to
market orientation. Journal of Business Research, 51 (1), 11–24.
Corace, C. J. (2007). Engagement – Enrolling the quiet majority. Organizational
Development Journal, 25 (2), 171–175.
de Chernatony, L. & Cottam, S. (2006). Internal brand factors driving successful
financial services brands. European Journal of Marketing, 40 (5=6), 611–633.
de Chernatony, L., Cottam, S., & Segal-Horn, S. (2006). Communicating service
brands’ values internally and externally. The Service Industries Journal, 26
(8), 819–836.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

145

de Chernatony, L. & Dall’Olmo Riley, F. (1999). Experts’ views about defining service
brands and the principles of services branding. Journal of Business Research,
46, 181–192.
de Chernatony, L. & Segal-Horn, S. (2003). The criteria for successful service brands.
European Journal of Marketing, 37 (7=8), 1095–1118.
Galotti, K. M. (2004). Cognitive Psychology–In and Out of the Laboratory (3rd ed.).
Belmont, CA: Thomson=Wadsworth.
Goldstein, S. M. (2003). Employee development: An examination of service
strategy in a high-contact service environment. Production and Operations
Management, 12 (2), 186–203.
Gronroos, C. (1979). An applied theory for marketing industrial services. Industrial
Marketing Management, 8 (1), 45–50.
Groome, D., Brace, N., Dewart, H., Edgar, G., Edgar, H., Esgate, A., et al. (2006).
An Introduction to Cognitive Psychology–Processes and disorders (2nd ed.).
London: Psychology Press.
Hajdin, M. (2005). Employee loyalty: An examination. Journal of Business Ethics, 59,
259–280.
Henkoff, R. (1994). Service is everybody’s business. Fortune, 129 (13), 48–54.
Herington, C., Johnson, L. W., & Scott, D. (2006). Internal relationships – Linking
practioner literature and relationship marketing theory. European Business
Review, 18 (5), 364–381.
Heskett, J. L., Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser, Jr, W. E., & Schlesinger, L. A.
(1994). Putting the service profit chain to work. Harvard Business Review, 72
(2), 164–174.
Holtzhausen, D. (2002). The effects of a divisionalized and decentralized
organizational structure on a formal internal communication function in a South
African organization. Journal of Communication Management, 6 (4), 323–339.
Interbrand. (2007). All Brands are not created equal – Best Global Brands 2007.
New York: Interbrand.
Iverson, R. D., McLeod, C. S., & Erwin, P. J. (1996). The role of employee
commitment and trust in service relationships. Marketing Intelligence &
Planning, 14 (3), 36–44.
Jacobs, R. (2003). Turn employees into brand ambassadors. ABA Bank Marketing,
35 (3), 22–26.
Jones, E., Busch, P., & Dacin, P. (2003). Firm market orientation and salesperson
customer orientation: Interpersonal and intrapersonal influences on customer
service and retention in business-to-business buyer-seller relationships. Journal
of Business Research, 56, 323–340.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring and managing customer based
brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57 (1), 1–22.
Keller, K. L. (1998). Strategic Brand Management. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Keller, K. L. (2001). Building customer-based brand equity. Marketing Management,
10 (2), 14–19.
Keller, K. L. & Lehmann, D. R. (2006). Brands and branding: Research findings and
future priorities. Marketing Science, 25 (6), 740–759.
Kelley, S. W. (1992). Developing customer orientation among service employees.
Academy of Marketing Science Journal, 20 (1), 27–36.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

146

C. King and D. Grace

Kim, H. B., Kim, W. G., & An, J. (2003). The effect of consumer-based brand equity
on firms’ financial performance. The Journal of Consumer Marketing, 20 (4=5),
335–351.
King, C. & Grace, D. (2005). Exploring the role of employees in the deliverance of the
brand: A case study approach. Qualitative Market Research: An International
Journal, 8 (3), 277–295.
Lassar, W., Mittal, B., & Sharma, A. (1995). Measuring customer-based brand equity.
The Journal of Consumer Marketing, 12 (4), 11–20.
Lings, I. N. (2004). Internal market orientation: Construct and consequences. Journal
of Business Research, 57 (4), 405–413.
Lings, I. N. & Greenley, G. E. (2005). Measuring internal market orientation. Journal
of Service Research, 7 (3), 290–305.
Loveman, G. W. (1998). Employee satisfaction, customer loyalty and finacial
performance–An emprircal examination of the service profit chain in retail
banking. Journal of Service Research, 1 (1), 18–31.
McDonald, M., de Chernatony, L., & Harris, F. (2001). Corporate marketing and
service brands: Moving beyond the fast-moving consumer goods model.
European Journal of Marketing, 35 (3=4), 335–352.
Meuter, M. L., Bitner, M. J., Ostrom, A. L., & Brown, S. W. (2000). Choosing among
alternative service delivery modes: An investigation of customer trial of self
service technologies. Journal of Marketing, 69, 61–83.
Miles, S. J. & Mangold, G. (2004). A conceptualization of the employee branding
process. Journal of Relationship Marketing, 3 (2=3), 65–87.
Morgan, R. M. & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58 (3), 20–39.
Murray, S. R. & Peyrefitte, J. (2007). Knowledge type and communication
media choice in the knowledge transfer process. Journal of Managerial Issues,
19 (1), 111–133.
Naude, P., Desai, J., & Murphy, J. (2003). Identifying the determinants of internal
market orientation. European Journal of Marketing, 37 (9), 1205–1220.
O’Reilly III, C. & Chatman, J. (1986). Organizational commitment and psychological
attachment: The effects of compliance, identification, and internalization on
prosocial behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71 (3), 492–499.
Padgett, D. & Allen, D. (1997). Communicating experiences: A narrative approach to
creating service brand image. Journal of Advertising, 26 (4), 49–62.
Papasolomou, I. & Vrontis, D. (2006). Building corporate branding through internal
marketing: The case of the UK retail bank industry. Journal of Product and
Brand Management, 15 (1), 37–47.
Pappu, R., Quester, P. G., & Cooksey, R. W. (2005). Consumer-based brand equity:
Improving the measurement–empirical evidence. The Journal of Product and
Brand Management, 14 (2=3), 143–154.
Pearson, C. A. L. (1991). An assessment of extrinsic feedback on participation,
role perceptions, motivation and job satisfaction in a self managed system for
monitoring group achievement. Human Relations, 44 (5), 517–537.
Rust, R. T., Stewart, G. L., Miller, H., & Pielack, D. (1996). The satisfaction and
retention of frontline employees: A customer satisfaction approach.
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 7 (5), 62–74.

Downloaded by [Memorial University of Newfoundland] at 01:16 03 August 2014

Employee Based Brand Equity

147

Schappe, S. P. (1996). Bridging the gap between procedural knowledge and positive
employee attitudes–procedural justice as a keystone. Group and Organization
Management, 21 (3), 337–364.
Schiffman, L., Bednall, D., Cowley, E., O’Cass, A., Watson, J., & Kanuk, L. (2001).
Consumer Behavior. Frenchs Forest, Australia: Prentice Hall.
Shinnar, R. S., Young, C. A., & Meana, M. (2004). The motivations for and outcomes
of employee referrals. Journal of Business and Psychology, 19 (2), 271–283.
Siguaw, J. A., Brown, G., & Widing II, R. E. (1994). The influence of market
orientation of the firm on sales force behavior and attitudes. Journal of Market
Research, 31 (1), 106–116.
Solomon, M. R., Surprenant, C., Czepiel, J. A., & Gutman, E. G. (1985). A role
theory perspective on dyadic interactions: The service encounter. Journal of
Marketing, 49, 99–111.
Srinivasan, V., Park, C., & Chang, D. R. (2005). An approach to the measurement,
analysis, and prediction of brand equity and its sources. Management Science,
51 (9), 1433–1448.
Sundaram, D. S. & Webster, C. (2000). The role of nonverbal communication in
service encounters. The Journal of Services Marketing, 14 (5), 378–391.
Tjosvold, D., Meredith, L., & Wellwood, R. M. (1993). Implementing relationship
marketing: A goal interdependence. The Journal of Business & Industrial
Marketing, 8 (4), 5–17.
Tosti, D. T. & Stotz, R. D. (2001). Brand: Building your brand from the inside out.
Marketing Management, 10 (2), 28–33.
Vallaster, C. (2004). Internal brand building in multicultural organizations: A
roadmap towards action research. Qualitative Market Research, 7 (4), 100–113.
Vargo, S. L. & Lusch, R. F. (2004a). Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing.
Journal of Marketing, 68 (1), 1–17.
Vargo, S. L. & Lusch, R. F. (2004b). The four service marketing myths: Remnants of a
goods-based, manufacturing model. Journal of Service Research, 6 (4), 324–335.
Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1993). The nature and determinants
of customer expectations of service. Academy of Marketing Science Journal,
21 (1), 1–12.
Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996). The behavioral consequences
of service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60 (2), 31–46.
Zeithaml, V. A. & Bitner, M. J. (1996). Services Marketing. New York: McGraw Hill.

