TYPE Review
PUBLISHED

04 August 2022

DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Chris Englert,
Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
REVIEWED BY

Jennifer Inauen,
University of Bern, Switzerland
Dayna Lee-Baggley,
Dalhousie University, Canada

Understanding the
intention-behavior gap: The role
of intention strength
Mark Conner1* and Paul Norman2
1

School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2 Department of Psychology,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom

*CORRESPONDENCE

Mark Conner
m.t.conner@leeds.ac.uk
SPECIALTY SECTION

This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
RECEIVED 19 April 2022
ACCEPTED 27 June 2022
PUBLISHED 04 August 2022
CITATION

Conner M and Norman P (2022)
Understanding the intention-behavior
gap: The role of intention strength.
Front. Psychol. 13:923464.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464
COPYRIGHT

© 2022 Conner and Norman. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.

This manuscript overviews recent research on the intention-behavior
gap, focusing on moderators of the intention-behavior relationship. The
manuscript draws on the concept of intention strength to make two important
points. First, strong intentions provide better predictions of behavior, thereby
reducing the intention-behavior gap. However, strong intentions have the
additional features of being more stable over time, less pliable in the face of
interventions to change them, and more likely to bias information processing
about engaging in the behavior. These four features of intention strength
are not independent. For example, stable intentions are likely to provide
better predictions of behavior. Second, various predictors of strength (e.g.,
importance, certainty, extremity) may also constitute important, but little
studied, moderators of the intention-behavior relationship. Moreover, the
effects of these moderators of the intention-behavior relationship may be
mediated through intention stability (and perhaps other features of intention
strength). Future research on the intention-behavior gap would benefit
from a more systematic consideration of a broad range of moderators of
the intention-behavior relationship both individually and in combination.
In addition, future research could usefully explore how these moderating
effects might be explained. Such a systematic approach may further our
understanding of the intention-behavior gap in relation to physical activity and
other behaviors.
KEYWORDS

intention, intention strength, intention-behavior gap, attitude strength, intention
stability, physical activity, health behavior

Introduction
Definitions of intentions often focus on the idea of them being self-instructions
(Triandis, 1980; Sheeran and Webb, 2016) that capture the underlying motivation
(Rogers, 1983) or commitment (Sheeran and Webb, 2016) to act. It is common to
distinguish goal (e.g., “I intend to get fit”) and behavioral (e.g., “I intend to engage
in physical activity at least five times per week”) intentions, with the former focusing
achieving desired goals and the latter focusing on engaging in a behavior or action
(perhaps in the service of reaching a goal). It is the latter that are the main focus
here. Behavioral intentions are central to a range of theories about the determinants

Frontiers in Psychology

01

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

small-to-medium sized changes in behavior (Webb and Sheeran,
2006; Sheeran et al., 2016). Similar sized effects are reported in
studies focusing just on physical activity (Rhodes and Dickau,
2012). It is notable that the effect sizes reported in reviews of
these experimental studies (r+ = 0.08–0.18) are considerably
smaller than those reported in reviews of correlational studies
(r+ = 0.40–0.48). The disjunction between intentions and
behavior observed in both correlational and experimental
studies has been termed the intention-behavior gap (Sheeran,
2002; see also Godin and Conner, 2008; Rhodes and de Bruijn,
2013).
A range of methodological factors will be associated
with either a narrowing or widening of this gap; more
reliable measures of intention and behavior or a focus on
relationships disattenuated for measurement error may be
associated with a narrowing of the gap, while a focus on
objective measures of behavior and failure to ensure that
measures of intention and action/behavior are matched on
the principle of correspondence (Ajzen, 1991) may widen the
gap. Unfortunately the former effects may be more modest
than the latter effects. For example, McEachan et al. (2011)
estimated the intention-behavior correlation increased from
0.40 to 0.43 when disattentuated for measurement error. In
contrast, McEachan et al. (2011) reported that intention and
perceived behavioral control explained 26% of the variance in
self-reported measures of physical activity, but only 12% of
the variance in objective measures. Across a broader set of
behaviors, Armitage and Conner (2001) reported that intention
and perceived behavioral control explained 31% of the variance
in self-reported behaviors, but only 20% of the variance in
objective behaviors. Matching of intention (plus other measures)
and behavior measures on action and target elements is central
to the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991). However,
some behaviors such as physical activity often employ frequency
measures of behavior that commonly fail to follow this principle.
For example, some physical activity studies measure behavior
based on frequency measures such as the International Physical
Activity Questionnaire (sometimes converting this into METs)
but predict this from intention items focusing on meeting
recommended guidelines for physical activity (e.g., five sessions
per week of at least 20 mins). The problem here is that the
intention measure should be matched to a behavior item that
taps whether the recommended activity had been completed
or not rather than number of METs. The linearity of the
relationship between such an intention measure and a measure
of METs is unclear and could under- or over-estimate the size
of the true intention-behavior relationship (see Morwitz and
Munz, 2020 on other methodological issues in relation to the
intention-behavior relationship).
An important focus in furthering our understanding of the
intention-behavior gap has been exploring the role of conceptual
moderators. This research focuses mainly on features of the

of behavior/action. Indeed they are the proximal and sole
determinant of action in the reasoned action approach (Fishbein
and Ajzen, 2010) and in protection motivation theory (Rogers,
1983), and one of several proximal determinants of behavior
in social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1997) and the health
action process approach (Schwarzer and Luszczynska, 2015).
Nevertheless, intentions rarely if ever explain all the variance in
behavior. This has become known as the intention-behavior gap
and is the focus of the current manuscript.
The current manuscript is divided into six main sections
(see Figure 1 for a route map and summary). The first briefly
reviews the intention-behavior gap for physical activity and
other behaviors. The second reviews work on various factors
that reduce the intention-behavior relationship (i.e., moderate
the intention-behavior relationship) for physical activity and
other behaviors. The third introduces the concept of intention
strength as a means to improve our understanding of the
intention-behavior relationship. The fourth and fifth consider
features and then predictors of intention strength. In particular,
these sections consider the intention-behavior gap as one of four
key features of intention strength and reviews various predictors
of intention strength as potential moderators of the intentionbehavior relationship. The sixth and final section discusses a
number of directions for future research on the intentionbehavior gap.

Intention-behavior gap
Measures of behavioral intentions (e.g., “I intend to
engage in physical activity at least five times per week,”
strongly disagree – strongly agree) commonly include both a
valence (i.e., intenders versus non-intenders and sometimes a
neutral category) and an extremity component (i.e., slightly
agree versus strongly agree) component. Such measures
of intention to engage in a behavior rarely predict all
or even the majority of the variance in behavior. For
example, reviews of the theory of planned behavior and the
reasoned action approach indicate that intentions explain
between 18 and 23% of the variance in behavior across
a broad range of behaviors (Armitage and Conner, 2001)
or health behaviors in particular (McEachan et al., 2011,
2016). Reviews suggest values at the lower end of this range
for studies focusing on physical activity (18% variance in
Hagger et al., 2002; 20% in McEachan et al., 2011). It is
notable that the (mostly prospective) correlational studies
included in these reviews almost exclusively focus on behavioral
intentions rather than goal intentions. Experimental studies
that manipulate intentions and observe effects on subsequent
behavior similarly indicate less than perfect relationships. For
example, studies of a range of behaviors indicate that mediumto-large sized changes in intentions are associated with only

Frontiers in Psychology

02

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

Intention-behavior gap
A brief review of the nature of the intention-behavior gap.
Intention-behavior moderators
A review of seven key sets of moderators of the intention-behavior relationship:
-

Goal dimensions (goal difficulty, goal desire, goal priority, goal conflict)
Basis of intention (affective attitude, moral norms, anticipated regret, self-identity)
Structure of intention (degree of reasoned action, motivational coherence, realism
of intention)
Past behavior / habit (frequency of past behavior, habit)
Personality (openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness,
neuroticism)
Socio-demographic factors (age, gender, socio-economic status)
Temporal stability of intentions (similarity of intentions over time)

What is strength?
A consideration of construct strength from the attitude domain that could be applied
to intentions.
Features of strength
Four features of strength distinguished:
- Durability (temporal stability, pliability)
- Impact (impact on behavior, impact on processing of relevant information)
Predictors of strength
Consideration of 11 predictors of strength (under four categories) derived from the
attitude domain and their potential application to intentions:
- Aspects of the cognition (Extremity)
- Aspects of the cognition structure (Knowledge, Accessibility, Moralization,
Ambivalence, Cognitive-Affective Consistency, Intensity)
- Processes (Elaboration)
- Subjective beliefs about the cognition (Certainty, Importance, Vested Interest)

Future directions
An integration of presented work and consideration of future directions:
- Need for systematic study of individual moderators (consider effects on different
features of intention strength)
- Need for systematic study of multiple moderators (consider effects on different
features of intention strength; identify dominant moderators)
- Exploration of mechanisms (consider stability and other features of strength as
mechanisms explaining the mechanisms of action for identified moderators).
FIGURE 1

Route map and summary of main sections of the manuscript.

Frontiers in Psychology

03

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

moderated the intention-behavior relationship for physical
activity in approximately 60% (13/21 tests) of studies reporting
this effect. Sheeran and Webb (2016) argue that some of the
mixed findings for perceptions of goal difficulty as a moderator
may be attributable to people under-estimating actual difficulty
of performing these more difficult behaviors.
Goal desire and commitment have received much less
attention. The more a goal is desired (Prestwich et al., 2008)
and the more an individual is committed to the goal (Rhodes
et al., 2018) then the stronger should be the intention-behavior
relationship. Prestwich et al. (2008) reported stronger intentionbehavior relationships at higher compared to lower levels of goal
desire across four studies. Greater commitment to a goal might
also be expected to increase the intention-behavior relationship
(Cooke and Sheeran, 2013). Rhodes et al. (2022) reported that
commitment significantly moderated the intention-behavior
relationship for physical activity in approximately 70% (2/3
tests) of studies.
Goal conflict and goal priority have also received attention
as moderators of the intention-behavior relationship. The less
a focal goal conflicts with other goals might be expected to
be associated with greater effort to achieve the focal goal
and so stronger intention-behavior relationships. Rhodes et al.
(2022) reported that goal conflicts significantly moderated
the intention-behavior relationship for physical activity in
approximately 70% (6/9 tests) of studies reviewed. Goal priority
is an important concept in understanding the pursuit of
multiple goals and refers to the temporary increase in the
importance attached to, and resources directed toward, one or
more goals compared to other goals – that serve to benefit
the performance of the prioritized behavior (Unsworth et al.,
2014). Although conceptually important, goal priority has
not received widespread attention as an intention-behavior
moderator (Geers et al., 2009; Conner et al., 2016a). Conner
et al. (2016a) showed that goal priority moderated the intentionbehavior relationship for physical activity (Study 1) and a range
of health behaviors (Study 4) and that a manipulation of goal
priority increased the intention-physical activity relationship
when physical activity was self-reported (Study 2) or objectively
measured (Study 3). More recently, Conner et al. (2022c)
showed that prioritizing one or two behaviors (including
physical activity) that individuals intended to engage in resulted
in greater performance of the prioritized behaviors with no
decrement to the non-prioritized behaviors.

intention and other constructs that influence the intentionbehavior gap and is briefly reviewed in the next section.

Intention-behavior moderators
In the existing research literature, a key approach to
understanding the intention-behavior gap in relation to physical
activity and other behaviors has been to focus on potential
moderators of the relationship, i.e., factors associated with
changes in the magnitude of the intention-behavior relationship.
Moderators help identify the limits of the relationship between
intention and behavior and also the conditions under which
strong versus weak relationships might be expected. A range
of such moderators have been identified in various studies
and discussed in several reviews (e.g., Sheeran, 2002; Sheeran
and Webb, 2016). In addition, a recent, broad review of
intention-physical activity moderators (Rhodes et al., 2022)
provides a number of insights. The moderators that have
received the most attention can be broadly split into goal
dimensions, basis of intention, structure of intention, past
behavior/habit, personality and socio-demographic factors, and
temporal stability.

Goal dimensions
The goal dimensions explored as moderators of the
intention-behavior relationship include goal difficulty, goal
desire and commitment, plus goal priority and conflict. As
the difficulty of a goal increases, the power of intentions to
predict behavior decreases (e.g., Sheeran et al., 2003). Goal
difficulty is a function of the goal itself and the skills, resources,
and effort an individual can bring to achieving the goal.
Measures typically tackle how easy or difficult the individual
perceives it to be to achieve the goal. Easy-difficult judgments
are a key component of perceived behavioral control. Lower
perceived behavioral control (i.e., high goal difficulty) should
be associated with larger intention-behavior gaps. This is the
prediction in the theory of planned behavior and reasoned
action approach (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2010). However, the
empirical findings are mixed. Armitage and Conner (2001)
reported that approximately 50% (9/19 studies) of the studies
in their meta-analysis testing the interaction between perceived
behavioral control and intentions reported a significant effect
(i.e., intentions being stronger predictors when perceived
behavioral control was higher). More recently, Hagger et al.
(2022) reported that across 36 tests, the intention-behavior
relationship was stronger when perceived behavioral control was
high (M + 1SD: b = 0.555, 95%CI [0.452, 0.658]) compared to
moderate (M: b = 0.489, 95%CI [0.384, 0.594]) or low (M-1SD:
b = 0.423, 95%CI [0.301, 0.545]). Rhodes et al. (2022) in their
review reported that perceived behavioral control significantly

Frontiers in Psychology

Basis of intention
Studies that have explored the basis of intention as a
moderator of the intention-behavior relationship have primarily
considered the extent to which intentions are based on affect
or identity. Several studies indicate that intentions based more
on personal or affective compared to other factors are more

04

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

predictive of behavior, consistent with the predictions of selfdetermination theory (Deci and Ryan, 1985). This includes work
on attitudes versus norms (Sheeran et al., 1999) and affective
versus instrumental attitudes (Keer et al., 2014). Similarly, high
levels of moral norms (Godin et al., 2005), anticipated regret
(Sheeran and Abraham, 2003), and self-identity (Sheeran and
Orbell, 2000; Carfora et al., 2017) have also been found to
be associated with stronger intention-behavior relationships.
Rhodes et al. (2022) reported that affective attitudes (4/6 tests),
anticipated regret (4/5 tests), and physical activity personal/selfidentity (5/7 tests) each significantly moderated the intentionphysical activity relationship in their review. Across a group
of health behaviors including physical activity, Conner et al.
(2016b) showed that out of instrumental attitude, affective
attitude, injunctive norm, descriptive norm, and anticipated
regret, it was intentions based on anticipated regret that
most strongly predicted behavior. Other studies have shown
that drawing attention to anticipated regret via measuring it
(drawing on the Question-Behavior Effect; Wood et al., 2016) is
sufficient to increase the power of intentions to predict behavior.
For example, Sandberg and Conner (2011) showed that
measuring anticipated regret increased the power of intentions
to predict objectively measured sports center use. Sandberg and
Conner (2009) showed similar effects for objective measured
attendance for cervical screening. Importantly this effect was
only present when anticipated regret was assessed before rather
than after intention, suggesting that the anticipation of regret
had to inform the intention for the moderation effect to occur.

activity), it was shown that more realistic intentions were
stronger predictors of behavior.

Structure of intention

Personality

A number of recent studies have explored various aspects
of the structure of intention as moderators of the intentionbehavior relationship. This includes work on the degree of
reasoned action (Sheeran and Conner, 2019), motivational
coherence (Sheeran and Conner, 2017) and the realism of
the intention (Avisha et al., 2019). Degree of reasoned action
refers to the extent to which a person’s determination to act is
based on relevant expectancies, or how well behavior-relevant
cognitions predict intentions. Across two studies, Sheeran and
Conner (2019) showed that well-reasoned intentions better
predicted behavior. Motivational coherence is the extent to
which predictors of intentions (e.g., attitudes, norms, perceived
control from the theory of planned behavior) cohere or point
in the same direction. Across three studies (including one on
physical activity), Sheeran and Conner (2017) showed that
greater motivational coherence was associated with a stronger
relationship between intentions and behavior. Finally, Avisha
et al. (2019) examined how realistic intentions (i.e., those
based on considerations of the expectations that the behavior
could be performed) might moderate the intention-behavior
relationship. Across three studies (including one on physical

The personality factors explored as moderators of the
intention-behavior relationship have included all of the
big five personality dimensions (openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism) with generally no
significant effects (see Rhodes et al., 2022). The exception to this
trend is conscientiousness, with Rhodes et al. (2022) reporting
that 80% (4/5 tests) of studies reported that higher levels
of conscientiousness were associated with stronger intentionphysical activity relationships. Conscientiousness refers to the
ability to control one’s behavior and to complete tasks, with
individuals high in conscientiousness being more organized,
careful, dependable, self-disciplined and achievement-oriented
than those low in conscientiousness (McCrae and Costa, 1987).
In addition, conscientiousness is associated with greater impulse
control (Bogg and Roberts, 2004, 2013). A number of these
factors might help explain why those high in conscientiousness
show stronger relationships between their intentions and
behavior with perhaps different factors operating in relation
to risk (e.g., impulse control) versus protection (e.g., selfdiscipline) behaviors like physical activity. These explanations
remain to be tested.

Frontiers in Psychology

Past behavior/habit
The frequency of past performance of a behavior (or
habit based on self-report measures) has also been found
to moderate the intention-behavior relationship, although
the direction of this moderation effect is inconsistent. For
example, Rhodes et al. (2022) reported that past behavior/habit
was associated with a significantly stronger intention-physical
activity relationship in approximately 30% (4/14 tests) of studies,
but a significantly weaker relationship in approximately 50%
(7/14 tests) of studies (see also Gardner et al., 2011). Sheeran
et al. (2017) showed that this apparent inconsistency can be
explained by the fact that the impact of past behavior/habit
on the relationship between intentions and behavior follows an
inverted U-shaped relationship. At low levels of past behavior,
increasing experience initially enhances the power of intention
to predict behavior, while at higher levels of past behavior
increasing experience attenuates the power of intention to
predict behavior. The former effect may be attributable to
experience strengthening the intention (similar arguments have
been made in relation to experience on the attitude-behavior
relationship; Fazio and Zanna, 1978), while the latter effect may
be attributable to the behavior becoming more automatized or
habitual (Ouellette and Wood, 1998).

05

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

Socio-demographic factors

moderator of intention-physical activity relationships in nearly
80% (10/13 tests) of studies and noted intention stability as one
of the more consistent moderators. Beyond the physical activity
domain, Conner et al. (2002) reported intentions were stronger
predictors of healthy eating over a period of 6 years when
these intentions were stable over a 6-month time period. More
recently, Norman et al. (2022) showed that the temporal stability
of intentions moderated intention-behavior relationships across
a number of COVID-19 protection behaviors. As discussed in
subsequent sections, the temporal stability of intentions may
also be considered a key feature of a strong intention and
also represent a key mechanism to explain the effects of other
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship.

A number of socio-demographic factors have been explored
as moderators of the intention-behavior relationship with
mostly null effects. For example, Rhodes et al. (2022) reviewed
a range of such demographic factors including age and gender
although no clear evidence emerged of consistent effects across
the various physical activity studies examined. One exception
to these generally null effects has been socio-economic status.
A number of studies on physical activity (Schüz et al., 2017)
and other behaviors (e.g., Conner et al., 2013; Schüz et al.,
2020, 2021) indicate that socio-economic status moderates the
intention-behavior relationship (i.e., weaker intention-behavior
relationships in lower SES groups). However, Rhodes et al.
(2022) reported mixed effects for different measures of socioeconomic status on intention-physical activity relationships: 1/2
significant effects for material deprivation, 1/5 significant effects
for income, 0/1 for social deprivation, and 2/4 for education. The
observed effects may be attributable to the same goal being of
greater difficulty in lower socio-economic status groups due to
variations in the opportunities, resources, ability, skills and time
and effort required to realize the goal (Sheeran and Webb, 2016;
Schüz, 2017).

What is strength?
The moderators reviewed in the previous section provide
a number of insights into the factors that may account for
the intention-behavior gap. However, in general they fail to
provide a strong framework for understanding the magnitude
of the impact of intentions on behavior. The subsequent
sections of this manuscript consider the concept of intention
strength, what it can add to our understanding of the intentionbehavior relationship, and how it might provide the basis for
such a framework.
The concept of “strength” in relation to social/health
cognitions has received the most attention in relation to
attitudes. Attitude strength has been defined as “the extent
to which attitudes manifest the qualities of durability and
impactfulness” (Petty and Krosnick, 1995, p. 3). Thus, strong
attitudes are stable and resistant to efforts to change them
(i.e., they are durable) and they bias information processing
and guide behavior (i.e., they are impactful). In the attitude
literature, a distinction is made between predictors versus the
defining features of attitude strength (Luttrell and Sawicki,
2020). Predictors of attitude strength include the importance,
accessibility and extremity of an attitude, while defining features
include the attitude’s temporal stability and impact on behavior.
The idea that goal or behavioral intentions also possess a
dimension of strength has received comparatively less attention,
although the idea does appear sporadically in the literature.
For example, Hall (2013), in the Encyclopedia of Behavioral
Medicine, offers this definition:

Temporal stability of intentions
Research in the goal/behavioral intention domain has also
focused on the whether the temporal stability of intentions is
associated with stronger effects on behavior. Temporal stability
here refers to the lack of change in an intention measure
over time. In most studies this is typically operationalized as
a lack of absolute change in an intention measure within an
individual over time (see Conner et al., 2000 for consideration
of different measures of stability). For intensive longitudinal
designs, where intention is measured multiple times, stability
might be better captured by some form of within-person
variability measure (with low variability equating to greater
stability). The important moderating role of temporal stability
has been highlighted as one of the limiting conditions of the
Theory of Planned Behavior/Reasoned Action and Reasoned
Action Approach (Fishbein and Ajzen, 2010) which states that
intentions will only predict behavior to the extent that they
remain unchanged between when they are measured and the
time point at which they may influence the decision to act.
A number of studies show that more stable intentions better
predict behavior. Cooke and Sheeran’s (2004) meta-analysis
showed temporal stability to significantly moderate intentionbehavior (10 studies) relationships. More specifically in relation
to physical activity, Conner and Godin (2007), across seven
studies, showed the intention-behavior relationship to be a
substantial r+ = 0.60 when intentions were stable, but only
r+ = 0.27 when intentions were unstable. Similarly, the review of
Rhodes et al. (2022) showed intention stability to be a significant

Frontiers in Psychology

“Intention strength can be defined as the quantity of
personal resources that an individual is prepared to invest
in executing a behavior. Intention strength is closely akin
to the concept of “motivation,” with high levels of intention
strength understood to represent strong motivation to
perform a behavior.”
Similarly, Fuchs et al. (2017) suggest that “intention strength
refers to the degree of firmness a person expresses toward

06

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

Indeed, temporally stable attitudes may predict behavior over
periods as long as 10 years (Conner and Norman, 2021).
Research has also looked at the resistance of strong attitudes
to persuasive attempts and the impacts of strong attitudes on
information processing. In general, this research shows that
stronger attitudes are more resistant to efforts to change them
(Eagly and Chaiken, 1995) and have greater impact on the
processing of attitude-relevant information (Petty and Krosnick,
1995) leading to more biased processing (i.e., enhancement of
information consistent with current attitude and denigration of
information inconsistent with current attitude).
As with strong attitudes, strong intentions might usefully
be defined as having the consequences of being durable and
having impact. Durability can be split into the temporal
stability of intentions and the pliability of intentions. Impact
can be split into effects of the intention on behavior and
on the processing of intention-relevant information. In the
intentions domain it is the intention-behavior relationship that
has received the most attention. From an intention strength
perspective, strong intentions are more predictive of behavior
and therefore reduce the gap between intentions and behavior.
However, strong intentions are also likely to have the features
of being stable over time, less pliable when challenged, and
having greater impacts on the processing of intention relevant
information. The need for these features of intention strength
to be given more attention alongside examination of impacts
on the intention-behavior relationship is noted in the future
directions section below. Importantly stability, pliability and
information processing effects may each represent important
mechanisms by which moderators of the intention-behavior
relationship have their effects.

an intended action” and Rebar et al. (2019) define intention
strength as “the degree of commitment a person has to enact
their intention.” The distinction here is between the focus of the
intention and the strength of the commitment to pursue that
intention. Rebar et al. (2019) label these decisional intentions
versus intention strength. Decisional intentions can be tapped
by items such as “I intend to engage in __ minutes of physical
activity next week,” yes/no. In contrast, strength of commitment
can be tapped by items such as “How strong is your intention
to resume your fitness training within the next weeks and
months?,” I do not have this intention at all – I do have a very
strong intention (Fuchs et al., 2017), or “To what degree do you
intend to engage in physical activity next week?,” Very little –
Very much (Rebar et al., 2019).
These definitions of strength identify some of the different
predictors of strength but say little about the consequences
of having a strong intention. It is argued here that work on
intention strength would benefit from employing a similar
definition to that used for attitude strength. That is, intention
strength should be broadly defined in terms of the extent
to which intentions manifest the qualities of durability and
impactfulness. These are discussed in the next section under the
features of intention strength. A subsequent section examines
a number of predictors of strength that might be expected to
impact on the features of strength.

Features of strength
There are interesting parallels between work on the
intention-behavior gap and work on the attitude-behavior
relationship. In the attitude domain, strong attitudes are defined
as having the consequences of being durable and having impact
(Petty and Krosnick, 1995). Luttrell and Sawicki (2020) refer
to these as the defining features of attitude strength. Durability
can be further split into temporal stability and pliability (or
persistence and resistance), while impact can be further split into
effects of the attitude on behavior and the processing of attituderelevant information. Temporal stability and impact on behavior
(i.e., the attitude-behavior gap) are the defining features of
attitude strength that have received the most attention (Petty
and Krosnick, 1995). It is worth noting that these two features
of strong attitudes are not unrelated, with attitude temporal
stability being one important mechanism through which strong
attitudes better predict behavior (the prediction explanation;
Fabrigar et al., 2005). As Schwartz (1978) noted, attitudes
will not be likely to predict subsequent behavior unless they
persist over the intervening time interval between when the
two are measured. A number of previous studies support this
prediction explanation (Schwartz, 1978; Davidson and Jaccard,
1979; see also Glasman and Albarracín, 2006). More recently,
Conner et al. (2022a) showed across three studies that more
stable attitudes were more predictive of subsequent behavior.

Frontiers in Psychology

Predictors of strength
A number of factors may be associated with having strong
cognitions. In the attitude domain, Luttrell and Sawicki (2020)
refer to these as predictors of attitude strength. In relation
to predictors of attitude strength, Howe and Krosnick (2017)
identified 11 predictors: certainty, importance, ambivalence,
accessibility, knowledge volume, extremity, cognitive-affective
consistency, intensity, moral conviction, elaboration, and vested
interest. Similarly, Luttrell and Sawicki (2020) identified
seven such predictors: accessibility, ambivalence, certainty,
importance, elaboration, knowledge, and moralization.
Many of these predictors of attitude strength may also
have direct or indirect utility in relation to understanding
intention strength. Each of the eleven predictors of strength
identified in previous reviews (Howe and Krosnick, 2017;
Luttrell and Sawicki, 2020) are discussed in detail below:
extremity, knowledge, accessibility, moralization, ambivalence,
cognitive-affective consistency, intensity, elaboration, certainty,
importance, and vested interest. Evidence from the attitude

07

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

behavior (Bechler et al., 2021), although here the greatest change
in behavior was apparent around the neutral point (these tests
mainly focused on the attitude-intention relationship). Bassili
(1996) makes the useful distinction between operative and metajudgmental measures of strength. Operative measures link to
processes and may be less open to bias in self-report (e.g.,
accessibility based on reaction times), while meta-judgmental
measures are based on self-perceptions and may be more open
to bias in self-report (e.g., perceived importance of a cognition).
Extremity measures can be considered to be both operative and
meta-judgmental measures of strength.
Similarly in relation to intentions, although few studies
explicitly examine extremity, typically measures are bipolar and
include elements tapping both direction (equivalent to valence
in attitude measures) and extremity which is assumed to tap
strength. For example, behavioral intentions toward physical
activity might be measured by an item such as, “I intend to
engage in the recommended levels of physical activity each
week over the next month, strongly disagree – strongly agree”
(scored 1–7). Such a measure taps the direction of the intention
(i.e., negative/disinclined for scores 1–3; neutral for a score of
4; positive/inclined for scores 5–7) and the extremity of the
intention (i.e., scored as the distance from the neutral point;
scores of 5 and 7 both indicate a positive intention but the latter
score indicates a more extreme [and stronger] positive intention
than the former). Although unipolar measures of intention (e.g.,
“I intend to engage in the recommended levels of physical
activity each week over the next month, not at all – definitely;”
scored 1–7) are possible, they are relatively little used. For
example, the intention-behavior relationship of r+ = 0.45 for
physical activity reported by McEachan et al. (2011) was largely
based on bipolar intention measures that include both direction
(or valence) and extremity elements. Such analyses assume
the intention-behavior relationship is linear, although research
points to this being unlikely to be the case (e.g., Rebar et al.,
2019). For example, Sheeran (2002) makes the important point
that the intention-behavior gap is mainly attributable to those
who are inclined to act (i.e., positive intention in the distinction
above) failing to subsequently act (i.e., inclined abstainers in
his matrix; see also Orbell and Sheeran, 1998). Sheeran (2002)
noted that in relation to physical activity, 54% of intenders (i.e.,
those inclined or with positive intentions) failed to act (and 46%
did act), while only 3% of non-intenders (i.e., those disinclined
to act/with negative intentions) acted (and 97% failed to act).
Rhodes and de Bruijn (2013), in their meta-analysis, reported
the overall intention-physical activity gap to be 46% (only 2% of
non-intenders acted; while 42% of intenders acted).
Reanalysis of data from Conner et al. (2021; Study 1) on
engagement with physical activity examined the effects for
both valence/direction and extremity for intention. This study
was conducted in a sample of almost 1,000 adults over a 1month time period using the above bipolar intention measure
and a self-report measure of engaging with the recommended

strength literature is reviewed alongside any work in the
intention domain.
These different predictors of strength fall into one of four
basic categories (Petty and Krosnick, 1995; Eaton and Visser,
2008). The first category comprises aspects of the cognition.
Extremity is the key predictor in this category. The second
category comprises aspects of the cognition structure. This
includes aspects of the structure of the thoughts associated with
the cognition in memory such as the amount of knowledge
linked to the cognition in memory (i.e., knowledge) and the
strength of the association between the cognition and the object
(i.e., accessibility), but also the extent to which the cognition is
based on something being right or wrong or moral or immoral
(i.e., moralization), the extent to which positive and negative
evaluations are incongruent (i.e., ambivalence), the extent to
which cognitive and affective evaluations are incongruent (i.e.,
cognitive-affective inconsistency), and the extent to which
strong emotions are elicited (i.e., intensity). The third category
comprises processes by which the cognition is formed. This
includes the degree of thinking done (i.e., elaboration) about the
merits and shortcomings of target. The fourth and final category
comprises the subjective beliefs about the cognition. This includes
the degree of certainty about the object, the importance given to
the cognition or the object, and vested interest in the cognition.

Aspects of the construct
In relation to extremity, attitude measures are typically
operationalized using bipolar scales with a neutral mid-point
(e.g., “For me, engaging in the recommended levels of physical
activity each week over the next month is. . .bad – good;”
scored 1–7). Such measures simultaneously tap the valence
of the attitude (i.e., negative for scores 1–3; neutral for a
score of 4; positive for scores 5–7) and the extremity of the
attitude (i.e., scored as the distance from the neutral point;
scores of 5 and 7 both indicate a positive attitude but the
latter score indicates a more extreme positive score than the
former). More extreme attitudes are assumed to be stronger
and considerable literature shows more extreme attitudes to
be more predictive of behavior, stable over time, resistant to
change and impactful on information processing (see Abelson,
1995 for a review). The majority of tests of the strength of
the attitude-behavior relationship employ bipolar measures of
attitude that confound the valence and extremity of the attitude.
For example, McEachan et al. (2011) meta-analysis of the theory
of planned behavior reports an attitude-behavior relationship
of r+ = 0.30 for physical activity based mainly on such bipolar
attitude measures. Such analyses assume the attitude-behavior
relationship is linear, although an attitude strength perspective
might suggest a cubic relationship with the greatest change in
behavior apparent at the extremes. Some recent research has
supported a cubic relationship between attitude extremity and

Frontiers in Psychology

08

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

level of physical activity (“Over the past month, how many
weeks did you engage in the recommended levels of physical
activity”? 0–4 weeks; coded into 0–3 weeks non-compliance,
4 weeks compliance). The results indicate that the discordant
percentages were 65% for intenders, but only 4% for nonintenders. Table 1 reports the percentage engaging with the
behavior for each point on the intention scale. This indicates
several interesting findings. First, that the relationship between
intention and behavior is not linear (with the pattern either side
of the neutral point looking very different). Second, that the
relationship between extremity and likelihood of behavior is not
linear (even for the positive intender end of the scale). Third, the
rate of change in the likelihood of behavior is greater between
more extreme positive responses. More detailed examination
of how extremity impacts on intention-behavior relationships
is warranted, particularly as tests of other moderators of
the intention-behavior relationship may be mainly based on
measures of intention that include both direction/valence
and extremity components. As Bechler et al. (2021) note in
relation to the attitude-behavior relationship, different patterns
of relationships between extremity and behavior have different
implications (e.g., a strength perspective would be expected to
lead to an accelerating effect at more extreme levels).

date there are no studies using operative or meta-judgmental
measures of knowledge on the intention-behavior relationship.
It might be expected that knowing more about a behavior
would be associated with intentions that are more predictive of
engaging in the behavior.
In relation to attitudes, accessibility is the likelihood that the
attitude will come to mind automatically in relevant situations.
It is an operative measure (i.e., response latency) and assessed
in relation to the evaluation of the attitude object (Fazio, 1995).
More accessible attitudes have been found to be more stable
over time (Bassili, 1996) and more predictive of behavior (Fazio
et al., 1982); they are also more resistant to persuasion (Pfau
et al., 2003) and more likely to bias information processing
(Houston and Fazio, 1989).
In relation to intentions, accessibility would be the
likelihood that the intention comes to mind automatically in
relevant situations. It is an operative measure (i.e., response
latency) and assessed in relation to the intention. Bassili (1993,
1995) reported more accessible voting intentions for a candidate
to better predict voting for that candidate. In contrast, Doll
and Ajzen (1992) failed to observe a significant moderating
effect for accessibility on intention-behavior relationships in
relation to playing with a video game. A meta-analysis by
Cooke and Sheeran (2004) reported that across five studies
for the intention-behavior relationship that accessibility was a
significant moderator. Those with highly accessible intentions
(r+ = 0.75) compared to those with less accessible intentions
(r+ = 0.62) showed stronger intention-behavior relationships.
There is a lack of studies testing intention accessibility in relation
to engaging in physical activity.
In relation to attitudes, moralization or moral conviction is
the degree to which an attitude is a strong and absolute belief
that something is right versus wrong, moral versus immoral,
or that it reflects core moral values and convictions (Skitka,
2014). It is measured by meta-judgmental measures and usually,
but not always, measured in relation to the attitude/evaluation
(e.g., Skitka, 2014) rather than the object (e.g., Conner et al.,
2022b). Various studies have shown such attitudes to be more
stable (Luttrell and Togans, 2021) and to better predict behavior
(Skitka and Bauman, 2008; Judge et al., 2012). For example,
Conner et al. (2022b) showed a measure of moral conviction
taken in relation to the object (e.g., “Morally, wearing a face
covering in public places is the right thing to do? Strongly
disagree-Strongly agree”) in a multi-behavior study significantly
moderated the attitude-behavior relationship (i.e., higher moral
conviction associated were better predictors of behavior).
To date there is a lack of studies assessing the impact
of moralization or moral conviction in relation to the
intention or in relation to the behavior on the intentionbehavior relationship. As noted earlier, some studies do show
that intentions based on moral norms were more predictive
of behavior, consistent with this hypothesis. For example,
Godin et al. (2005) showed, across six datasets for various

Aspects of the construct structure
Attitude knowledge or knowledge volume refers to the
amount of information the person has about the attitude
object. This is usually tapped by knowledge listing tasks or
quizzes (i.e., operative indexes), although meta-judgmental
measures have also been used. For example, Davidson et al.
(1985) asked respondents about how well-informed they were
about the attitude object (completely uninformed - completely
informed). Davidson et al. (1985) showed greater knowledge to
be associated with stronger attitude-behavior relationships and
studies have also shown it to be linked to greater attitude stability
(Bartle, 2000). Similarly, Conner et al. (2022b) reported that
more self-reported knowledge about the behavior was associated
with attitudes that were more predictive of behavior.
Knowledge measures typically focus on the attitude object
(i.e., behavior) and therefore could also predict the strength
of an intention, including its impact on behavior. However, to
TABLE 1 Percentages of respondents reporting engaging in
recommended levels of physical activity at different levels of intention
(reanalysis of data from Conner et al., 2021, Study 1).

Scale point

Behavior

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0%

0%

9%

17%

28%

33%

51%

Higher scores indicate more positive intentions (4 is the neutral point).

Frontiers in Psychology

09

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

physical activity elicits powerful positive or negative emotions
then intentions might be expected to be more predictive of
engaging in physical activity than if no emotions are elicited.
This may be related to intentions being better predictors of
behavior when based on affective attitudes or anticipated regret.
Future research could usefully explore intensity as an intentionbehavior moderator in the physical activity domain.

behaviors (including physical activity), that intentions more
closely aligned with moral norms (compared to attitudes)
were more predictive of subsequent behavior. Further tests
of moral conviction as a predictor of intention strength, are
warranted, although moralization might not be expected to be
a key predictor of intention strength in relation to physical
activity as physical activity is not typically considered to be
a moral behavior.
In the attitude domain, ambivalence is the degree to which
an individual has both positive and negative reactions to an
attitude object (Conner and Sparks, 2002). Greater ambivalence
is generally associated with less stable attitudes and weaker
attitude-behavior relationships. Cooke and Sheeran (2004)
reported a significant effect of ambivalence on the attitudebehavior relationship across six studies, although the average
effect size was small. Both meta-judgmental and operative
measures of ambivalence are widely used (Conner and Sparks,
2002), although the correlation between the two is modest.
A limited number of studies have examined ambivalence
as a moderator of the intention-behavior relationship (see
Armitage and Conner, 2004), although the effects do not appear
to be consistent.
Cognitive-affective inconsistency is the absolute difference
between the cognitive and affective evaluations of an attitude
object (irrespective of whether these evaluations are oppositely
valenced or not as would be required for a measure of
cognitive-affective ambivalence). Conner et al. (2021) found
that a measure of cognitive-affective inconsistency, derived
from bipolar measures of cognitive and affective attitudes,
moderated the attitude-behavior relationship, as did a measure
of cognitive-affective ambivalence. Higher levels of cognitiveaffective inconsistency and ambivalence were both associated
with weaker attitude-behavior relationships, although cognitiveaffective inconsistency was the stronger moderator of attitudebehavior relations (Conner et al., 2021). There are few tests
of cognitive-affective inconsistency as a predictor of attitude
stability (see Chaiken et al., 1995). In addition, to date, there
have been no tests of cognitive-affective inconsistency (taken
in relation to the behavior) as a moderator of the intentionbehavior relationship. It might be expected that when cognitiveaffective inconsistency is low intentions to perform the behavior
will be more predictive of behavior.
In the attitude domain, intensity is the degree to which
a person’s evaluation of the attitude object activates powerful
emotions (Howe and Krosnick, 2017). Intensity is measured
by simple, meta-judgmental measures about how strong the
participant’s feelings are about an issue or attitude object
(Krosnick and Schuman, 1988). Again, there are no tests
to date of intensity taken in relation to the behavior as a
moderator of the intention-behavior relationship. It might be
expected that when the behavior activates powerful positive
emotions then intentions toward to perform the behavior will
be more predictive of behavior. For example, if the thought of

Frontiers in Psychology

Cognitive processes
Attitude elaboration is the degree of thought or careful
consideration one has given to the attitude object’s merits and
shortcomings (Barden and Tormala, 2014). The classic measure
is based on thought listing where participants list all their
thoughts about an attitude object (i.e., operative measures; Petty
and Cacioppo, 1977), although meta-judgmental measures of
elaboration could be tapped by simple self-report. Studies have
shown more elaborated attitudes based on thought-listing to be
more stable (Haugtvedt and Petty, 1992) and to better predict
behavior (Barden and Petty, 2008). In contrast, Conner et al.
(2022b) did not find a meta-judgmental measure of attitude
elaboration about the attitude object to moderate the attitudebehavior relationship.
There are no published tests of elaboration (operative
or meta-judgmental) taken in relation to the behavior as a
moderator of the intention-behavior relationship. It might be
expected that greater elaboration about a behavior might lead to
intentions that are more predictive of engaging in the behavior.

Subjective beliefs about the construct
Attitude certainty refers to the degree of confidence an
individual has that his or her evaluation of the attitude object
is correct/clear to him or her. The conviction with which an
attitude is held is included as part of other definitions of
certainty (Tormala and Rucker, 2018). Simple single-item, metajudgmental measures are often used to tap certainty (e.g., Fazio
and Zanna, 1978) and studies have shown greater certainty
to be linked to both greater stability of attitudes (Bassili,
1996) and stronger attitude-behavior relationships (Warland
and Sample, 1973; Fazio and Zanna, 1978). Cooke and Sheeran
(2004) found significant effects of certainty on attitude-behavior
relationships across four studies with small-medium average
effect sizes. Conner et al. (2022b) showed that a measure of
certainty taken in relation to general thoughts and feelings
about the behavior (e.g., How certain are you about what you
think about wearing a face covering in public places? Not
at all certain-Extremely certain’) in a multi-behavior study
significantly moderated the attitude-behavior relationship (i.e.,
higher certainty associated with attitudes that were better
predictors of behavior).

10

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

given the large amount of attention devoted to this variable
in relation to attitude strength and the conclusion that it is a
key predictor that may account for the role of other predictors
(Conner et al., 2022b).
In the attitude domain, vested interest is the degree to which
the attitude object is perceived to be of significant personal
consequence (Crano, 1995; Howe and Krosnick, 2017). Crano
(1995) notes the strong overlap between vested interest and
personal relevance (and also attitude importance). Personal
relevance is measured by simple, meta-judgmental measures
about the attitude object anchored with “not personally
relevant” to “personally relevant” (Haugtvedt and Wegener,
1994). To date there are no tests of vested interest or personal
relevance taken in relation to the behavior as a moderator of
the intention-behavior relationship. It might be expected that
greater vested interest/personal relevance of a behavior would be
associated with intentions that are more predictive of engaging
in the behavior.

A limited number of studies have reported that intentions
held with greater certainty better predict behavior (Bagozzi
and Yi, 1989; Bassili, 1993; Pieters and Verplanken, 1995;
Chandrashekaran et al., 2000; Sheeran, 2002; Sheeran and
Abraham, 2003). A meta-analysis by Cooke and Sheeran (2004)
reported that that certainty was a significant moderator of the
intention-behavior relationship across two studies, with those
with more certain intentions (r = 0.64) compared to those with
less certain intentions (r = 0.41) showing stronger intentionbehavior relationships. Sheeran and Abraham (2003) reported
that intention certainty significantly moderated the intentionphysical activity relationship.
Attitude importance is the degree to which an individual
attaches significance to the attitude. This is a predictor of
attitude strength that has received considerable attention (e.g.,
it is the focus of the first Annual Review of Psychology article
focusing on attitude strength; Howe and Krosnick, 2017). Howe
and Krosnick (2017) argue that attitude importance is a key
predictor of attitude strength and reflects the degree of priority
a person attaches to an attitude and distinguish it from concepts
that link an attitude to one’s values or self-image (e.g., centrality,
involvement, ego-involvement, salience, personal relevance).
The most frequently used measures of this construct tap how
important the attitude or object is to the individual, how
concerned they are about it, or how deeply they care about
it (i.e., meta-judgmental measures; Krosnick, 1989; Gopinath
and Nyer, 2009). Studies show greater attitude importance
to be associated with stronger attitude-behavior relationships
in relation to product choices (Kokkinaki and Lunt, 1997),
work behavior (Ziegler and Schlett, 2016), and environmental
behaviors (Bolsen, 2013). There are fewer tests of the impact
of attitude importance on attitude stability with mixed findings
(Krosnick, 1988).
Eaton and Visser (2008) note that although typical
definitions of attitude importance focus on the significance
that people attach to their attitude toward a given object,
measures of attitude importance (Boninger et al., 1995) tend
to focus on how important the attitude object is to them.
However, studies show that measures of these two aspects of
attitude importance are extremely highly correlated (Boninger
et al., 1995). Conner et al. (2022b) showed a measure of
importance taken in relation to the attitude object or behavior
(e.g., “How important is wearing a face covering in public
places to you? Not at all – Extremely important”) in a multibehavior study significantly moderated the attitude-behavior
relationship (i.e., higher importance associated with better
predictions of behavior).
Given the attention in the attitude domain it is perhaps
surprising that importance has not received any attention
in relation to intention strength. It might be expected that
intentions toward behaviors judged to be important (or indeed
behaviors judged to be important) might be stronger (i.e.,
durable and impactful) than those toward behaviors not judged
to be important. Tests in the intention domain are warranted

Frontiers in Psychology

Future directions
In this section two related directions for future research
on the intention-behavior gap are set out based on the
above review of the existing literature (see Figure 1 for a
summary). These are the systematic study of individual and
multiple moderators of the intention-behavior relationship and
exploration of mechanisms by which moderators influence the
intention-behavior relationship.

Systematic study of individual and
multiple moderators
The literature reviewed above has highlighted a wide
range of moderators of the intention-behavior relationship
which together could provide a better understanding of the
intention-behavior gap in relation to physical activity and other
behaviors. The moderators reviewed prominently included goal
dimensions, intention strength predictors and intention stability
but also those linked to the basis of intention, structure of
intention, and the personality dimension of conscientiousness.
The concept of intention strength might provide a useful way to
conceptualize these various different moderators. In this view,
the different individual moderators would be considered as
predictors of intention strength. As such, it would be useful to
explore their effects on the intention-behavior relationship as
well as on other features of intention strength such as intention
stability, pliability and impacts on information processing (for
an example see Cooke and Sheeran, 2013). For example, in
addition to the predictors of strength reviewed above (i.e.,
extremity, knowledge, accessibility, certainty, and importance),
goal dimensions such as goal desire, goal commitment, goal
priority and goal conflict and measures of the structure of
intentions (e.g., motivational coherence) might all be expected

11

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

importance and cognitive-affective inconsistency moderated the
attitude-behavior relationship and only the former remained
significant when controlling for attitude stability. This supports
the idea that attitude importance is a key predictor of attitude
strength (see Howe and Krosnick, 2017). Similar studies in
relation to the various moderators of the intention-behavior
relationship would be valuable to identify key moderators.
This might indicate that moderators found to be dominant in
relation to attitude strength such as importance are also key
in relation to intention strength or whether different patterns
exist (e.g., a different moderator such as certainty or several
moderators are important).

to influence the intention-behavior relationship as well as other
features of intention strength (i.e., intention stability, intention
pliability and impact on information processing). As noted
below, studies assessing the impact of moderators on both the
intention-behavior relationship and other features of intention
strength opens up the possibility of testing these other features
as mechanisms to explain their effects on the intention-behavior
relationship. In particular, research on intention stability as a
mechanism to explain the effects of various intention-behavior
moderators is reviewed below.
Studies examining multiple moderators of the intentionbehavior relationship open up additional avenues for analysis.
Relatively few studies have assessed more than one of these
moderators, making comparisons of effects difficult due to
differences in samples and behaviors. More studies could
usefully assess multiple moderators to allow more direct
comparisons of effects without the potential confounding
factors that limit between study comparisons (e.g., sample,
behavior or measure differences). Such studies could also allow
exploration of the inter-relationships between moderators. In
the attitude domain, a number of studies have examined the
inter-relationships of different predictors of attitude strength.
The general conclusion is that these predictors of attitude
strength are both conceptually and empirically distinct (Luttrell
and Sawicki, 2020). Correlations (e.g., Conner et al., 2022b)
and confirmatory factor analyses (Krosnick et al., 1993; Lavine
et al., 1998) support the idea that each constitutes its own
latent factor), although they are intercorrelated. This may
also be the case for moderators of the intention-behavior
relationship although this remains to be determined. Studies
that assess multiple intention-behavior moderators could
employ exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses to test for
underlying dimensions among moderators.
A limited number of studies have examined the effects
of more than one predictor of attitude strength at a time
on more than one feature of attitude strength (Bassili, 1996;
Prislin, 1996; Luttrell and Togans, 2021; Conner et al., 2022b;
see also Philipp-Muller et al., 2020 on predicting intentions).
Such studies also allow exploration of the simultaneous
effects of different predictors of attitude strength in order to
assess if, for example, particular predictors dominate in their
impact on the stability of attitudes and the attitude-behavior
relationship. Conner et al. (2022b) showed that attitude
certainty, importance, subjective knowledge, moral basis of
attitude, cognitive-affective felt and potential ambivalence
plus cognitive-affective inconsistency, but not attitude
elaboration, individually and in combination (excluding
potential ambivalence) predicted attitude stability. It was also
found that attitude certainty, importance, subjective knowledge,
moral basis of attitude, cognitive-affective felt ambivalence,
cognitive-affective inconsistency plus attitude stability, but
not cognitive-affective potential ambivalence or attitude
elaboration, each individually moderated the attitude-behavior
relationship. But when considered simultaneously only attitude

Frontiers in Psychology

Exploration of mechanisms
A further useful direction for research on the intentionbehavior gap would be exploration of the mechanisms by
which moderators of this relationship have their effect. In
statistical terms this would be a test of whether measures
of a proposed mechanism fully or partially mediate the
effect of a moderator of the intention-behavior relationship.
As noted above, intention stability, intention pliability and
impacts on information processing might each be features of
intention strength that could explain the effects of various
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship. For example,
a moderator like conscientiousness might be associated with
stronger intention-behavior relationships because conscientious
individuals hold intentions that are more stable and less pliable
in the face of persuasive attempts and also because they are more
likely to denigrate information that conflicts with their existing
intentions (or bolster information that is consistent with their
existing intentions).
The stability of attitudes has particularly received attention
as a mechanism to explain the effects of other moderators of the
attitude-behavior relationship. The idea that attitude temporal
stability is one important mechanism through which strong
attitudes better predict behavior is known as the prediction
explanation (Fabrigar et al., 2005). As Schwartz (1978) noted,
attitudes are unlikely to predict subsequent behavior unless
they remain stable over the intervening time interval between
when the two are measured. For example, Conner et al.
(2022b) showed that the moderating effects of certainty,
importance, knowledge, moral basis of attitude, ambivalence
and inconsistency on the attitude-behavior relationship were
fully or partially explained by their effects on attitude stability.
Other mechanisms relate to other features of attitude strength
(e.g., changing/biased perceptions of the attitude object;
Fabrigar et al., 2005).
Similarly, intention stability rather than being just another
moderator of the intention-behavior relationship, may
represent an important mechanism through which other
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship have their
effect. That is, a moderator like high goal commitment may
strengthen the intention-behavior relationship because it is

12

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

aid our understanding of causal relationships in relation to
intentions and behavior.

associated with more stable intentions. The extent to which
intention stability effects fully mediate the effects of other
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship would
point to stability being a key mechanism by which they have
this effect. Research has shown intention stability to fully or
partially explain the effect of various other moderators of the
intention-behavior relationship. For example, Sheeran and
Abraham (2003) reported that intention stability moderated
the intention–behavior relationship for exercising (intentionbehavior correlation for low stability, r+ = 0.49, for high
stability, r+ = 0.76). More importantly, Sheeran and Abraham
(2003) found that intention stability fully mediated the effect
of other moderators (i.e., intention certainty, past behavior,
self-schema, anticipated regret and attitudinal control) of
the intention–behavior relationship. This suggests that the
mechanism by which these other moderators have their effect
on intention–behavior relationships is through changing the
temporal stability of intentions. Hence, factors that might be
expected to make individual intentions more stable over time
would be expected to increase the impact that these intentions
have on behavior and so reduce the intention–behavior gap.
Further studies that consider intention stability and other
mechanisms as mediators of the effects of moderators of the
intention-behavior relationship would be valuable. This is the
case both for the examination of the effects of individual
(e.g., motivational coherence, Sheeran and Conner, 2017) and
multiple (e.g., Sheeran and Abraham, 2003) moderators. In
relation to other mechanisms, it was noted earlier that in
the attitude strength domain, attitude stability was assumed
not to be the only mechanism that might explain the effects
of moderators of the attitude-behavior relationship. Similarly,
in the intention domain, intention stability may not be the
only mechanism to explain the effects of moderators of the
intention-behavior relationship. For example, such moderators
may have their effects on the intention-behavior relationship
through their effects on various aspects of goal pursuit. Sheeran
and Webb (2016) provide a useful review of the processes
leading to goal realization. Self-regulatory challenges such as
getting started, keeping goal pursuit on track, and bringing
goal pursuit to a successful close are highlighted. Aspects of
these processes could also form mechanisms explaining how
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship have their
effect (see also Johnson et al., 2006 for relevant suggestions
from control theory). Relatedly, increased effort during goal
pursuit and greater persistence in the face of obstacles could
constitute additional mechanisms by which moderators have
their effect on the intention-behavior relationship (see Bogg and
Roberts, 2004, 2013 on conscientiousness). Studies that compare
various different mechanisms through which individual and
multiple moderators of the intention-behavior relationship
have their effects could make an important contribution
to understanding in this area. Further, experimental studies
that attempt to manipulate moderators or mechanisms could

Frontiers in Psychology

Conclusion
This manuscript has reviewed the work on various
moderators of the intention-behavior relationship in order to
provide insights into the factors that might explain the gap
between the two. The focus was on the concept of intention
strength and how this might add to understanding in this area.
In particular, the idea that strong intentions may not only
better predict behavior but also be more stable over time was
advanced and it was noted that stability may be an important
mechanism by which moderators of the intention-behavior
relationship have their effects. In addition, a number of potential
moderators drawn from the concept of intention strength and
its parallels to predictors of attitude strength were reviewed.
Future research in this area could benefit from a systematic
examination of multiple moderators of the intention-behavior
relationship and the extent to which intention stability or other
mechanisms might explain their moderating effects. Relatedly,
future research should also consider other key features of
intention strength such as the pliability of intentions and their
impact on the processing of intention-relevant information.
Although strong intentions may be stable over time and more
predictive of engaging in behaviors such as physical activity,
they may also be more difficult to change through intervention
and may lead to the biased processing of messages designed
to change them (see Johnson et al., 2006; Cooke and Sheeran,
2013).

Author contributions
MC and PN developed the idea, contributed to and wrote
the manuscript, and approved the submitted version.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.

13

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

References
Abelson, R. P. (1995). “Attitude extremity,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents and
Consequences, eds R. E. Petty and J. A. Krosnick (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum), 25–41.

Conner, M., and Norman, P. (2021). Predicting long-term healthy eating
behaviour: understanding the role of cognitive and affective attitudes. Psychol.
Health 36, 1165–1181. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2020.1832675

Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 50, 179–211. doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T

Conner, M., and Sparks, P. (2002). Ambivalence and attitudes. Eur. Rev. Soc.
Psychol. 12, 37–70. doi: 10.1080/14792772143000012

Armitage, C. J., and Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned
behaviour: a meta-analytic review. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 40, 471–499.

Conner, M., McEachan, R., Jackson, C., McMillan, B., Woolridge, M., and
Lawton, R. (2013). Moderating effect of socioeconomic status on the relationship
between health cognitions and behaviors. Ann. Behav. Med. 46, 19–30. doi: 10.
1007/s12160-013-9481-y

Armitage, C. J., and Conner, M. (2004). “The effects of attitudinal ambivalence
on attitude-intention-behaviour relations,” in Theoretical Perspectives on Attitudes
for the 21st Century: The Gregynog Symposium, eds G. R. Maio and G. Haddock
(Hove: Psychology Press), 121–143.

Conner, M., McEachan, R., Lawton, J., and Gardner, P. (2016b). Basis of
intentions as a moderator of the intention-health behavior relationship. Health
Psychol. 35, 219–227. doi: 10.1037/hea0000261

Avisha, A., Conner, M., and Sheeran, P. (2019). Setting realistic health goals:
antecedents and consequences. Ann. Behav. Med. 53, 1020–1031. doi: 10.1093/
abm/kaz012

Conner, M., Norman, P., and Bell, R. (2002). The theory of planned behavior
and healthy eating. Health Psychol. 21, 194–201. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.21.2.194

Bagozzi, R. P., and Yi, Y. (1989). The degree of intention formation as a
moderator of the attitude-behavior relationship. Soc. Psychol. Q. 52, 266–279.
doi: 10.2307/2786991

Conner, M., Sheeran, P., Norman, P., and Armitage, C. J. (2000). Temporal
stability as a moderator of relationships in the theory of planned behaviour. Br.
J. Soc. Psychol. 39, 469–493. doi: 10.1348/014466600164598

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York, NY:
Freeman.

Conner, M., van Harreveld, F., and Norman, P. (2022a). Attitude stability as
a moderator of the relationships between cognitive and affective attitudes and
behaviour. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 61, 121–142. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12473

Barden, J., and Petty, R. E. (2008). The mere perception of elaboration creates
attitude certainty: exploring the thoughtfulness heuristic. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
95, 489–509. doi: 10.1037/a0012559

Conner, M., Wilding, S., and Norman, P. (2022b). Testing predictors of attitude
strength as determinants of attitude stability and attitude-behavior relationships:
a multi-behavior study. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 1–13. doi: 10.1002/ejsp2844

Barden, J., and Tormala, Z. L. (2014). Elaboration and attitude strength: the
new meta-cognitive perspective. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 8, 17–29. doi:
10.1111/spc3.12078

Conner, M., Wilding, S., Prestwich, A., Hutter, R., Hurling, R., van Harreveld,
F., et al. (2022c). Goal prioritization and behavior change: evaluation of an
intervention for multiple behaviors. Health Psychol. 41, 356–365. doi: 10.1037/
hea0001149

Bartle, J. (2000). Political awareness, opinion constraint and the stability of
ideological positions. Polit. Stud. 48, 467–484. doi: 10.1111/1467-9248.00270
Bassili, J. N. (1993). Response latency versus certainty as indexes of the strength
of voting intentions in a CATI survey. Public Opin. Q. 57, 54–61. doi: 10.1086/
269354

Conner, M., Wilding, S., van Harreveld, F., and Dalege, J. (2021). Cognitiveaffective inconsistency and ambivalence: impact on the overall attitudebehavior relationship. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 47, 673–687. doi: 10.1177/
0146167220945900

Bassili, J. N. (1995). Response latency and the accessibility of voting intentions:
what contributes to accessibility and how it affects vote choice. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. Bull. 21, 686–695. doi: 10.1177/0146167295217003

Cooke, R., and Sheeran, P. (2004). Moderation of cognition-intention and
cognition-behaviour relations: a meta-analysis of properties of variables from
the theory of planned behaviour. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 43, 159–186. doi: 10.1348/
0144666041501688

Bassili, J. N. (1996). Meta-judgmental versus operative indexes of psychological
attributes: the case of measures of attitude strength. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 71,
637–653. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.71.4.637
Bechler, C. J., Tormala, Z. L., and Rucker, D. D. (2021). The attitude–behavior
relationship revisited. Psychol. Sci. 32, 1285–1297. doi: 10.1177/0956797621995206

Cooke, R., and Sheeran, P. (2013). Properties of behavioral intentions: factor
structure and consequences for behavior, information processing, and resistance
to attack. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 43, 749–760. doi: 10.1111/jasp.12003

Bogg, T., and Roberts, B. W. (2004). Conscientiousness and health-related
behaviors: a meta-analysis of the leading behavioral contributors to mortality.
Psychol. Bull. 130, 887–919. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.130.6.887

Crano, W. D. (1995). “Attitude strength and vested interest,” in Attitude
Strength: Antecedents and Consequences, eds R. E. Petty and J. A. Krosnick
(Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum), 131–157.

Bogg, T., and Roberts, B. W. (2013). The case for conscientiousness: evidence
and implications for a personality trait marker of health and longevity. Ann. Behav.
Med. 45, 278–288. doi: 10.1007/s12160-012-9454-6

Davidson, A. R., and Jaccard, J. J. (1979). Variables that moderate the attitudebehavior relation: results of a longitudinal survey. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 37,
1364–1376. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.37.8.1364

Bolsen, T. (2013). A light bulb goes on: norms, rhetoric, and actions for the
public good. Polit. Behav. 35, 1–20. doi: 10.1007/s11109-011-9186-5

Davidson, A. R., Yantis, S., Norwood, M., and Montano, D. E. (1985). Amount
of information about the attitude object and attitude–behavior consistency.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 49, 1184–1198. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.49.5.1184

Boninger, D. S., Krosnick, J. A., Berent, M. K., and Fabrigar, L. R. (1995). “The
causes and consequences of attitude importance,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents
and Consequences, eds R. E. Petty and J. A. Krosnick (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum),
159–189.

Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination
in Human Behavior. New York, NY: Plenum.
Doll, J., and Ajzen, I. (1992). Accessibility and stability of predictors in the theory
of planned behavior. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 63, 754–765. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.
63.5.754

Carfora, V., Caso, D., Sparks, P., and Conner, M. (2017). Moderating effects of
pro-environmental self-identity on pro-environmental intentions and behaviour:
a multi-behaviour study. J. Environ. Psychol. 53, 92–99. doi: 10.1016/J.JENVP.
2017.07.001

Eagly, A. H., and Chaiken, S. (1995). “Attitude strength, attitude structure, and
resistance to change,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents and Consequences, eds R. E.
Petty and J. A. Krosnick (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum), 413–432.

Chaiken, S., Pomerantz, E. M., and Giner-Sorolla, R. (1995). “Structural
consistency and attitude strength,” in Attitude Strength: Antecedents and
Consequences, eds R. E. Petty and J. A. Krosnick (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum), 387–412.

Eaton, A. A., and Visser, P. S. (2008). Attitude importance: understanding the
causes and consequences of passionately held views. Soc. Personal. Compass 2,
1719–1736. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.2008.00125.x

Chandrashekaran, M., McNeilly, K., Russ, F. A., and Marinova, D. (2000).
From uncertain intentions to actual behavior: a threshold model of whether and
when salespeople quit. J. Market. Res. 37, 463–479. doi: 10.1509/jmkr.37.4.463.
18793

Fabrigar, L. R., MacDonald, T. K., and Wegener, D. T. (2005). “The structure
of attitudes,” in The Handbook of Attitudes, eds D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, and
M. P. Zanna (Milton Park: Routledge), 79–124.

Conner, M., Abraham, C., Prestwich, A., Hutter, R., Hallam, J., Sykes-Muskett,
B., et al. (2016a). Impact of goal priority and goal conflict on the intention-health
behavior relationship: tests on physical activity and other health behaviors. Health
Psychol. 35, 1017–1026. doi: 10.137/hea0000340

Fazio, R. H. (1995). “Attitudes as object-evaluation asociations: determinants,
consequences, and correlates of attitude accessibility,” in Attitude Strength:
Antecedents and Consequences, eds R. E. Petty and J. A. Krosnick (Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum), 247–282.

Conner, M., and Godin, G. (2007). Temporal stability of behavioural intention
as a moderator of intention-health behaviour relationships. Psychol. Health 22,
875–896. doi: 10.1080/14768320601070449

Fazio, R. H., and Zanna, M. P. (1978). Attitudinal qualities relating to the
strength of the attitude-behavior relationship. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 14, 398–408.
doi: 10.1016/0022-1031(78)90035-5

Frontiers in Psychology

14

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

Fazio, R. H., Chen, J., McDonel, E. C., and Sherman, S. J. (1982). Attitude
accessibility, attitude-behavior consistency and the strength of the objectevaluation association. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 18, 339–357. doi: 10.1016/00221031(82)90058-0

Kokkinaki, F., and Lunt, P. (1997). The relationship between involvement,
attitude accessibility and attitude-behavior consistency. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 53,
315–327. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8309.1997.tb01146.x
Lavine, H., Huff, J. W., Wagner, S. H., and Sweeney, D. (1998). The moderating
influence of attitude strength on the susceptibility to context effects. J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 75, 359–373. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.75.2.359

Fishbein, M., and Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and Changing Behavior: The
Reasoned Action Approach. London: Psychology Press.
Fuchs, R., Seelig, H., Gohner, W., Schlatterer, M., and Ntoumanis, N. (2017). The
two sides of goal intentions: Intention self-concordance and intention strength as
predictors of physical activity. Psychol. Health 32, 110–126. doi: 10.1080/08870446.
2016.1247840

Luttrell, A., and Sawicki, V. (2020). Attitude strength: distinguishing predictors
versus defining features. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 14:e12555. doi: 10.1111/
spc3.12555
Luttrell, A., and Togans, L. J. (2021). The stability of moralized attitudes over
time. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 47, 551–564. doi: 10.1177/0146167220935737

Gardner, B., de Bruijn, G.-J., and Lally, P. (2011). Systematic review and metaanalysis of applications of the self-report habit index to nutrition and physical
activity behaviours. Ann. Behav. Med. 42, 174–187. doi: 10.1007/s12160-0119282-0

McCrae, R. R., and Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the five-factor model of
personality across instruments and observers. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 52, 81–90.
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.52.1.81

Geers, A. L., Wellman, J. A., and Lassiter, G. D. (2009). Dispositional optimism
and engagement: the moderating influence of goal prioritization. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 96, 913–932. doi: 10.1037/a0014830

McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., and Lawton, R. J. (2011).
Prospective prediction of health-related behaviors with the theory of planned
behavior: a meta-analysis. Health Psychol. Rev. 5, 97–144. doi: 10.1080/17437199.
2010.521684

Glasman, L. R., and Albarracín, D. (2006). Forming attitudes that predict future
behavior: a meta-analysis of the attitude-behavior relation. Psychol. Bull. 132,
778–822. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.5.778

McEachan, R., Taylor, N., Harrison, R., Lawton, R., Gardner, P., and Conner, M.
(2016). Meta-analysis of the Reasoned Action Approach (RAA) to understanding
health behaviors. Ann. Behav. Med. 50, 592–612. doi: 10.1007/s12160-0169798-4

Godin, G., and Conner, M. (2008). Intention-behavior relationship based on
epidemiological indices: an application to physical activity. Am. J. Health Promot.
22, 180–182. doi: 10.4278/ajhp.22.3.180

Morwitz, V. G., and Munz, K. P. (2020). Intentions. Consum. Psychol. Rev. 4,
26–41. doi: 10.1002/arcp.1061

Godin, G., Conner, M., and Sheeran, P. (2005). Bridging the intention-behavior
“gap”: the role of moral norm. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 44, 497–512. doi: 10.1348/
014466604X17452

Norman, P., Wilding, S., and Conner, M. (2022). Does temporal stability
moderate reasoned action approach relations with Covid-19 preventive
behaviours? Ann. Behav. Med. doi: 10.1093/abm/kaac022

Gopinath, M., and Nyer, P. U. (2009). The effect of public commitment on
resistance to persuasion: the influence of attitude certainty, issue importance,
susceptibility to normative influence, preference for consistency and source
proximity. Int. J. Res. Market. 26, 60–68. doi: 10.1016/j.ijresmar.2008.08.003

Orbell, S., and Sheeran, P. (1998). ‘Inclined abstainers’: a problem for predicting
health—related behaviour. Br. J. Health Psychol. 37, 151–165. doi: 10.1111/j.20448309.1998.tb01162.x

Hagger, M., Chatzisarantis, N., and Biddle, S. (2002). A meta-analytic review
of the theories of reasoned action and planned behavior in physical activity:
Predictive validity and the contribution of additional variables. J. Sport Exerc.
Psychol. 24, 3–32. doi: 10.1123/jsep.24.1.3

Ouellette, J. A., and Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention in everyday life: the
multiple processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior. Psychol. Bull.
124, 54–74. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.124.1.54
Petty, R. E., and Cacioppo, J. T. (1977). Forewarning, cognitive responding, and
resistance to persuasion. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 35, 645–655. doi: 10.1037/00223514.35.9.645

Hagger, M. S., Cheung, M. W.-L., Ajzen, I., and Hamilton, K. (2022). Perceived
behavioral control moderating effects in the theory of planned behavior: a metaanalysis. Health Psychol. 41, 155–167. doi: 10.1037/hea0001153

Petty, R. E., and Krosnick, J. A. (eds) (1995). Attitude Strength: Antecedents and
Consequences. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Hall, P. (2013). “Intention strength,” in Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine, eds
M. D. Gellman and J. R. Turner (New York, NY: Springer), doi: 10.1007/978-14419-1005-9_1708

Pfau, M., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D., Wood, M., Yin, S., Cho, J., Lu, K.-H., et al.
(2003). Attitude accessibility as an alternative explanation for how inoculation
confers resistance. Commun. Monogr. 70, 39–51. doi: 10.1037/10.1080/71511
4663

Haugtvedt, C. P., and Petty, R. E. (1992). Personality and persuasion: need for
cognition moderates the persistence and resistance of attitude changes. J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 63, 308–319. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.63.2.308

Philipp-Muller, A., Wallace, L. E., and Wegener, D. T. (2020). Where does
moral conviction fit?: A factor analytic approach examining antecedents to attitude
strength. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 86:103900. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2019.103900

Haugtvedt, C. P., and Wegener, D. T. (1994). Message order effects in
persuasion: an attitude strength perspective. J. Consum. Res. 21, 205–218. doi:
10.1086/209393

Pieters, R. G. M., and Verplanken, B. (1995). Intention-behaviour consistency:
effects of consideration set size, involvement and need for cognition. Eur. J. Soc.
Psychol. 25, 531–543. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2420250505

Houston, D. A., and Fazio, R. H. (1989). Biased processing as a function of
attitude accessibility: making objective judgments subjectively. Soc. Cogn. 7, 51–66.
doi: 10.1521/soco.1989.7.1.51

Prestwich, A. J., Perugini, M., and Hurling, R. (2008). Goal desires moderation
intention-behaviour relations. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 47, 49–71. doi: 10.1348/
014466607X218221

Howe, L. C., and Krosnick, J. A. (2017). Attitude strength. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
68, 327–351. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033600
Johnson, R. E., Chang, C. H., and Lord, R. G. (2006). Moving from cognition to
behavior: what research says. Psychol. Bull. 132, 381–415. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.
132.3.381

Prislin, R. (1996). Attitude stability and attitude strength: one is enough to make
it stable. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 26, 447–477. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0992(199605)
26:3<447::AID-EJSP768<3.0.CO;2-I

Judge, L. W., Bellar, D., Petersen, J., Lutz, R., Gilreath, E., Simon, L., et al. (2012).
The attitudes and perceptions of adolescent track and field athletes toward PED
use. Perform. Enhanc. Health 1, 75–82. doi: 10.1016/j.peh.2012.04.002

Rebar, A. L., Rhodes, R. E., and Gardner, B. (2019). How we are misinterpreting
physical activity intention – behavior relations and what to do about it. Int. J.
Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 16:71. doi: 10.1186/s12966-019-0829-y

Keer, M., Conner, M., Van den Putte, B., and Neijens, P. (2014). The temporal
stability and predictive validity of affect-based and cognition-based intentions. Br.
J. Soc. Psychol. 53, 315–327. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12034

Rhodes, R. E., and de Bruijn, G.-J. (2013). How big is the physical activity
intention-behaviour gap? A meta-analysis using the action control framework. Br.
J. Health Psychol. 18, 296–309. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12032

Krosnick, J. A. (1988). Attitude importance and attitude change. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 24, 240–255. doi: 10.1016/0022-1031(88)90038-8

Rhodes, R. E., and Dickau, L. (2012). Experimental evidence for the intentionbehavior relationship in the physical activity domain: a meta-analysis. Health
Psychol. 31, 724–727. doi: 10.1037/a0027290

Krosnick, J. A. (1989). Attitude importance and attitude accessibility. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. Bull. 15, 297–308. doi: 10.1177/0146167289153002

Rhodes, R. E., Cox, A., and Reza Sayar, M. A. (2022). What predicts the physical
activity intention–behavior gap? A Systematic Review. Ann. Behav. Med. 56, 1–20.
doi: 10.1093/abm/kaab044

Krosnick, J. A., and Schuman, H. (1988). Attitude intensity, importance, and
certainty and susceptibility to response effects. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 54,
940–952. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.940

Rhodes, R. E., Saelens, B. E., and Sauvavage-Mar, C. (2018). Understanding
physical activity through interactions between the built environment and social
cognitions: A systematic review. Sports Med. 48, 1893–1912. doi: 10.1007/s40279018-0934-0

Krosnick, J. A., Boninger, D. S., Chuang, Y. C., Berent, M. K., and Carnot, C. G.
(1993). Attitude strength: one construct or many related constructs? J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 65, 1132–1151. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.81.4.566

Frontiers in Psychology

15

frontiersin.org

Conner and Norman

10.3389/fpsyg.2022.923464

Sheeran, P., and Webb, T. L. (2016). The intention-behavior gap. Soc. Personal.
Compass 10, 503–518. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12265

Rogers, R. W. (1983). “Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals
and attitude change: a revised theory of protection motivation,” in Social
Psychophysiology: A Source Book, eds J. T. Cacioppo and R. E. Petty (New York,
NY: Guilford Press), 153–176.

Sheeran, P., Godin, G., Conner, M., and Germain, M. (2017). Paradoxical effects
of experience: past behavior both strengthens and weakens the intention-behavior
relationship. J. Assoc. Consum. Res. 2, 309–318. doi: 10.1086/691216

Sandberg, T., and Conner, M. (2009). A mere measurement effect for anticipated
regret: impacts on cervical screening attendance. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 221–236.
doi: 10.1348/014466608X347001

Sheeran, P., Maki, A., Montanaro, E., Bryan, A., Klein, W. M. P., Miles, E.,
et al. (2016). The impact of changing attitudes, norms, and self-efficacy on healthrelated intentions and behavior: a meta-analysis. Health Psychol. 35, 1178–1188.1.
doi: 10.1037/hea0000387

Sandberg, T., and Conner, M. (2011). Using self-generated validity to promote
exercise behaviour. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 50, 769–783. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8309.2010.
02004.x

Sheeran, P., Norman, P., and Orbell, S. (1999). Evidence that intentions based
on attitudes better predict behaviour than intentions based on subjective norms.
Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 29, 403–406. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0992(199903/05)29:
2/3<403::AID-EJSP942>3.0.CO;2-A

Schüz, B. (2017). Socio-economic status and theories of health behaviour: time
to upgrade a control variable. Br. J. Health Psychol. 22, 1–7. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.
12205
Schüz, B., Brick, C., Wilding, S., and Conner, M. (2020). Socioeconomic status
moderates the effects of health cognitions on health behaviors: two multi-behavior
studies. Ann. Behav. Med. 54, 36–48. doi: 10.1093/abm/kaz023

Sheeran, P., Trafimow, D., and Armitage, C. J. (2003). Predicting behaviour
from perceived behavioural control: tests of the accuracy assumption of the
theory of planned behaviour. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 42, 393–410. doi: 10.1348/
014466603322438224

Schüz, B., Conner, M., Wilding, S., Alhwatan, R., Prestwich, A., and Norman,
P. (2021). Do socio-structural factors moderate the effects of health cognitions
on COVID-19 protection behaviours? Soc. Sci. Med. 285:114261. doi: 10.1016/j.
socscimed.2021.114261

Skitka, L. J. (2014). “The psychological foundations of moral conviction,” in
Advances in Moral Psychology, eds J. C. Wright and H. Sarkissian (London:
Bloomsbury Academic Press), 148–166.

Schüz, B., Li, A. S. W., Harding, A., McEachan, R. R. C., and Conner, M. (2017).
Socioeconomic status as a moderator between social cognitions and physical
activity: systematic review and meta-analysis based on the theory of planned
behavior. Psychol. Sport Exerc. 30, 186–195. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2017.03.004

Skitka, L. J., and Bauman, C. W. (2008). Moral conviction and political
engagement. Polit. Psychol. 29, 29–54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9221.2007.00611.x
Tormala, Z. L., and Rucker, D. D. (2018). Attitude certainty: antecedents,
consequences, and new directions. Consum. Psychol. Rev. 1, 72–89. doi: 10.1002/
arcp.1004

Schwartz, S. H. (1978). Temporal instability as a moderator of the attitudebehavior relationship. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 36, 715–724. doi: 10.1037/00223514.36.7.715

Triandis, H. C. (1980). Reflections on trends in cross-cultural research. J. Cross
Cult. Psychol. 11, 35–58. doi: 10.1177/0022022180111003

Schwarzer, R., and Luszczynska, A. (2015). “Health action process approach,”
in Predicting and Changing Health Behaviour: Research and Practice with Social
Cognition Models, 3rd Edn, eds M. Conner and P. Norman (Maidenhead: Open
University Press), 252–278.

Unsworth, K., Yeo, G., and Beck, J. (2014). Multiple goals: a review and
derivation of general principles. J. Organ. Behav. 8, 1064–1078. doi: 10.1002/job.
1963

Sheeran, P. (2002). Intention-behavior relations: a conceptual and empirical
review. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 12, 1–30. doi: 10.1080/14792772143000003

Warland, R. H., and Sample, J. (1973). Response certainty as a moderator
variable in attitude measurement. Rural Sociol. 38, 174–180.

Sheeran, P., and Abraham, C. (2003). Mediator of moderators: temporal stability
of intention and the intention–behavior relationship. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
29, 205–215. doi: 10.1177/0146167202239046

Webb, T. L., and Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions
engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol.
Bull. 132, 249–268. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.249

Sheeran, P., and Conner, M. (2017). Improving the translation of intentions into
health actions: the role of motivational coherence. Health Psychol. 36, 1065–1073.
doi: 10.1037/hea0000553

Wood, C., Conner, M., Sandberg, T., Taylor, N., Godin, G., Miles, E., et al.
(2016). The impact of asking intention or self-prediction questions on subsequent
behavior: a meta-analysis. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 20, 245–268. doi: 10.1177/
1088868315592334

Sheeran, P., and Conner, M. (2019). Degree of reasoned action predicts
increased intentional control and reduced habitual control over health behaviors.
Soc. Sci. Med. 228, 68–74. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.03.015

Ziegler, R., and Schlett, C. (2016). An attitude strength and selfperception framework regarding the bi-directional relationship of job
satisfaction with extra-role and in-role behavior: the doubly moderating
role of work certainty. Front. Psychol. 7:235. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
00235

Sheeran, P., and Orbell, S. (2000). Using implementation intentions
to increase attendance for cervical cancer screening. Health Psychol. 19,
283–289. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.19.3.283

Frontiers in Psychology

16

frontiersin.org

