Personality and Social Psychology
Review

http://psr.sagepub.com/

Residual Effects of Past on Later Behavior: Habituation and Reasoned Action Perspectives
Icek Ajzen
Pers Soc Psychol Rev

 2002 6: 107

DOI: 10.1207/S15327957PSPR0602_02

The online version of this article can be found at:
http://psr.sagepub.com/content/6/2/107

Published by:

http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Society for Personality and Social Psychology

Additional services and information for 

Personality and Social Psychology Review

 can be found at:

Email Alerts: 

http://psr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts

Subscriptions: 

http://psr.sagepub.com/subscriptions

Reprints: 

http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav

Permissions: 

http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

Citations: 

http://psr.sagepub.com/content/6/2/107.refs.html

>> 

Version of Record 

- May 1, 2002

What is This?

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personality and Social Psychology Review
2002, Vol. 6, No. 2, 107-122

Copyright © 2002 by
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Residual Effects of Past on Later Behavior:
Habituation and Reasoned Action Perspectives

Icek Ajzen
Department ofPsychology
University ofMassachusetts-Amherst

The frequency with which a behavior has been performed in the past is found to ac-
count for variance in later behavior independent of intentions. This is often taken
as evidence for habituation of behavior and as complementing the reasoned mode
of operation assumed by such models as the theory ofplanned behavior. In this arti-
cle, I question the idea that the residual effect ofpast on later behavior can be at-
tributed to habituation. The habituation perspective cannot account for residual ef-
fects in the prediction of low-opportunity behaviors performed in unstable contexts,
no accepted independent measure of habit is available, and empirical tests of the
habituation hypothesis have so far met with little success. A review of existing evi-
dence suggests that the residual impact of past behavior is attenuated when mea-
sures of intention and behavior are compatible and vanishes when intentions are
realistic, and specific plans for intention
strong and well formed, expectations are
implementation have been developed.

Past behavior, people are often told, is the best pre-
dictor of future behavior. Human beings are said to be
creatures of habit; they tend to persist in doing what
they have become accustomed to. It is well-known that,
with repeated performance, many behaviors become
routine to the point where they can be executed with
minimal conscious control (Schneider & Shiffrin,
1977; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977). For most of us,
walking, driving a car, brushing our teeth, getting
dressed, and the myriad of other activities we perform
every day become routines that do not require much fo-
cused attention. Even complex behaviors that are ini-
tially guided by explicit intentions and self-regulation
can, with sufficient repetition and practice, habituate
and become more or less automatic in the sense that
they are performed quickly, outside awareness, with
minimal attention, and in parallel with other activities
(Bargh, 1996; Ouellette & Wood, 1998; Posner &
Snyder, 1975).

Faced with uneven and generally modest success in
attempts to account for human social behavior, it is
tempting to look with envy at the reputed ability of
prior behavior to predict future action. At the very
least, we might want to incorporate past behavior as
one of the major predictors in our theories. This possi-

I thank Sheina Orbell and Bas Verplanken for providing unpub-
lished data and information about their research, and Kerry Cour-
neya, Bas Verplanken, and Wendy Wood for their comments on an
earlier draft.

Requests for reprints should be sent to Icek Ajzen, Department of
Tobin Hall, University of Massachusetts,

Psychology, Box 3771
Amherst, MA 01003. E-mail: aizentpsych.umass.edu

bility has often been examined in the context of the
theory of reasoned action (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980;
Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) or its successor, the theory of
planned behavior (Ajzen, 1988, 1991). Briefly, accord-
ing to the theory of planned behavior, human action is
guided by three kinds of considerations: beliefs about
the likely consequences of the behavior (behavioral
beliefs), beliefs about the normative expectations of
others (normative beliefs), and beliefs about the pres-
ence of factors that may facilitate or impede perfor-
mance of the behavior (control beliefs). In their respec-
tive aggregates, behavioral beliefs produce a favorable
or unfavorable attitude toward the behavior, normative
beliefs result in perceived social pressure or subjective
norm, and control beliefs give rise to perceived behav-
ioral control. In combination, attitude toward the be-
havior, subjective norm, and perception of behavioral
control lead to the formation of a behavioral intention.
As a general rule, the more favorable the attitude and
subjective norm and the greater the perceived control,
the stronger should be the person's intention to per-
form the behavior in question. Finally, given a suffi-
cient degree of actual control over the behavior, people
are expected to carry out their intentions when the op-
portunity arises. Intention is thus assumed to be the
immediate antecedent of behavior. However, because
many behaviors pose difficulties of execution that may
limit volitional control, it is useful to consider per-
ceived behavioral control in addition to intention. To
the extent that perceived behavioral control is veri-
dical, it can serve as a proxy for actual control and con-
tribute to the prediction of the behavior in question.

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

107

AJZEN

It is an undisputed fact that the frequency with
which a behavior has been performed in the past can
be a good predictor of later action. Of greater impor-
tance for my purposes, however, is the finding that
the relation between prior and later behavior is not
fully mediated by the constructs that serve as predic-
tors in the theories of reasoned action or planned be-
havior (Ajzen, 1991; Albarracin, Johnson, Fishbein,
& Meuellerleile, 2001; Bagozzi, 1981; Bentler &
Speckart, 1979; Fredricks & Dossett, 1983; see Con-
ner & Armitage, 1998, and Ouellette & Wood, 1998,
for reviews). A study of exercise behavior (Norman
& Smith, 1995) can serve as an illustration. Un-
dergraduate college students completed a theory of
planned behavior questionnaire on two occasions, 6
months apart. Frequency of exercise reported on the
second occasion (later behavior) was regressed on the
variables contained in the theory of planned behavior
and on exercise frequency reported on the first survey
(prior behavior). The results of a hierarchical regres-
sion analysis revealed a significant (I = .32, p < .01)
residual effect of prior exercise on later exercise.
Without the consideration of past exercise, the theory
of planned behavior variables accounted for 41% of
the variance in exercise behavior, with both intentions
and perceptions of behavioral control making signifi-
cant contributions to the prediction. However, adding
past exercise behavior to the prediction equation
raised the proportion of explained variance to 54%, a
highly significant increase.

Findings of this kind have been reported in a variety
of behavioral domains (see Conner & Armitage, 1998;
Ouellette & Wood, 1998), and they appear inconsistent
with the theory of planned behavior. According to the
theory, measures of intention and perceived behavioral
control should fully mediate the effects of earlier expe-
riences on later action. The finding that past behavior
has a significant residual impact on later behavior con-
tradicts this expectation. In this article, I consider sev-
eral alternative explanations for the residual effect of
prior on later behavior and examine these explanations
in light of published research.

Routinization of Social Behavior

Habituation Versus Reasoned Action

One way to look at the process of routinization is to
assume that repeated performance of a behavior pro-
duces habituation. When a habit develops, behavior is
said to come under the control of stimulus cues (Aarts,
Verplanken, & van Knippenberg, 1998; Ouellette &
Wood, 1998; Ronis, Yates, & Kirscht, 1989). On future
occasions, presence in a similar situation is sufficient
to trigger the automatic response sequence. A stable
stimulus context is therefore crucial for habitual be-

108

havior to occur, and habit has indeed been defined as
the tendency to repeat past behavior in a stable context
(Ouellette & Wood, 1998).

Routinization of behavior, however, is also consis-
tent with a reasoned action perspective. The theory of
planned behavior does not propose that individuals re-
view their behavioral, normative, and control beliefs
prior to every enactment of a frequently performed be-
havior. Instead, attitudes and intentions-once formed
and well-established-are assumed to be activated au-
tomatically and to guide behavior without the necessity
of conscious supervision (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2000).1
However, whereas the habituation perspective asserts
that routinized behavior is under the control of stimulus
cues, the reasoned action perspective postulates that
such behavior is guided by automatically activated or
spontaneous attitudes and intentions. The distinction
between routinization as reflecting habit formation ver-
sus formation of spontaneous attitudes and intentions is
reminiscent ofthe exchanges between behaviorists who
adhered to Hull's (1943) reinforcement theory of learn-
ing and those who supported Tolman's (1938) purposive
behaviorism. Like the modern habituation perspective,
Hull and his disciples thought oflearning in terms of au-
tomatic habits established through reinforcement. In
contrast, and similar to the reasoned action perspective
of routinized behavior I advocate here, Tolman and his
followers preferred to think of learning in terms of men-
tal processes, cognitive events, and the formation oftacit
hypotheses and expectations. The implications of the
two perspectives, however, are quite similar: So long as
the context remains relatively unchanged, routinized
behavior is performed in a largely automatic fashion
with minimal conscious control.

Deliberate Versus Spontaneous Modes
of Operation

Currently popular dual-mode processing models of
human judgment, attitude change, and the attitude-be-
havior relation (Fazio, 1990; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986;
see Chaiken & Trope, 1999; Smith & DeCoster, 2000)
imply that behavior can be generated in one of two
ways: It can be guided by conscious deliberation or by
automatic reliance on well-established routines (cf.
Bargh, 1989, 1994; Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Ouellette

IUnlike implicit cognitive responses (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995),
which are said to be unavailable to self-report or introspection and that
can be unrelated to explicit responses (Greenwald, McGhee, &
Schwartz, 1998; Kawakami & Dovidio, 2001), the spontaneous atti-
tudes and intentions in the reasoned action perspective are assumed to
be accessible in memory and equivalent to explicitly expressed atti-
tudes and intentions. This is not to deny the importance ofimplicit atti-
tudes and intentions. However, the reasoned action approach I advo-
cate here deals only with attitudes and intentions that are available to
introspection, whether effortfully brought to mind or invoked in a
more automatic or spontaneous manner.

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

& Wood, 1998).2 The theory of planned behavior is
consistent with this approach. Novel behaviors and un-
familiar situations are said to evoke careful delibera-
tion and controlled production of beliefs, attitudes, and
intentions that direct subsequent behavior. In contrast,
routine behaviors are assumed to be performed sponta-
neously and to be guided by automatically activated at-
titudes and intentions (see Ajzen & Fishbein, 2000;
Ajzen & Sexton, 1999).

There is abundant evidence to show that attitudes,
intentions, and simple acts can indeed be activated au-
tomatically (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Bargh, Chen,
& Burrows, 1996; Fazio, Sanbonmatsu, Powell, &
Kardes, 1986; Gollwitzer, 1999). However, most rou-
tines in everyday life, whether going to the movies or
to a restaurant, are best described as semiautomatic re-
sponse patterns that involve controlled as well as au-
tonomous phases (Abelson, 1981; Bargh, 1989; Logan
& Cowan, 1984; Wegner & Bargh, 1998). Moreover,
even in the case of controlled activities, the amount of
deliberation varies depending on motivation and cog-
nitive capacity. At one end of the information process-
ing continuum are novel or rarely performed behaviors
that require deliberation, formation of an explicit in-
tention, and conscious monitoring for their execution.
At the other extreme are familiar behaviors that have
become automatic as a result of frequent performance
and are now guided by spontaneous attitudes and inten-
tions. From a reasoned action perspective, at both ends
of the continuum behavior is controlled by such cogni-
tive factors as beliefs, attitudes, and intentions-ef-
fortfully at the controlled end and automatically at the
spontaneous end. This view contrasts with the habitua-
tion perspective that assumes that routinized behavior
is under the direct control of stimulus cues.

Is Frequency of Past Behavior a Valid
Indicator of Habit Strength?

According to the habituation perspective, the more
frequently a behavior has been performed in the past,
the more it has come under stimulus control, that is, the
stronger the habit. The tendency for social psycholo-
gists to identify past behavior frequency with habit
strength can perhaps be traced to Triandis's (1977)
model of interpersonal behavior. According to this
model, the probability that an act will be performed is a
function of intentions and habits (moderated by fa-
cilitating conditions), and habit strength "is measured
by the number of times the act has already been per-
formed by the person" (Triandis, 1977, p. 10). Thus,

2Most dual-mode processing models assume that motivation and
cognitive capacity determine whether the deliberative or spontane-
ous mode dominates. In contrast, the habituation perspective seems
to assume that the mode of operation employed is a function of the
frequency with which the behavior has been performed in the past (in
a stable context).

the strength of a habit is assumed to grow with repeated
performance of the behavior, and its effect on later be-
havior increases accordingly.

In contrast, the reasoned action perspective sees no
necessary link between frequency of past behavior and
its routinization. Just because a behavior has been per-
formed many times does not, by itself, prove habitua-
tion. No matter how often we may have climbed the
same mountain, it is difficult to believe that this be-
havior has become routine in the sense of constituting
an automatic response sequence. Behaviors of this
kind require conscious control, even after they have
been performed many times. Whether a frequently per-
formed behavior has or has not habituated is an empiri-
cal question, and to answer it we need an independent
and validated measure of habit.

Automaticity in motor behaviors versus auto-
Another problem of equating habit
matic decisions.
strength with frequency of past behavior is that this
practice fails to distinguish between automaticity in the
execution of a behavior and automaticity in the deci-
sion to take the action in question. A behavioral inten-
tion is the cognitive representation of a decision to per-
form a given behavior. When the same decision is
made repeatedly, the intention becomes spontaneous;
it is readily accessible in memory and is activated au-
tomatically without conscious intervention. However,
even when an intention is constructed mindfully and
with careful deliberation, the subsequent behavior may
be performed in largely an automatic fashion. Thus, a
person may deliberate at length before settling on a
choice in a restaurant, but once the decision is made,
consumption of the meal may proceed automatically,
without much conscious effort.

The habit construct, as developed in psychology by
learning theorists (e.g., Hull, 1943), was originally ap-
plied to relatively simple behaviors by lower animals,
such as a rat running through a T-maze. The rat's ten-
dency to make a left turn at the junction can be streng-
thened by placing food at the end of the maze's left
arm, thus reinforcing the left-turn response. It is the de-
cision to turn left that is reinforced in the T-maze, not
the mechanics involved in running along the pathway
to the goal because these mechanics are the same
whether the rat turns left or right. A large number of re-
inforced trials produces a strong habit to turn left, as in-
dicated by a high probability (relative frequency) of the
left-turn response. However, it should be clear that this
learning process also produces at the same time a low
probability of a turn to the right. That is, the rat devel-
ops not only a strong habit to turn left but also a strong
habit not to turn right. If we recorded the frequency
with which the rat turns right, a low frequency would
not indicate a weak habit. Instead, a weak habit would
be indicated by a pattern of behavior that shows no
clear preference between the left and right options.

109

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

AJZEN

This discussion shows that frequency of past behav-
ior may not provide a valid indication of habit strength.
First, the fact that a behavior has been performed many
times is no guarantee that it has habituated. Second, even
if habituation occurred, researchers cannot be sure how
habit strength is related to performance frequency. We
would expect skill level to increase with performance,
but if we want to predict the course of action people will
take, that is, which of several alternatives they will pur-
sue, then frequency ofpast behavior may not be a useful
indicator ofthe relevant habit. Drivers who always get in
their cars, start their engines, and begin to drive may de-
velop a strong habit to perform this sequence of events.
The fact that they exhibit a low frequency of wearing a
seat belt does not indicate a weak habit (cf. Mittal,
1988). In a decision-making context, therefore, habit
strength may not be directly proportional to frequency
of past behavior. Instead, it may exhibit a U-shaped
function such that habit strength rises when the fre-
quency of a chosen alternative increases as well as when
the frequency of the chosen alternative decreases.

Can Habit Explain the Correlation
Between Prior and Later Behavior?

Past behavior, even when it has been frequently per-
formed, does not directly control performance of the
behavior on future occasions. Instead, investigators
have proposed that the strong and consistent relation
between past and later behavior is due to the process of
habituation (e.g., Aarts et al.,1998; Bagozzi, 1981;
Bentler & Speckart, 1979; Ouellette & Wood, 1998).
With repeated performance, a habit is assumed to de-
velop, and the habitual behavior is triggered automati-
cally in the presence of controlling stimulus events.

Strictly speaking, the observed correlation between
frequency of prior and later behavior is no more (or
less) than an indication that the behavior in question is
stable over time. In the absence of an independent mea-
sure of the habit construct, using habit to explain the re-
lation between prior and later behavior involves circu-
lar reasoning: One infers the existence of a habit from
the behavior's temporal stability and then uses the in-
ferred construct to explain the observed phenomenon.
Moreover, reasoned as well as automatic processes can
account for temporal stability of behavior. Thus, be-
havioral stability may be attributable not to habituation
but to the influence of cognitive and motivational fac-
tors that remain unchanged and are present every time
the behavior is observed (Ajzen, 1991; Eagly & Chai-
ken, 1993).3 In the theory of planned behavior, the cru-
cial factors of interest are intentions and perceptions of

3Temporal stability of behavior may also be in part a function of
self-perception processes whereby people infer their attitudes from
their past behavior and these attitudes then influence their present in-
tentions and actions (Albarracin & Wyer, 2000; Zanna, Olson, &
Fazio, 1981).

110

behavioral control. So long as these factors remain un-
changed, the behavior should also remain the same.

Can Habit Explain the Residual
Impact of Prior on Later Behavior?

Like the behavior's temporal stability, the residual
impact of past behavior on later behavior has also been
attributed to the process of habituation or routinization.
When the behavior habituates, it presumably comes
under the direct control of stimulus cues and, more im-
portant, intentions and other cognitive factors are said
to lose some of their predictive validity (Aarts et al.,
1998; Ouellette & Wood, 1998). As a result, past be-
havior frequency acquires a residual relation to later
behavior. However, the proposition that habit, as indi-
cated by frequency of past behavior in a stable context,
can explain the residual effect of prior on later behavior
faces a number of difficulties.

1. Residual effects of past on later behavior are
not evidence of habit. The observed residual impact
of prior behavior on later behavior has often been
taken as prima facie evidence for the operation of
habit (e.g., Bentler & Speckart, 1979; see Conner &
Armitage, 1998). However, just as behavioral stabil-
ity does not provide evidence for habituation, the re-
sidual effect of past behavior on later behavior, unme-
diated by intention, is also not sufficient to prove the
operation of habit. Any factor that influenced behav-
ior in the past and that continues to exert an effect at
present could explain the residual effect. Indeed,
there is no shortage of candidates. Questioning the
sufficiency of the theory of planned behavior, investi-
gators have suggested a variety of additional determi-
nants of intentions and behavior, including personal
or moral norms (e.g., Gorsuch & Ortberg, 1983), an-
ticipated regret (e.g., Richard, van der Pligt, & de
Vries, 1995), desire to attain a behavioral goal (Peru-
gini & Bagozzi, 2001), self-identity (e.g., Sparks &
1998), and affect (Manstead & Parker,
Guthrie,
1995). If added to the model, these factors-and
many others-could, in theory, mediate the effect of
prior behavior on later behavior. For example, it is
possible that repeated contributions to the American
Cancer Society produce in an actor a sense of com-
mitment to the cause of fighting cancer. This commit-
ment may then be responsible for continued contribu-
tions on future occasions, over and above intentions.
To show that habit is the crucial mediating factor, it is
not sufficient to point to the residual link between fre-
quency of prior behavior and later behavior. Instead,
evidence needs to be provided that is independent of
the behavior that habit is meant to explain.

2. Low-opportunity behaviors have residual effects.
Because habituation requires repeated enactment of a
behavior, it applies only to high-opportunity activities

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

that can be performed repeatedly. However, the residual
effect of past on later behavior has been reported not
only with respect to behaviors of this kind but also with
respect to low-opportunity behaviors. In a study of ex-
tra-relationship involvement, for example, the residual
effect of past on later infidelities was found to be strong
and significant (Drake & McCabe, 2000). Intentions
and perceptions ofbehavioral control together account-
ed for 22% of the variance in frequency of extra-rela-
tionship involvements over a 6-month period. By com-
parison, past frequency of such involvements by itself
explained 56% of the variance, and it significantly im-
proved the prediction when added to the theory of
planned behavior. Participants reported engaging in ex-
tra-relationship affairs with relatively low frequency,
and it would therefore be difficult to argue that the resid-
ual effect was due to habituation. Residual effects have
also been reported for other low-opportunity behaviors
such as searching for employment (Van Ryn & Vinokur,
1992) and attending medical checkups (Norman & Con-
ner, 1996).

In conclusion, attempts to attribute residual effects
of past behavior to habituation face serious difficulties.
Because no independent indicators of habit strength
are readily available, investigators have had to rely on
measures of past behavior frequency. However, it is not
clear that past behavior is necessarily a measure of
habit. It may reflect the operation of other factors that
could account equally well for its residual effect on
later behavior. In addition, the hypothesized process of
habituation cannot account for residual effects in the
prediction of low-opportunity behaviors.

A Reasoned Action Approach
to the Residual Effect of Prior
on Later Behavior

As long as the stimulus situation remains stable and
intentions remain unchanged, there is no reason for be-
havior to change, and past behavior should be a good
predictor of later behavior. What requires explanation,
however, is why and how past behavior acquires a di-
rect, residual impact on later behavior, independent of
intentions and perceptions of behavioral control. In a
stable context, one would expect intentions as well as
past behavior to be good predictors of later behavior,
and there is no reason to anticipate that past behavior
will account for variance not explained by intentions.
The habituation perspective attributes the residual ef-
fect to a process of habituation in which control over
the behavior shifts from cognitive factors to environ-
mental cues, but this view fails to describe the changes
in intentions or behavior that would be required to
produce the observed residual effects. Why-if the
situation remains stable-should intentions lose their
predictive validity?

The most likely explanation from a reasoned ac-
tion perspective is that intentions have changed and
that the newly formed intentions are relatively poor
predictors of later behavior. There is general agree-
ment that even performance of a high-opportunity be-
havior is at least initially controlled by deliberate in-
tentions. If the stimulus situation, as well as the
cognitive determinants of a repeated behavior, re-
mained stable over time, there would no reason for
intentions or behavior to change. Under such condi-
tions, current intentions would be perfectly consistent
with past behavior, and they would be sufficient to
predict later action. The presence of a residual impact
of past on later behavior implies that something must
have changed: Later behavior is still consistent with
past behavior, but it is no longer completely in line
with intentions. Assuming that the context has re-
mained the same, the only possible explanation is that
intentions have changed and that the new intentions
are less than perfect predictors of later behavior.

Several reasons can be suggested as to why people
may fail to carry out newly formed intentions (see
Ajzen, 1985). Of limited theoretical interest is the pos-
sibility that they simply forget to enact the new inten-
tion. Thus, people who form the intention to put on a
seat belt after driving without one for many years may
sometimes, "by force of habit," forget to enact their in-
tentions until they have become accustomed to the new
behavior. There is evidence to show that difficulties of
this kind can be overcome by forming an implemen-
tation intention, that is, an explicit plan as to exactly
when and how the behavior is to be enacted (cf. Goll-
witzer, 1999). I return to the question of implementa-
tion intentions later in this article.

A conceptually more interesting possibility is that
the failure to act in accordance with a newly formed in-
tention is due to factors related to the predictors in the
theory of planned behavior. Among the possible rea-
sons are early indications of detrimental unanticipated
consequences, negative reactions from important ref-
erents, underestimation of the behavior's difficulty,
and lack of resolve or willpower. "Bad habits" are of-
ten attributed to task difficulty or lack of resolve. Thus,
many smokers intend to quit but fail to carry out their
intentions, and people who intend to maintain a diet to
lose weight often have great difficulty doing so. It
should be noted, however, that these failures do not es-
cape the person's attention. In fact, they are generally
accompanied by a good deal of anguish and regret. It
would be difficult to argue that, in these instances, the
residual impact of past on later behavior represents the
operation of an automatic habit. People are conscious
of their routine response tendencies-that is, their bad
habits-and their behavior exhibits none of the hall-
marks of automaticity: It is not performed quickly, out-
side awareness, with minimal attention, and in parallel
with other activities.

111

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

AJZEN

In sum, forgetting, lack of resolve, unanticipated
detrimental consequences, and other difficulties may
account for people's failure to carry out their intentions
and may thus help explain the residual impact of prior
on later behavior. However, this does not provide evi-
dence for habituation of behavior because the failure to
carry out an intention is often a conscious process that,
far from proceeding automatically, cah greatly inter-
fere with other activities.

Empirical Tests
of the Habituation Perspective

As noted, direct tests of the hypothesis that habit
mediates the relation between prior and later behavior
frequency require an independent measure of habit
strength. However, lacking such a measure, it is still
possible to derive certain implications from the habit-
uation hypothesis that can be submitted to empirical
test. Thus, it has been suggested that if habit is an ac-
tive influence it should moderate the effect of inten-
tions on behavior. When behavior has come under the
direct control of stimulus cues, intentions and other
cognitive factors should be relatively unimportant.
Under these conditions, frequency of past behavior
should be a good predictor of later behavior, but cog-
nitive and motivational factors such as intentions
should lose their predictive validity (Aarts et al.,
1998; Ouellette & Wood, 1998). This hypothesis has
been tested in different ways.

Moderating Effect
of Past Behavior Frequency

One approach was adopted by Verplanken, Aarts,
van Knippenberg, and Moonen (1998). In this study,
car use during a 7-day period-a high-opportunity be-
havior-was predicted from intentions to use the car
and from frequency of past car use (considered a mea-
sure of habit). Using simple slope analysis (Aiken &
West, 1991), Verplanken et al. (1998) found a signifi-
cant interaction between intentions and frequency of
past behavior. The relation between intention and later
car use was, as predicted, weakest for individuals who
had used the car frequently in the past and strongest for
individuals at the lower end of past car use. Individuals
who reported using the car at an intermediate rate fell
in between the other two groups.

The results of Verplanken et al. (1998), however,
run counter to a great deal of other available evidence.
Whatever else it may signify, the frequency with
which a behavior has been performed in the past is a
good indication of the amount of direct experience
with the behavior, and it is well established that the
ability of attitudes and intentions to predict later be-

112

direct

increases

with amount of

havior
past
experience (see Fazio & Zanna, 1981). In one of their
studies, Fazio & Zanna (1978) used attitudes toward
volunteering to participate in psychological research
to predict actual volunteering behavior, and the atti-
tude-behavior correlation was found to be strongest
for individuals who had participated in a large number
of experiments in the past (top third). The attitude-be-
havior correlation in this group was .42 compared
with a correlation of -.03 for individuals who had par-
ticipated in relatively few experiments in the past
(bottom third).

Similar results emerged in a reanalysis of data from
a study of class attendance (Ajzen & Madden, 1986).
College students' class attendance was recorded over a
period of 16 class sessions. After the first 8 sessions, a
questionnaire was administered that contained mea-
sures of the constructs in the theory of planned behav-
ior. The first 8 sessions thus served as a measure of past
behavior and the final 8 sessions as the criterion. Par-
ticipants were divided into thirds on the basis of their
past attendance frequency and correlations were com-
puted between intentions and the frequency of later
class attendance separately for each subgroup. Con-
trary to the findings of Verplanken et al. (1998), the in-
tention-behavior correlation increased with frequency
of past attendance, from -.21 in the low-frequency
group to .14 in the intermediate frequency group to .31
in the high-frequency group.

The implications of these moderating effects of past
behavior frequency are far from clear, however. When
dealing with a high-opportunity behavior, such as car
use or class attendance, all participants can potentially
develop a strong habit. I noted earlier, however, that
just as high frequency of past behavior may indicate a
strong habit to perform the behavior, low frequency of
performance may indicate a strong habit not to perform
the behavior or to perform an alternative behavior. It
could be argued, therefore, that to examine the effect of
habit in terms of the moderating effect of prior behav-
ior it may be necessary to compare high and low per-
formance frequency with moderate frequency. In con-
trast to high and low frequency, moderate frequency
indicates an irregular pattern of behavioral perfor-
mance and thus, arguably, low habit strength.

This possibility was examined in another reanalysis
of the data from the class attendance study described
previously (Ajzen & Madden, 1986). Students who re-
vealed patterns of high or low past attendance were
compared with those who came to class on an irregular
basis (intermediate level of past attendance). Contrary
to the revised habit hypothesis, prediction of later be-
havior from intentions was greater for students who
had exhibited consistently high or low attendance in
the past (r = .44, p < .01) than for students who had at-
tended inconsistently (r = .14, ns).

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

Moderating Effects
of Behavior Opportunity

Perhaps a better approach would consider the op-
portunities people have to perform a given behavior.
Frequent opportunities to engage in a behavior in a sta-
ble context should produce a strong habit to perform or
not to perform the behavior in question. If taken as a
measure of habit, past behavior frequency should
therefore be a better predictor of high-opportunity as
opposed to low-opportunity behaviors. Conversely, in-
tentions should be better predictors of low- as com-
pared to high-opportunity behaviors because the for-
mer are presumably not as much under the control of
stimulus cues as are the latter.

In a test of these ideas, Ouellette and Wood (1998)
performed a meta-analysis of 15 data sets that they
classified as dealing with behaviors that can be per-
formed frequently (e.g., seat belt use, coffee drinking,
class attendance) or infrequently (e.g., flu shots, blood
donation, nuclear protest). To test the relative predic-
tive power of intentions and habits, the investigators re-
gressed behavior on intentions and past behavior si-
multaneously. The problem with this approach is that it
relies on the unproven equation of past behavior fre-
quency with habit strength. Whether we assume that
frequently performed behaviors have come under the
control of stimulus cues or remain under the control of
deliberate processes, we would expect that high-oppor-
tunity behaviors will exhibit greater stability over time
than low-opportunity behaviors. This expectation fol-
lows from well-established principles of psychological
measurement. An index of behavioral frequency based
on many observations is more reliable than one based
on relatively few observations. There is extensive em-
pirical evidence to show that a measure of behavior ag-
gregated over many occasions is more stable over time
than one that aggregated over fewer occasions (Ep-
stein, 1979, 1980). The habituation and reasoned ac-
tion perspectives differ only in their expectations
regarding the effect of intentions on later behavior. Ac-
cording to the habituation perspective,
intentions
should be less accurate predictors of high-opportunity
as opposed to low-opportunity behaviors. The rea-
soned action perspective, in either its deliberate or
spontaneous mode, would anticipate little difference.
The results provided no clear support for habituation.
As expected on the basis of both perspectives, past be-
havior frequency was a more accurate predictor for
high-opportunity (r = .64) than for low-opportunity (r =
.37) behaviors. However, consistent with the reasoned
action perspective, prediction of later behavior from in-
tentions was found to be quite accurate for both types of
behavior (r = .59 and r = .67 for high- and low-opportu-
nity behaviors, respectively). Moreover, as the investi-
gators acknowledged (Ouellette & Wood, 1998), it is

impossible to derive definite conclusions from this
meta-analysis because the high-opportunity behaviors
differed in substance from the low-opportunity behav-
iors. The two types of behavior may have differed not
only in performance opportunities but also in degree of
importance, familiarity, or other properties that could
account for any observed effects.

Moderating Effect of Context Stability

To address this problem, Ouellette and Wood
(1998) reported the results of primary research that
was designed to demonstrate the moderating effect of
contextual stability on the prediction of a target behav-
ior from intentions and prior behavior. The target be-
haviors selected were two high-opportunity activities:
watching TV and recycling. To estimate stability of the
supporting context, participants were asked to list the
activities (if any) they always performed prior to en-
gaging in each of these behaviors. On the basis of their
responses, they were divided into groups of high and
low context stability.

As expected, the results of this investigation re-
vealed a moderating effect of past behavior frequency,
but the pattern of findings again did not conform to pre-
dictions that would be derived from the habituation
perspective. For such high-opportunity behaviors as
watching TV and recycling, a stable context should al-
low strong habits to be formed, whereas an unstable
context should not. Consequently, one would expect a
high correlation between prior and later behavior for
individuals with a stable supporting context and a low-
er correlation for individuals with an unstable context.
The results only partly confirmed these expectations.
The correlations between prior recycling and recycling
assessed 3 weeks later were .96 in the stable context
and .12 in the unstable context. With respect to TV
watching, however, there was no appreciable differ-
ence (r = .59 and r = .56, respectively). This latter find-
ing implies either that watching TV does not require a
stable context or that the measure of context stability
developed in this study lacked construct validity.

Of greater importance, however, were the correla-
tions between intentions and later behavior. The habit-
uation perspective suggests that intentions should be
relatively good predictors of later behavior in an unsta-
ble context, but in a stable context where the behavior
is presumably under direct control of stimulus cues,
their predictive validity should decline. The reasoned
action perspective would not lead us to expect appre-
ciable differences between stable and unstable con-
texts. The results of the study were inconclusive. With
respect to watching TV, the intention-behavior corre-
lation was higher in the unstable context (r = .63) than
in the stable context (r = .46), although a reanalysis
showed that the difference between these two correla-

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

113

AJZEN

tions was not significant (z = .96). Moreover, there was
little difference with respect to recycling. Here, the
prediction of later behavior from intentions was actu-
ally slightly better in the stable context (r = .48) than in
the unstable context (r = .43). Thus, neither the meta-
analysis performed by Ouellette and Wood (1998) nor
their primary research provides clear support for habit-
uation as an explanation of the residual impact of prior
on later behavior.

Independent Measures of Habit

The research reviewed thus far offers no convincing
evidence to suggest that the residual effect of past on
later behavior is due to the operation of habit. The
problem, in part, is due to the fact that most efforts to
examine this issue have made the arbitrary assumption
that habit can be equated with frequency of past behav-
ior. A more appropriate approach would rely on an
operationalization of habit that is independent of the
behavior it is supposed to explain and predict. Like
measures of such constructs as moral obligation or
self-identity, an independent measure of habit could be
added to the theory of planned behavior, and its role as
a mediator between past and later behavior could then
be tested.

One attempt to develop an independent measure of
habit (Verplanken, Aarts, van Knippenberg, & van
Knippenberg, 1994) is based on the idea that the ac-
cessibility of a behavioral alternative increases with
habit strength, and some research based on this ap-
proach has been summarized in a recent review (Aarts
et al., 1998).4 The approach adopted is rooted in the
assumption that habits are akin to behavioral scripts
(Abelson, 1981), that is, to schemas that embody
knowledge of stereotyped event sequences. The mea-
sure, developed by Verplanken et al. (1994), confronts
respondents with a set of alternative behavioral choices
(e.g., different travel modes, such as car, bus, train, bi-
cycle) and asks them to indicate, as quickly as possible,
which option they would select in a number of hypo-
thetical situations (e.g., when going to the beach, visit-
ing friends, etc.). Frequency of choice across situations
is assumed to indicate habit strength.

The scripted behavior index results in highly reli-
able scores that tend to correlate well with frequency of
past behavior and to act in other ways similar to mea-
sures of past behavior (Aarts et al., 1998). However, in
his discussion of behavioral scripts, Abelson (1981)

4Other attempts to assess habit directly have asked respondents
to indicate whether they perform the behavior in question by force
of habit (Wittenbraker, Gibbs, & Kahle, 1983), as a matter of habit
or automatically (Orbell, Blair, Sherlock, & Conner, 2001), or
without awareness (Mittal, 1988). However, these investigations
did not try to test whether habit, as assessed, mediated the effect of
prior on later behavior.

warned against the equation of scripts with habits. He
noted that "the difference between a script and a habit
is that a script is a knowledge structure, not just a re-
sponse program" (Abelson, 1981, p. 722). More im-
portant, the procedure developed by Arts et al. may
have little to do with scripts or habits. Respondents
were asked to indicate their intentions or tendencies to
perform a particular behavior in different hypothetical
situations. Depending on the exact phrasing, the result-
ing measure is best interpreted as a generalized inten-
tion to perform the behavior or as a report of past be-
havior generalized across situations. The justification
for assuming that it may represent something other
than a generalized intention or past behavior is the in-
struction to participants to respond as quickly as possi-
ble. It is an empirical question whether time pressure
has any effect on responses and, if so, whether the mea-
sure obtained under time pressure is in fact an indicator
of habit strength.

If researchers disregard the measure's low face va-
lidity, they can use it to examine whether habit, as as-
sessed, can help to account for the residual effect of
prior on later behavior. This was done in a study of
travel mode choice (Bamberg, Ajzen, & Schmidt, in
press) that examined bus use among college students.
In support of the theory of planned behavior, students'
use of the bus was predicted quite accurately from in-
tentions and perceptions of behavioral control. How-
ever, consistent with past research, addition of prior be-
havior resulted in a significant increase in explained
variance. A structural equation analysis was used to ex-
amine the mediating effect of the scripted habit mea-
sure. Prior behavior was found to have strong and sig-
nificant impacts on habit (f3 = 0.64), as well as on
perceived behavioral control (f = 0.58), on intention
(f3 = 0.55), and on later behavior (P = 0.28). The direct
path from habit to later behavior, however, was weak
and not significant (I = 0.07), indicating that inclusion
of the scripted behavior index failed to support the as-
sumed mediating role of habit.

Empirical Tests of the Deliberate
Reasoned Action Perspective

The previous review of the literature indicates that
attempts to explain the residual effect of prior on later
behavior in terms of habituation have, so far, not been
very productive. Reliance on frequency of past behav-
ior as an indicator of habit strength is of questionable
validity, and neither the stability of behavior over time
nor the residual impact ofprior on later behavior can be
taken as prima facie evidence for habituation. More di-
rect tests of the habituation perspective, examining
whether past behavior frequency moderates the effect
of intentions on later behavior, have also yielded in-
conclusive results. In the remainder of this article, I

114

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

consider alternative explanations for the residual im-
pact of prior on later behavior, explanations involving
the deliberate mode of the reasoned action perspective.

Scale Compatibility

Studies that have dealt with repeated behavior have
usually tried to predict reported performance frequency
(e. g., Norman & Smith, 1995; Verplanken, Aarts, van
Knippenberg, & Moonen, 1998). In a comparable fash-
ion, such studies have also tended to assess past behavior
in terms ofthe number oftimes it has been performed. In
contrast, measures of attitudes, intentions, and percep-
tions ofbehavioral control usually ask about performing
(or not performing) the behavior, without reference to
frequency. Thus, participants in a study on exercising
may be asked to indicate how often they exercised in the
past 2 weeks and, 2 weeks hence, they may be asked the
same question again to assess their subsequent behavior.
The other variables in the theory of planned behavior,
however, might be assessed by means of7-point graphic
scales asking participants to rate regular exercise in the
next 2 weeks on an evaluative continuum, to indicate
whether other people expected them to exercise regu-
larly, to judge the difficulty of engaging in regular exer-
cise, and to express their intentions to exercise regularly
in the next 2 weeks. The measure of past behavior is
therefore likely to share method variance with the mea-
sure of later behavior, variance not shared by the mea-
sures of attitude, subjective norm, perceived behavioral
control, or intention (see Ajzen, 1991). Thus, the supe-
rior compatibility between the scales used to measure
past and later behavior may lend greater validity to the
measure ofpast behavior as compared to measures ofthe
other constructs (Coumeya & McAuley, 1993).

A reanalysis of published data (Courneya & McAu-
ley, 1994) confirms the importance of scale compati-
bility. In this study, participants reported the number of
times they had engaged in physical activity in the past 4
weeks and did so again 4 weeks later. At the first inter-
view, they also indicated their intentions to engage in
physical activity during the next 4 weeks. These inten-
tions were assessed on a 7-point likelihood scale rang-
ing from 1 (extremely unlikely) to 7 (extremely likely)
and on a numerical scale (the number of times respon-
dents intended to exercise in the next 4 weeks). Clearly,
the numerical scale was more compatible with the
measure of behavior than the likelihood scale.

The data obtained by Courneya and McAuley (1994)
revealed a strong correlation (r = .62, p < .01) between
past and later behavior. To test the residual effect of past
on later behavior, each measure of intention was held
constant in a reanalysis of the data. The correlation be-
tween prior and later behavior was reduced to .55 when
the likelihood measure was held constant, but to .34
when the numerical measure was held constant. The dif-
ference between these two partial correlations is statisti-

cally significant (z = 2.42, p < .01), indicating that a
behavior-compatible measure of intention can indeed
weaken the residual effect of past on later behavior.
However, the remaining partial correlation of .34 was
still statistically significant (p < .0 1), suggesting that the
residual effect of past behavior could not be explained
completely by lack of scale compatibility.5

Strength of Attitudes and Intentions

Strong attitudes and intentions have a number of
interesting qualities (see Petty & Krosnick, 1995, forre-
views). Ofgreatest interest for my purposes here, strong
attitudes and intentions are expected to be relatively sta-
ble over time and to predict manifest behavior better
than weak attitudes and intentions. Weak attitudes and
intentions with respect to a behavior most likely reflect
some degree of ambivalence, indifference, or uncer-
tainty. Clearly, such uncertain dispositions fail to pro-
vide clear guides to action. In the case of respondents
with weak dispositions, past behavior may be abetter in-
dicator of likely future action than are intentions. These
considerations imply that the residual effect of past be-
havior on later behavior should emerge when people
hold relatively weak attitudes and intentions but not
when their attitudes and intentions are strong.

Some support for this hypothesis can be found in a
study (Conner, Sheeran, Norman, & Armitage, 2000)
that tried to predict attendance at a health screening
from variables in the theory of planned behavior with
the addition of past attendance. Theory of planned be-
havior data were collected by mail survey at two points
in time, separated by 1 year. About 4 weeks after com-
pletion of each survey, participants received an invita-
tion to attend a health screening at their local general
practice in the course of the subsequent month. Patient
records were used to establish actual behavior at each
time point. The first observation of attendance served
as a measure of past behavior. It was taken prior to
administration of the second survey, which was then
used to predict attendance at the second screening-
the measure of later behavior. Stability of intentions
over the 1-year period, a measure of intention strength,
was obtained by computing the absolute difference be-
tween intentions assessed in the two surveys.

The results showed that past attendance at the health
screening had a significant direct effect on later behav-
ior even after the variables of the theory of planned be-
havior had been entered into the regression equation
(P = 0.93, p < .05). However, the effect of prior on later
behavior was found to be moderated by the stability of
intentions (I = -1.08, p < .05). Simple slope analysis

51n the theory of planned behavior, the predictors of later behav-
ior are intentions and perceptions of behavioral control. It is possible
that adding a measure of perceived behavioral control as a mediator
would further reduce the relation between prior and later behavior.

115

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

AJZEN

showed that, when intention stability was low (1 SD
below the mean) or moderate (at the mean), past be-
havior strongly predicted later action (J = 1.96, p < .01
and D = 0.93,p < .01, respectively). However, when the
stability of intentions was high (1 SD above the mean),
past attendance at the health screening failed to predict
later attendance (P = -0.10, ns).

Very similar results were reported in an investiga-
tion (Sheeran, Orbell, & Trafimow, 1999) that pre-
dicted the amount of time students spent studying
during their winter vacation. Theory of planned behav-
ior questionnaires were administered approximately 6
weeks prior to the vacation and again in the last week
prior to the vacation. Stability of intentions was mea-
sured by computing within-subjects correlations be-
tween the two waves across the five items used to as-
sess intentions. Past behavior was the amount of time
participants reported studying prior to the vacation,
and subsequent behavior during the vacation was re-
ported after students returned for the second semester.
Past studying behavior had a significant residual effect
on later behavior (I = 0.36, p < .01), but this effect was
again moderated by intention stability (I = -0.36, p <
.05). A simple slope analysis revealed the expected
pattern. When intentions were stable, it made little dif-
ference how much students had studied in the past;
their studying behavior was very well predicted from
intentions. However, when intentions were unstable,
they were relatively poor predictors of later studying
behavior that was instead consistent with prior behav-
ior.6 Strong, stable intentions thus appear to be a pre-
requisite for accurate prediction. When intentions are
strong, a measure of past behavior fails to account for
additional variance in later behavior. However, when
intentions are weak, as indicated by relatively low sta-
bility, past behavior can serve as a useful predictor over
and above intentions.

Belief Veridicality

Another possible explanation for the residual effect
of prior on later behavior is suggested by the stipula-
tion in the theory of planned behavior that perceived
behavioral control can contribute to the prediction of
behavior only to the extent that it accurately reflects a
person's actual control. Clearly, however, people are
not always accurate in their appraisals. Lack of rele-

6Sheeran et al. (1999) reported figures showing the results of
simple slope analyses but did not provide the regression coefficients
at different levels of intention stability. They did, however, report the
results of subgroup analyses in which the sample was split at the me-
dian level of intention stability. This analysis confirmed the conclu-
sions reached earlier: Past behavior was a significant predictor only
when intentions were unstable (I = 0.37, p < .01), not when they
were stable (,1 = 0.09, ns). Conversely, intentions predicted later be-
havior when they were stable (I = 0.58, p < .01) but not when they
were unstable (I = 0.08, ns).

116

vant information can produce inaccurate beliefs, and
there is plenty of evidence in the psychological litera-
ture to indicate that people's beliefs can also be biased
by a variety of cognitive and motivational processes
(for reviews, see Ajzen & Sexton, 1999; Nisbett &
Ross, 1980). For example, related to the veridicality of
perceived control, people are found to be overly opti-
mistic in estimating the amount of time it will take
them to complete a task (Buehler, Griffin, & Ross,
1994). In a series of studies, Buehler et al. showed that
people are inclined to underestimate task completion
times because they tend to focus on possible comple-
tion scenarios rather than on prior experience with task
completion. Estimates were found to become more re-
alistic when participants were instructed to relate their
predictions to past experiences.

a

as

Just

have

behavior,

Questions of veridicality can be raised not only with
respect to control beliefs but also with respect to behav-
people may
beliefs.
ioral and normative
underestimate or overestimate the difficulty of perform-
ing
they may also
unrealistic
expectations regarding the likely consequences of a
behavior, and they may misperceive what important oth-
ers expect of them. To the extent that people overestimate
the ease of performing a behavior and the favorability of
its outcomes, they are likely to form unrealistic intentions
to perform the behavior in question. When confronted
with the actual behavior, two processes may be set in
motion. First, people may reconsider their decisions, be-
come more realistic in their expectations, and modify
their intentions. Support for this process can be found in
a variety of domains. For example, research on contin-
gent valuation of public goods has documented that peo-
ple consistently overestimate the amount of money they
would be willing to pay for a worthwhile purpose (e. g.,
Brown, Champ, Bishop, & McCollum, 1996). When
they know that they will actually have to make a pay-
ment, indications of willingness to pay tend to be much
lower-a tendency known as hypothetical bias (cf.
Cummings & Taylor, 1999). A similar tendency was ob-
served in the study on exercising discussed previously
(Courneya & McAuley, 1994) in which participants' in-
tentions were found to overstate the frequency with
which they would engage in physical activity in the next
4 weeks. The actual frequency was, on average, 13.65,
but the intended frequency, M = 15.33, was significantly
higher. Respondents appeared to realize that their inten-
tions were overly optimistic, however. When asked to in-
dicate how often they expected to actually exercise in the
next 4 weeks, the average estimate was 13.51, very close
to the reported behavior.

Such findings are also common in other research
on the intention-behavior relation. For instance, in a
study (Linn, 1965) of racial attitudes and behavior,
White female college students were asked to indicate
their willingness to pose for a photograph with a
Black male that was to be used for a variety of pur-

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

poses. On a later occasion, they were asked to sign
releases of the photograph for these same purposes.
The results revealed inconsistencies between inten-
tions and behaviors because a large proportion of par-
ticipants failed to carry out their favorable intentions.
Postexperimental interviews traced these inconsisten-
cies to the fact that, when expressing their intentions,
many participants had disregarded the likely negative
reactions of family and friends, but such consider-
ations became prominent when they were asked to
actually release the photographs.

These examples suggest that confrontation with the
actual behavioral situation can be sufficient to change
people's intentions prior to engaging in the behavior. In
other instances, the changes may occur gradually as
people begin to engage in the behavior and receive
feedback contradictory to their unrealistic expecta-
tions. Evidence in support of this process comes from a
study (Doll & Ajzen, 1992) on the effects of direct ex-
perience on the predictive validity of attitudes and in-
tentions. Participants were either given direct experi-
ence playing several video games or they received
secondhand information about the games by watching
recorded sessions. It stands to reason that beliefs about
the games based on personal experience (how enjoy-
able, challenging, or difficult the games are) will tend
to be more realistic than beliefs based on indirect infor-
mation. When they were later given an opportunity to
play the different games, participants in the direct ex-
perience condition displayed less change in their atti-
tudes, perceptions of control, and intentions than did
participants in the indirect experience condition. As
would therefore be expected, attitudes and intentions
were better predictors of game-playing behavior in the
direct as opposed to the indirect experience condition.
In sum, people often bring unrealistic expectations
to a behavioral situation with the result that intentions
are less predictive of actual behavior than they would
be if beliefs were veridical. This is especially likely
when individuals have had little direct experience
with the behavior, but it also seems to occur when
past experience could have produced veridical be-
liefs. People seem to find ways to convince them-
selves that they will be able to do what they did not
manage to accomplish in the past or that they will do
what they know they should be doing. Thus, smokers
intend to quit soon even though past attempts have
failed, weight-conscious individuals intend to adhere
to a strict diet despite past failures, students expect
higher grades than they have received in previous
courses, parents intend to spend more time with their
children even though they have not kept past resolu-
tions of this kind, and so forth.

In comparison to beliefs, attitudes, and intentions,
which may be unrealistically optimistic (or pessimis-
tic), the frequency with which people have performed a
behavior in the past can provide a relatively realistic

estimate of a person's actual abilities and dispositions.
In other words, past performance or nonperformance
of a behavior may provide information about a per-
son's likely future behavior that is, at least for some
people, more accurate than are expressed intentions
and perceptions of behavioral control. Therefore, to the
extent that beliefs are in fact unrealistic, a measure of
past behavior can account for systematic variance in
later behavior that is not accounted for by the predic-
tors in the theory of planned behavior.

Several lines of research provide indirect evidence
for the importance of veridicality in beliefs for the pre-
diction of behavior. As noted previously, belief veri-
dicality is likely to increase as a result of direct experi-
ence and, indeed, it has been found consistently that
attitudes formed on the basis of direct experience are
better predictors of later behavior than are attitudes
formed on the basis of secondhand information (Doll
& Ajzen, 1992; Fazio & Zanna, 1978; Fazio & Zanna,
1981). In a similar fashion, the predictive validity of at-
titudes and intentions has been reported to increase
with amount of knowledge about the attitude object
(Davidson, Yantis, Norwood, & Montano, 1985) and
with reflection about it (Snyder & Swann, 1976). A
greater amount of information and increased reflection
are likely to be associated with more realistic expecta-
tions, resulting in better prediction of later behavior.

More direct evidence for the mediating role of be-
lief veridicality comes from a reanalysis of data ob-
tained in a study of academic achievement (Ajzen &
Madden, 1986). At the beginning of the semester and
again toward the end of the semester, college students
enrolled in several different classes completed a ques-
tionnaire that assessed the constructs in the theory of
planned behavior with respect to attaining an "A" in the
course. In addition, the students also estimated the
grade they thought they would get. Accuracy of grade
expectations could be assessed by computing the dis-
crepancy between this expected grade and the actual
grade attained at the end of the semester. To examine
the effect of veridicality, participants were divided at
the median discrepancy score into high- and low-accu-
racy groups. Results of the reanalysis are displayed in
Table 1. It can be seen that intentions were much better
predictors of current grades when participants were
relatively accurate in their expectations (r = .61, p <
.01) than when they were inaccurate (r = -.01, ns). Past
academic performance, indexed by grade point aver-
age, correlated somewhat better with present grade at-
tainment in the low-accuracy group (r = .35, p < .05)
than in the high-accuracy group (r = .23, p < .05). Thus,
when students were unrealistic in their grade expecta-
tions, their intentions failed to predict the grades they
actually attained, but their past accomplishments pro-
vided a relatively good indication of their prospects.
When they were more realistic, their intentions pre-
dicted grade attainment very well and past grades had a

117

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

AJZEN

Table 1. Predicting of Grade Attainment From Past
Performance and Intentions in Low- and High-Accuracy
Subgroups

Variable

Grade Expectations
Low Accuracy

Past Performance
Intentions
High Accuracy

Past Performance
Intentions

Perceived Behavioral Control

Low Accuracy

Past Performance
Intentions
High Accuracy

Past Performance
Intentions

r

.35*
-.01

.23*
.61**

.28*
.17

.19
.50**

.43*
-.01

0.13
.61**

.26*
.17

.14
.50**

R

.39*

.61**

.29*

.52**

Note: Secondary analysis of data published in Ajzen & Madden
(1986).
*p<.05. **p <.Ol.

lower, albeit still significant, correlation with grades
attained in the present course.

Most important for my purposes were the results of
a hierarchical regression analysis in which current
grade attainment was predicted from intentions on the
first step and past grades on the second step. As can be
seen in Table 1, past performance had a significant re-
gression coefficient (P = 0.43, p < .05) in the low-accu-
racy subgroup even after intentions had been entered
into the equation; the regression coefficient for inten-
tions (j3 = -0.01) was not significant. By contrast, in the
high-accuracy subgroup, the regression coefficient for
past behavior was low and not significant (I = 0.13),
but for intentions it was high and significant (f = 0.61,
p < .01). The residual effect of past on later behavior
was thus significant only for individuals who held rela-
tively unrealistic expectations regarding the grade they
could expect in the course. When expectations were re-
alistic, past behavior lost its predictive validity.

Very similar results were obtained in another re-
analysis of the data from Ajzen and Madden (1986), an
analysis that looked at the veridicality of control be-
liefs. Because inaccurate expectations of control over
attaining an "A" are likely to be revised in the course of
the semester, changes in control beliefs can be taken as
an indication of low veridicality of initial beliefs. In the
reanalysis, amount of change in control beliefs from
the beginning to the end of the semester was computed,
and participants were divided at the median score into
high and low belief accuracy subgroups. Past per-
formance predicted grade attainment at r = .28 (p < .05)
in the low-accuracy subgroup and r = .19 (ns) in the
high-accuracy group, whereas intentions predicted
grade attainment much better for students with high
belief accuracy (r = .50, p < .01) than for students with
low accuracy (r = .17, ns). As can be seen in Table 1, a

118

multiple regression analysis revealed the expected pat-
tern. In the low-veridicality subgroup, the regression
coefficients were 0.26 (p < .05) for past performance
and 0.06 (ns) for intentions. In the high-veridicality
subgroup, the regression coefficients were reversed: f3
= 0.14 (ns) for past performance and ,B = 0.50 (p < .01)
for intentions. Clearly, the residual effect of past on
later behavior depended on low veridicality of control
over attaining a good grade in the course.

Behaving in Accordance
With One's Intentions

The theory of planned behavior assumes that for rel-
atively novel behaviors, people engage in deliberation
before they form an intention to perform or not per-
form the behavior in question. After repeated opportu-
nities for performance, deliberation is no longer re-
quired because the intention is activated spontaneously
in a behavior-relevant situation (see Ajzen & Fishbein,
2000). This view would imply that once a positive in-
tention is formed, it is carried out when the appropriate
opportunity arises. However, Gollwitzer (1993; Goll-
witzer & Bayer, 1999) has shown that considerable
work is often required to carry out an intention. It may
be necessary to collect information in preparation for
the behavior, to obtain needed cooperation by other
people, or simply to remember to enact it. These tasks
are facilitated when people have formed an imple-
mentation intention, that is, a specific plan that deter-
mines when, where, and how to carry out their in-
tended actions. Such plans are particularly important
for intentions that can be acted on in different ways or
intentions that are poorly specified (Bargh, 1990). For-
mation of an implementation intention is said to bring
the behavior under the control of stimulus cues such
that it is activated automatically at the designated time
and place (Gollwitzer & Brandstatter, 1997; Sheeran &
Orbell, 1999).7

Clearly then, the formation of an intention to en-
gage in a particular behavior may not be sufficient for
the behavior to occur and intentions may turn out to be
poor predictors of behavior, especially for people who
have not formed an implementation intention. These
individuals may fall back on their common responses
to the situation; that is, their behavior may be more
consistent with prior behavior than with current inten-
tions. However, individuals who have formed not only
an intention to engage in a behavior but also a specific
plan for its implementation should exhibit a different
pattern. These individuals should carry out their inten-

71n contrast to the habituation hypothesis, which requires repeated
performance in a stable context for the establishment of a habit,
Gollwitzer's (1993) theory stipulates that one-time institution of an
implementation intention is sufficient to produce automatic elicitation
of the intended behavior under the designated circumstances.

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

tions; their past behavior should make little if any addi-
tional contribution to the prediction of later behavior.
This hypothesis was confirmed in a study of breast
self-examination among female students and adminis-
trative staff (Orbell, Hodgkins, & Sheeran, 1997). A
theory of planned behavior questionnaire was adminis-
tered and participants also reported on breast self-ex-
amination during the preceding month as a measure of
prior behavior. About 1 month later, the participants re-
ported their behavior during the preceding month. This
second self-report constituted a measure of later be-
havior. Immediately following the theory of planned
behavior questionnaire, a subgroup of women in the
intervention condition was asked to write down where
and when they would perform breast self-examina-
tions, that is, to develop implementation intentions.
This intervention was found to be highly effective. At
the end of the 1-month follow-up, 64% of women who
had established implementation intentions reported
that they had performed the self-examinations as op-
posed to only 14% in the no intervention control group.
All women in the implementation intention group who
had indicated clear intentions to perform the examina-
tion reported actually doing so, whereas in the control
group, of the women who intended to perform the ex-
amination, only 53% actually did. Most important for
my purposes, however, is the effect of forming an im-
plementation intention on the correlation between pri-
or and later behavior. After the constructs of the theory
of planned behavior had been entered into the regres-
sion equation, the addition of past behavior improved
prediction of later behavior in the no intervention con-
trol group (I = 1.00, p < .01) but not in the implementa-
tion intention group (IP = 0.18, ns). Thus, forming an
implementation intention improved prediction of be-
havior from intentions and reduced the residual effect
of past behavior to nonsignificant. When intentions
were not accompanied by specific action plans they
were less accurate predictors of later behavior and the
measure of past behavior retained a residual impact.

Summary and Conclusions

Human behavior is often remarkably stable over
time to the point of overshadowing the effects of atti-
tudes and intentions. Although intentions are generally
good predictors of behavior, some people fail to carry
out their intentions and instead revert to past patterns of
behavior. The usual explanation for this phenomenon
is that the behavior in question has become habitual,
has come under the control of stimulus cues, and no
longer conforms to intentions. Evidence commonly
cited in support of this idea is the finding that the fre-
quency with which a behavior was performed in the
past tends to account for variance in later behavior,
over and above the influence of attitudes, intentions,

and other variables included in the theory of planned
behavior.

Whether we adopt the habituation or reasoned ac-
tion perspective, we would expect that, so long as the
situation remains stable, a behavior that has been per-
formed frequently in the past is likely to be performed
again. There is also general agreement that frequently
performed behaviors can become habitual or routine
and be enacted without much conscious attention. This
is not to say, however, that the residual impact of prior
on later behavior must necessarily be attributed to ha-
bituation. In fact, "the role of habit per se remains inde-
terminate in this research because of the difficulty of
designing adequate measures of habit" (Eagly & Chai-
ken, 1993, p. 181). It would be erroneous to simply
assume that past performance frequency is a valid mea-
sure of habit. Just because a behavior has been per-
formed many times, it does not follow that it is now au-
tomatically activated or that it occurs below conscious
awareness and with little effort-the usually accepted
criteria of automaticity (Bargh, 1994). Whether or not
a behavior has become routine to the point of being
an automatic habitual response is an empirical ques-
tion, and it requires an independent measure of habit
for confirmation. Although some attempts have been
made to develop such a measure, the evidence thus far
provides little support for the proposition that the re-
sidual effect of prior on later behavior is indeed medi-
ated by habit.

In fact, it is not at all clear how the concept of habit
could account for the residual effect of prior on later
behavior. Generally speaking, when a behavior habitu-
ates, it turns from being cognitively controlled and
guided by deliberate intentions to routine and requiring
little cognitive effort for its initiation and execution.
However, if people's behavior is initially guided by ex-
plicit intentions and remains consistent over time, then
why should intentions, even if they become spontane-
ous, lose their predictive validity? Once a behavior has
become routine or habitual, the frequency of past be-
havior should be a good predictor of later behavior, but
it should not eclipse the impact of intentions.

Strictly speaking, the association between past be-
havior frequency and frequency of later behavior, by it-
self, merely demonstrates that the behavior in question
is stable over time. The reason for this stability may
simply be that whatever factors determined the behav-
ior in the past continue to exert their influence in the
present (see Ajzen, 1991; Eagly & Chaiken, 1993). In
the context of the theory of planned behavior, these
factors are said to be intention and perceived control
over the behavior. To have a residual effect on later be-
havior, frequency of past behavior must reflect the in-
fluence of factors not adequately captured in measures
of these determinants. In this article, I examined sev-
eral possibilities that, individually or in combination,
may be able to account for the residual effect of prior

119

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

AJZEN

on later behavior. At least in part, the residual effect
may be due to issues of measurement. In most empiri-
cal investigations, measures of prior and later behavior
have common method variance not shared by measures
of intentions and other dispositions. The only relevant
data set available shows that scale incompatibility can
account for some, but not all, of the residual associa-
tion between prior and later behavior.

Other possible explanations attribute the residual
effect of past behavior to factors of a more substantive
nature. First, when attitudes and intentions are held
with a degree of ambivalence, indifference, or uncer-
tainty, they are unstable and fail to provide clear guides
to action. Empirical evidence shows that, under these
conditions, past behavior is a good predictor of later
behavior. The residual effect of prior on later behavior
disappears when attitudes and intentions are strong and
well formed. Second, the expectations embodied in be-
havioral, normative, and control beliefs may not be
particularly accurate. In the theory of planned behav-
ior, these beliefs provide the cognitive foundation for
attitudes, intentions, and behavior, but if they are inac-
curate they will fail the test of reality. As a result, the
predictive validity of intentions and perceived behav-
ioral control will suffer. Past performance frequency
reflects people's preexisting response dispositions.
That is, it reflects the operation of all factors that
exerted an influence on the behavior in the past. To the
extent that people are insufficiently cognizant of these
factors-that is, to the extent that their beliefs lack
veridicality-a measure of past behavior can provide
the information needed to improve prediction of later
behavior. Empirical evidence supports this proposition
by showing that the residual effect of prior on later be-
havior is eliminated for respondents with relatively ac-
curate control beliefs and realistic intentions. Finally,
carrying out an intention often requires development of
a detailed plan that specifies when, where, and how the
behavior is to be enacted. The available evidence sug-
gests that when such implementation intentions are in-
duced, the residual effect of prior on later behavior is
no longer significant.

In conclusion, empirical evidence for a residual ef-
fect of prior on later behavior, controlling for inten-
tions, has raised a number of important practical and
conceptual issues. From a practical perspective, it im-
plies that we as researchers may want to include a mea-
sure of prior behavior in our models to improve predic-
tion of later action. My review suggests that this will be
particularly valuable when intentions are relatively
weak and unstable, when underlying expectations are
inaccurate, or when people have not developed a clear
plan of action. From a theoretical perspective, how-
ever, past behavior frequency adds little to our under-
standing of a behavior's determinants. Its correlation
with later behavior merely provides a measure of the
behavior's temporal stability. The attempt to imbue

120

past behavior frequency with theoretical significance
by considering it a measure of habit strength has, so far,
been unsuccessful. Rather than treating the residual ef-
fect of prior on later behavior as evidence for habitua-
tion, it may be more useful to take it as an opportunity
to explore the factors involved in going from beliefs to
actions. In this review, I suggest that the limits of rea-
soned action are not the habituation of behavior with
repeated performance but may instead be related to in-
accurate or unrealistic behavioral, normative, and con-
trol beliefs; weak or unstable attitudes and intentions;
and inadequate planning required for successful imple-
mentation of an intended behavior.

References

Aarts, H., Verplanken, B., & van Knippenberg, A. (1998). Predicting
behavior from actions in the past: Repeated decision making or
a matter of habit? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28,
1355-1374.

Abelson, R. P. (1981). Psychological status of the script concept.

American Psychologist, 36, 715-729.

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and

interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned
behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckman (Eds.), Action-control:
From cognition to behavior (pp. 11-39). Heidelberg, Ger-
many: Springer.

Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality, and behavior Chicago:

Dorsey.

Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Be-

havior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 179-21 1.

Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and pre-

dicting social behavior Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2000). Attitudes and the attitude-behavior
relation: Reasoned and automatic processes. In W. Stroebe &
M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review ofsocial psychology (pp.
1-33). Chichester, England: Wiley.

Ajzen, I., & Madden, T. J. (1986). Prediction of goal-directed behav-
ior: Attitudes, intentions, and perceived behavioral control.
Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 22, 453-474.
Ajzen, I., & Sexton, J. (1999). Depth of processing, belief congru-
ence, and attitude-behavior correspondence. In S. Chaiken &
Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology
(pp. 117-138). New York: Guilford.

Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., Fishbein, M., & Meuellerleile, P. A.
(2001). Theories of reasoned action and planned behavior as
models of condom use: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 127, 142-161.

Albarracin, D., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (2000). The cognitive impact of
past behavior: Influences on beliefs, attitudes, and future be-
havioral decisions. Journal ofPersonality & Social Psychology,
79, 5-22.

Bagozzi, R. P. (1981). Attitudes, intentions, and behavior: A test of
some key hypotheses. Journal ofPersonality & Social Psychol-
ogy, 41, 607-627.

Bamberg, S., Ajzen, I., & Schmidt, P. (in press). Choice of travel
mode in the theory of planned behavior: The roles of past be-
havior, habit, and reasoned action. Journal ofBasic andApplied
Social Psychology.

Bargh, J. A. (1989). Conditional automaticity: Varieties of automatic
influence in social perception and cognition. In J. S. Uleman &
J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 3-I1). New York:
Guilford.

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PAST ON LATER BEHAVIOR

Bargh, J. A. (1990). Auto-motives: Preconscious determinants of so-
cial interaction. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.),
Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social
behavior (pp. 93-130). New York: Guilford.

Bargh, J. A. (1994). The four horsemen of automaticity: Awareness,
intention, efficiency, and control in social cognition. In R. S.
Wyer, Jr. & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social cognition
(2nd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 1-40). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.

Bargh, J. A. (1996). Automaticity in social psychology. In E. T. Hig-
gins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook
of basic principles (pp. 169-183). New York: Guilford.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity

of being. American Psychologist, 54, 462-479.

Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social
behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and stereotype activa-
tion on action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
71, 230-244.

Bentler, P. M., & Speckart, G. (1979). Models of attitude-behavior

relations. Psychological Review, 86, 452-464.

Brown, T. C., Champ, P. A., Bishop, R. C. & McCollum, D. W.
(1996). Which response format reveals the truth about dona-
tions to a public good? Land Economics, 72, 152-166.

Buehler, R., Griffin, D., & Ross, M. (1994). Exploring the "planning
fallacy": Why people underestimate their task completion times.
Journal ofPersonality & Social Psychology, 67, 366-381.
Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (Eds.). (1999). Dual-process theories in so-

cial psychology. New York: Guilford.

Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (1998). Extending the theory of
planned behavior: A review and avenues for further research.
Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 28, 1429-1464.

Conner, M., Sheeran, P., Norman, P., & Armitage, C. J. (2000). Tem-
poral stability as a moderator of the relationships in the theory
of planned behavior. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39,
469-494.

Courneya, K. S., & McAuley, E. (1993). Predicting physical activity
from intention: Conceptual and methodological issues. Journal
ofSport and Exercise Psychology, 15, 50-62.

Courneya, K. S., & McAuley, E. (1994). Factors affecting the inten-
tion-physical activity relationship: Intention versus expectation
and scale correspondence. Research Quarterlyfor Exercise and
Sport, 65, 280-285.

Cummings, R. G., & Taylor, L. 0. (1999). Unbiased value esti-
mates for environmental goods: A cheap talk design for the
contingent valuation method. American Economic Review, 89,
649-665.

Davidson, A. R., Yantis, S., Norwood, M., & Montano, D. E. (1985).
Amount of information about the attitude object and attitude-
behavior consistency. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 49, 1184-1198.

Doll, J., & Ajzen, I. (1992). Accessibility and stability of predictors
in the theory of planned behavior. Journal ofPersonality & So-
cial Psychology, 63, 754-765.

Drake, C. R., & McCabe, M. P. (2000). Extrarelationship involve-
ment among heterosexual males: An explanation based on the
theory of planned behavior, relationship quality, and past be-
havior. Jounal ofApplied Social Psychology, 30, 1421-1439.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology ofattitudes. Fort

Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.

Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of
the people much of the time. Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 37, 1097-1126.

Epstein, S. (1980). The stability of behavior: II. Implications for psy-
chological research. American Psychologist, 35, 790-806.
Fazio, R. H. (1990). Multiple processes by which attitudes guide be-
havior: The MODE model as an integrative framework. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
23, pp. 75-109). San Diego, CA: Academic.

Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., & Kardes, F R.
(1986). On the automatic activation of attitudes. Journal ofPer-
sonality and Social Psychology, 50, 229-238.

Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. (1978). Attitudinal qualities relating to
the strength of the attitude-behavior relationship. Journal ofEx-
perimental Social Psychology, 14, 398-408.

Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. (1981). Direct experience and atti-
tude-behavior consistency. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 14, pp. 161-202). New
York: Academic.

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief attitude, intention, and be-
havior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.

Fredricks, A. J., & Dossett, D. L. (1983). Attitude-behavior rela-
tions: A comparison of the Fishbein-Ajzen and the Bentler-
Speckart models. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
45, 501-512.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1993). Goal achievement: The role of intentions.

European Review of Social Psychology, 4, 141-185.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects

of simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493-503.

Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bayer, U. (1999). Deliberative versus im-
plemental mindsets in the control of action. In S. Chaiken & Y.
Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp.
403-422). New York: Guilford.

Gollwitzer, P. M., & Brandstitter, V. (1997). Implementation inten-
tions and effective goal pursuit. Journal ofPersonality and So-
cial Psychology, 73, 186-199.

Gorsuch, R. L., & Ortberg, J. (1983). Moral obligation and attitudes:
Their relation to behavioral intentions. Journal ofPersonality &
Social Psychology, 44, 1025-1028.

Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1995). Implicit social cognition:
Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychological Review,
102, 4-27.

Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Mea-
suring individual differences in implicit cognition: The implicit
association test. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology,
74, 1464-1480.

Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles ofbehavior: An introduction to behav-

ior theory. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Kawakami, K., & Dovidio, J. F (2001). The reliability of implicit stereo-
typing. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 212-225.
Linn, L. S. (1965). Verbal attitudes and overt behavior: A study of ra-

cial discrimination. Social Forces, 43, 353-364.

Logan, G. D., & Cowan, W. B. (1984). On the ability to inhibit
thought and action: A theory of an act of control. Psychological
Review, 91, 295-327.

Manstead, A. S. R., & Parker, D. (1995). Evaluating and extending
the theory of planned behaviour. In W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone
(Eds.), European review of social psychology (Vol. 6, pp.
69-95). Chichester, England: Wiley.

Mittal, B. (1988). Achieving higher seat belt usage: The role of habit
in bridging the attitude-behavior gap. Journal ofApplied Social
Psychology, 18, 993-1016.

Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and short-
comings ofsocialjudgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Norman, P., & Conner, M. (1996). Predicting health-check atten-
dance among prior attenders and nonattenders: The role ofprior
behavior in the theory of planned behavior. Journal ofApplied
Social Psychology, 26, 1010-1026.

Norman, P., & Smith, L. (1995). The theory of planned behaviour
and exercise: An investigation into the role of prior behaviour,
behavioural intentions and attitude variability. European Jour-
nal of Social Psychology, 12, 403-415.

Orbell, S., Blair, C., Sherlock, K., & Conner, M. (2001). The theory
of planned behavior and ecstasy use: Roles for habit and per-
ceived control over taking versus obtaining substances. Journal
ofApplied Social Psychology, 31, 31-47.

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012

121

AJZEN

Orbell, S., Hodgkins, S., & Sheeran, P. (1997). Implementation in-
tentions and the theory of planned behavior. Personality & So-
cial Psychology Bulletin, 23, 945-954.

Ouellette, J. A., & Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention in every-
day life: The multiple processes by which past behavior pre-
dicts future behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 54-74.
Perugini, M., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2001). The role of desires and antici-
pated emotions in goal-directed behaviours: Broadening and
deepening the theory of planned behaviour. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 40, 79-98.

Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persua-
sion: Central and peripheral routes to attitude change. New
York: Springer-Verlag.

Petty, R. E., & Krosnick, J. A. (Eds.). (1995). Attitude strength: Ante-
cedents and consequences (Vol. 4). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Posner, M. I., & Snyder, C. R. R. (1975). Attention and cognitive
control. In R. L. Solso (Ed.), Information processing and cogni-
tion: The Loyola symposium (pp. 55-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Richard, R., van der Pligt, J., & de Vries, N. K. (1995). The impact of
anticipated affect on (risky) sexual behaviour. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 34, 9-21.

Ronis, D. L., Yates, J. F., & Kirscht, J. P. (1989). Attitudes, decisions,
and habits as determinants of repeated behavior. In A. R. Prat-
kanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Attitude structure
andfinction (pp. 213-239). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Inc.

Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and auto-
matic human information processing: I. Detection, search,
and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1-66.

Sheeran, P., & Orbell, S. (1999). Implementation intentions and
repeated behaviour: Augmenting the predictive validity of
the theory of planned behaviour. European Journal of So-
cial Psychology, 29, 349-369.

Sheeran, P., Orbell, S., & Trafimow, D. (1999). Does the temporal
stability of behavioral intentions moderate intention-behavior
and past behavior-future behavior relations? Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 721-730.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic hu-
man informationprocessing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic at-
tending and a general theory. PsychologicalReview, 84, 127-190.
Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual-process models in social
and cognitive psychology: Conceptual integration and links to
underlying memory systems. Personality & Social Psychology
Review, 4, 108-131.

Snyder, M., & Swann, B. W., Jr. (1976). When actions reflect atti-
tudes: The politics of impression management. Journal of Per-
sonality & Social Psychology, 34, 1034-1042.

Sparks, P., & Guthrie, C. A. (1998). Self-identity and the theory of
planned behavior: A useful addition or an unhelpful artifice?
Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 28, 1393-1410.
Tolman, E. C. (1938). The determiners of behavior at a choice point.

Psychological Review, 45, 1-41.

Triandis, H. C. (1977). Interpersonal behavior Monterey, CA:

Brooks/Cole.

Van Ryn, M., & Vinokur, A. D. (1992). How did it work? An exami-
nation of the mechanisms through which an intervention for the
unemployed promoted job-search behavior. American Journal
of Community Psychology, 20, 577-597.

Verplanken, B., Aarts, H., van Knippenberg, A., & Moonen, A.
(1998). Habit versus planned behavior: A field experiment.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 37, 111-128.
H.,

A., & van
Knippenberg, C. (1994). Attitude versus general habit: Ante-
cedents of travel mode choice. Journal of Applied Social Psy-
chology, 24, 285-300.

Knippenberg,

Verplanken,

Aarts,

van

B.,

Wegner, D. M., & Bargh, J. A. (1998). Control and automaticity in
social life. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & L. Gardner (Eds.), The
handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 446-496).
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.

Wittenbraker, J., Gibbs, B. L., & Kahle, L. R. (1983). Seat belt atti-
tudes, habits, and behaviors: An adaptive amendment to the
Fishbein model. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 13,
406-421.

Zanna, M. P., Olson, J. M., & Fazio, R. H. (1981). Self-perception
and attitude-behavior consistency. Personality & Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 7, 252-256.

122

Downloaded from 

psr.sagepub.com

 at UNIV LIBRARY AT IUPUI on October 6, 2012