Journal of Social Service Research

ISSN: 0148-8376 (Print) 1540-7314 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wssr20

Fundraising of Nonprofit Organizations: Specifics
and New Possibilities
Dita Hommerová & Lucie Severová
To cite this article: Dita Hommerová & Lucie Severová (2018): Fundraising of Nonprofit
Organizations: Specifics and New Possibilities, Journal of Social Service Research, DOI:
10.1080/01488376.2018.1479678
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/01488376.2018.1479678

Published online: 22 Aug 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wssr20

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH
https://doi.org/10.1080/01488376.2018.1479678

Fundraising of Nonprofit Organizations: Specifics and New Possibilities
Dita Hommerovaa and Lucie Severovab
a
Faculty of Economics, Department of Marketing, Trade and Services, University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, Czech Republic; bFaculty of
Economics and Management, Department of Economic Theories, Czech University of Life Sciences in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic

KEYWORDS

ABSTRACT

Fundraising can be viewed as a systematic activity aimed primarily at raising financial
resources for the activities of either an organization or an individual. The inconsistency of
this effort usually cannot be blamed on internal factors within an organization, but rather
phenomena of a macroeconomic, legislative or societal nature. In an effort to gain an
insight into the measure of utilizing fundraising principles in nonprofit organizations, extensive research was conducted for the ninth time among nonprofit organizations in the Czech
Republic, the sample of which consisted of 313 fully completed questionnaires. Based on
the research results focusing on fundraising, measures were proposed to expand the possibilities of ensuring effective multisource funding for a selected nonprofit organization. One
of these options and at the same time the current trend in marketing not only for the nonprofit sector is crowdfunding. Crowdfunding is a new concept of funding projects that has
seen a significantly growing trend in the fundraising is part of marketing activities, or at
least it is very closely connected with them.

Introduction

Every year, nonprofit organizations in the Czech
Republic are faced with instability in funding their
activities. In their case, it is about the constant
daily struggle to raise sufficient financial resources
to ensure their operation. The nonconceptual
nature of this effort cannot usually be blamed on
the organization’s internal factors, but rather can
be attributed to phenomena of a macroeconomic,
legislative, and societal character. In an effort to
gain an insight into the extent of application of
fundraising principles in nonprofit organizations,
further measures aimed at expanding the possibilities of effective multisource funding will be
proposed for a selected nonprofit organization.
Introduction to Fundraising of
Nongovernmental Nonprofit Organizations

Nowadays, nongovernmental nonprofit organizations (NGO) form an integral part of every modern society. The tightening competition in the
nonprofit sector, caused mainly by the number of

Fundraising; research;
crowdfunding; sustainability

NGOs growing every year while the number of
voluntary donors remains constant, has resulted
in the fact that it is increasingly difficult to raise
the funds necessary for long-term functioning of
an organization and achieving its mission. A substantial, if not decisive, role in gaining the necessary means is that of fundraising.
Fundraising can be viewed as a systematic
activity aimed primarily at raising financial
resources for the activities of either an organization or an individual. From another point of
view, fundraising can be viewed as a science that
deals with the motivation to do good and the
conviction of people that money is not everything
ova, 2010).
(Soban
According to Polackova (2005), fundraising is
a professional, targeted, and both organizationally
sophisticated and time-conscious activity aimed
at finding sponsors and gaining financial means
intended for the support of publicly beneficial or
charity purposes.
Another definition of fundraising is the statement that the purpose of fundraising is not for

CONTACT Lucie Severova
severova@pef.czu.cz
Faculty of Economics and Management, Department of Economic Theories, Czech University of Life
Sciences in Prague, 16521 Prague, Czech Republic.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/wssr.
ß 2018 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

2

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

nonprofit organizations to raise money, but
to get help in managing their relations with
public donors with whom they share goals
and intentions.
There are various classifications of sources of
funding of nonprofit organizations (e.g. Figure 1).
According to the authors Hyanek, Skarabelova
 zuchova (2016), sources of funding can be
and Re
divided into the following categories:
 Public funding
) Domestic sources (state administration, local
authorities),
) Foreign sources (European Union, … );
 Nonpublic funding
) Foundations,
) Corporate donations,
 Donations from individuals;
) Income from the NGO’s own activities,
) The organization’s own activities,
) Membership fees,
) Income from lotteries and games of chance,
) Advertising,
) Public collections.

These are the so-called direct sources of
income. Indirect sources include tax allowances
(income tax, value added tax, road tax, excise tax,
property tax, … ) (Hyanek, Skarabelova, &
 zuchova, 2016).
Re

Figure 1. Funding of nonprofit organizations. Source: Pehe (2015).

Research into the Nonprofit Sector in the
Czech Republic
Research Introduction – Methodology

In cooperation with the organization SANEK
Ponte o.s. (Hommerová & Sanek, 2015), the
authors of this article regularly take part in the
realization of annual research into nongovernmental nonprofit organizations in the Czech Republic.
A total of 313 organizations took part in the
ninth annual research into the management of
nongovernmental nonprofit organizations. More
than one-third of respondents were social service
organizations (122). Therefore, research results
and subsequent recommendations are of great
importance for the provision of social services
within the nonprofit sector.
Based on the substantially transforming nonprofit sector in terms of professionalism, the
2015 questionnaire included a question that divided organizations into “professional” (159) and
“nonprofessional” (154) organizations. For this
reason, there are two charts provided for some of
the questions followed by two separate interpretations. The responding organizations themselves
decided whether they consider themselves to be
more “professional” nonprofit organizations
applying the principles of a management system,
active PR management, fundraising and others,

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH

or whether they view themselves more as
“nonprofessional” organizations, not applying
systems of management, but based rather on voluntary activities … . The division of nonprofit
organizations according to the level of professionalism is used also by other authors, e.g., Bacuvcık
(2011) as well as foreign authors, e.g., Helmig
and Boenigk (2012).
The two groups of respondents are characterized as follows:
“Professional” organizations
 Organizations that apply management systems
 Actively work with PR, fundraising and
human resources
 159 respondents

“Nonprofessional” organizations
 Small/emerging organizations on a voluntary
basis or with a minimum number of paid staff
 Those that do not apply management systems
 154 respondents.
Goal of the Research into the Nonprofit Sector in
the Czech Republic

The objective of this annual research into the
nonprofit sector in the Czech Republic is:
1. To assess the situation of nonprofit organizations, identify their biggest issues (weak points)
and barriers (threats) for sustainability.
2. To present the research results to the appropriate institutions that deal with support for the
nonprofit sector as well as the participating
nonprofits themselves. That means the handover of the assessment of results and expert
commentaries, including recommendations by
experts, both academicians specializing in the
nonprofit sector as well as members of management of successful nonprofit organizations. At
the regional level, this specifically includes
training sessions and workshops organized for
nonprofit organizations and the incorporation
of current topics into the nonprofit fair. These
materials are further provided to the
Government Council for Nongovernmental
Nonprofit Organizations.

3

Given the annual frequency of the research,
one of the goals is also to assess the development
of selected areas over time. This provides the
feedback necessary to assess the efficiency of past
activities aimed at supporting the nonprofit
sector. Based on the statistical assessment of
collected data, it can be said that respondents
took the research seriously and their answers
were consistent.
Brady, Brace-Govan, Brennan, and Conduit
(2011) presents the results of research (approximately the same number of respondents – 401,
though administered in CATI form – Computer
Assisted Telephone Interviewing) into the nonprofit sector in Australia, focused exclusively on
market orientation and the utilization of marketing in the nonprofit sector. Brady et al. (2011)
compare the key differences across the various
areas of interest of nonprofit organizations. In
her article, Brady explains the importance of the
research into the nonprofit sector and adds that
it would be desirable to compare the survey conducted in Australia with other research studies
available. In 2005, a research study of the nonprofit sector with a focus on the use of marketing
strategies was conducted in western Michigan
(Pope, Sterrett Isely, & Asamoa-Tutu, 2009). One
of the first research papers on the implementation of a marketing concept in nonprofit organizations was presented by Capella et al. (1993)
from 1993 to 1994. Only a handful of comparative studies have been conducted so far, e.g.,
research into the nonprofit sector in the USA,
Great Britain, and Australia (Dolnicar &
Lazarevski, 2009). At the end of the study, Brady
et al. (2011) reiterate that the nonprofit sector
should be the center of attention for science and
research, and that efficient use of marketing
activities in an organization and an optimum setting of its market orientation depends on other
processes within the organization. Therefore, any
research should take into consideration the
comprehensive functioning of a nonprofit
organization.
Statistical Methodology

The data from 313 questionnaires (159
“professional”
and
154
“nonprofessional”

4

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

organizations) from approximately 123,000 nonprofit organizations registered in the Czech
Republic were processed using the MS Excel and
Statistica 10 CZ software applications. Answers to
close-ended questions can be considered as realizations of discrete random values. In most cases,
the possible answers to a particular question were
sorted in such a way that they presented ordinal
values, and here we talk about the so-called categorized data, as the answers were assigned numbers 1, 2, 3, …
When a respondent failed to answer a question, the number 0 was assigned. To give an
example: the numbers assigned to administrative
regions do not contain an implicit order, but
numbers assigned to some answers, e.g.,
“never” ¼ 1, “sometimes” ¼ 2, “always” ¼ 3 do
contain an order, i.e., they form the so-called
ordinal values. Such sequencing usually contributes, among others things, to easier interpretation
of the results of statistical tests and makes it
easier to merge rows or columns in contingency tables.
First, the absolute incidences of answers for
the various questions were determined, and for
better orientation they were often expressed in
percentage points and demonstrated graphically.
Further, r  s tables were compiled with nij incidence of answers for combinations of selected
values. The selected combinations were those
where possible connections were hypothetically
expected. These hypotheses were then statistically
tested – rejecting a hypothesis of independence
means proof of a connection (statistical dependency).
The objective was to answer the question of
whether there was a link between certain selected
values (questions, characteristics) in the given
group or not. For this situation, the so-called
Pearson’s chi-squared test of independence in a
contingency table is usually used (Agresti, 2013).
Otherwise, standard markings were used where
Pearson’s test compares acquired experimental
(observed) incidence nij with theoretical (socalled expected) incidence n0 ij , which can be
expected in the case of independence. These can
be calculated as follows:

ni: n:j
; i ¼ 1; 2:::r;
n
n:j are row or column sums:
n0 ij ¼

j ¼ 1; 2:::s;

ni: ;

(1)

The difference between the observed and
expected incidence nij  n0 ij is referred to as
the residual.
As the test criterion, we use the following
statistics
v ¼
2


2
r X
s
X
nij  n0 ij
i¼1 j¼1

n0 ij

(2)

which in the event of independence and given a
sufficient number of observations (respondents) n
approximately v2 – distribution with  ¼ (r  1)
(s  1) degrees of freedom.
It is a limit distribution with the use of various
practical criteria defining the term “sufficient
number of observations”, e.g.:
1.
2.

A minimum occurrence in the table should be
such that expected incidence n0ij > 5
A maximum of 20% of expected incidence
n0ij < 5 and no expected incidence is less than 1,
(according to some authors, no expected incidence is less than 2).

With the chosen alpha level, the critical value
W is: v2 > v21a ½, which leads to the rejection of
H0 about the independence of the significance
level a, by which the dependence of both qualitative random values is considered to be proven.
(As for the p value, it is the level at which H0
would still be rejected.)
In tables where the hypothesis of independence was rejected, a detailed analysis of interaction links between the row and column
categories was conducted. Standardized residuals
with limit Gaussian distribution were used. The
terminology is not entirely consistent here – in
Statistica CZ version 10, the “standardized
residuals” are referred to as “standardized
deviation” ¼ (observed – expected)/standard error
of mentioned difference. Subsequently, the appropriate p value of Gaussian distribution was
calculated in MS Excel for the standardized
deviation.

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH

As these are basically the so-called multiple
comparisons (another term used is “post hoc”
analysis), the p values need to be appropriately adjusted.
There are a number of ways of doing that. The
2015 research used a modified Bonferroni’s correction according to Agresti (2013). These p values were organized in tables where a
combination of the row and column values
resulted in an observed incidence that is statistically significantly different from the appropriate
expected incidence.
The fact that the research is repeated on an
annual basis ensures both the validity and reliability of its results. The questionnaire is updated
each year with respect to any issues that were
identified in its previous evaluation and with
respect to the current trends in the management
of nonprofit organizations or any changes in the
external environment (e.g., legislation – the new
Civil Code and others).
The survey was administered in the months of
March and April 2015 by the CAWI (Computer
Assisted Web Interviewing) method. CAWI combines the advantages of both qualitative and quantitative research and thus presents a new dimension
in research methods. Answers are recorded in electronic form, which allows them to be processed
quickly and efficiently. Following the pilot phase, a
link to the questionnaire form was sent to all the
contacts in the database of the SANEK Ponte
organization, i.e., over 2,000 nonprofit organizations, and at the same time distributed to selected
cooperating umbrella organizations for nonprofit
organizations and the appropriate departments of

regional authorities, requesting cooperation and
support for the research.
The processing of the data and the statistical
analysis was followed by synthesis and induction
and the resulting interpretation of the acquired
data, including evaluation of the development of
selected results over time. Subsequently, the
results and interpretations are normally consulted
with experts working in the key areas of the
management of nonprofit organizations. The
survey concludes with recommendations aimed at
improving the position of nonprofit organizations.
Research Results: Fundraising

The greatest number of organizations uses a
long-term financial plan only for individual projects (Figure 2). The responses are further divided
according to the professionalism of organizations.
More than a fifth of “professional” organizations
(37) have a financial plan as part of a strategic
document, while only 13 “nonprofessional”
organizations
have
one.
A
third
of
“nonprofessional” organizations (46) do not
consider a financial plan to be necessary. An
equal number of both “professional” and
“nonprofessional” organizations (30 in each category) do not have a financial plan, but would be
interested in having one.
Once again, with reference to the main priorities of nonprofit organizations at present (note:
The most frequently stated priorities of
“professional” organizations are (see Figure 3)
strategy (36), daily operation (32), and development of services (25). The areas most often

80
70
60
50

40
30
20
10

0
yes, but only for
individual projects

yes, as part of a long- no, but we would be
term (strategic) plan interested in having
one

professional organizaons

Figure 2. Long-term fundraising plan.

5

yes, as a separate
document

no, we don’t consider
it necessary

non-professional organizaons

n=313

6

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

4%

2% 1%

public administration (ministries, regions, cities,
municipalities)
EU structural funds

4%
5%

payments from clients
5%

corporate donors
47%

income from auxiliary economic activities

6%

individual donors
foundations and foundation funds
income from social business activities

13%

founder’s contribution
international donors
13%

n = 159

Figure 3. Sources of funding – “professional” nonprofit organizations.

chosen as a second priority included fundraising
(40), development of services (36), and our operation (26). It comes as no surprise that there has
been an increase in the area of long-term financial planning (this corresponds with the application of elements of strategic planning) and more
than 70% of all respondents (230) put together a
long-term funding plan in one form or another
(119 of all respondents do so only for individual projects).
Half of the “nonprofessional” organizations (77)
have a long-term funding plan – see Figure 4.
Nonprofessional organizations try to cover most
of their activities themselves and with the help of
volunteers; however, that does not mean that they
do not incur costs in connection with these activities. Another point of view is that “professional”
organizations are better able to calculate how
much money they need and what exactly they are
going to do with it.

obtain more funds from individual (12%) and corporate (10%) donors (Figure 4).
As for the structure of funding, in comparison
with those in the past, the options in this year’s
questionnaire survey were expanded to reflect the
current trends, particularly funding from structural funds, the option of international donations
and income from the organization’s auxiliary economic activities. When it comes to sources of
funding, there is a noticeable difference between
“professional” and “nonprofessional” organizations. “Professional” organizations use EU funds
more because of their better knowledge of the
challenges, their experience with the application
process and the greater chances of successfully
meeting the set requirements. “Nonprofessional”
organizations are more interested in acquiring
funds from individual and corporate donors who
often happen to be consumers of their services.
In “nonprofessional” nonprofit organizations, a
statistically
significant
dependence
has
been identified.

Evaluation of “Professional” and
“Nonprofessional” Nonprofit Organizations

In all organizations that participated in the survey, the most financial resources come from public administration and clients (43%). Responses
differed in “professional” organizations (Figure 3),
which use more EU structural funds (13%), but
on the other hand “nonprofessional” organizations

Comments on the Dependence of
Selected Variables

A “post hoc” contingency table analysis, in which
the rows are variable 60 [Do you use long-term
planning in your organization?] and variable 94
[Do you have a long-term funding plan in your

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH

7

0%
3% 1% 0%
3%

public administration (ministries, regions,
cities, municipalities)
payments from clients

4%
9%

individual donors

38%

corporate donors
income from auxiliary economic activities
EU structural funds

10%

foundations and foundation funds
founder’s contribution
income from social business activities
12%

n = 154
20%

Figure 4. Sources of funding – “nonprofessional” nonprofit organizations.

organization?] has resulted in the following findings:
132
The combination of the row value of 1 “yes,
we have an annual strategic plan” and the column value of 2 “yes, we have a long-term funding plan as part of a long-term strategic plan”
has shown a statistically significantly higher frequency (p < 0.05) than what would correspond
with the independence of variables (aspects) 60
and 94.
If “nonprofessional” nonprofit organizations
use a strategic plan, they also include in it a
long-term funding plan.
434
The combination of the row value of 4 “we
haven’t used a plan yet, but we would like to
start” and the column value of 4 “we don’t have
one, but we would be interested” has shown a
statistically
significantly
higher
frequency
(p < 0.05) than what would correspond with the
independence of variables (aspects) 60 and 94.
535
The combination of the row value of 5 “no, we
don’t consider it necessary” and the column value
of 5 “no, we don’t consider it necessary” has shown
a statistically very significantly higher frequency
(p < 0.001) than what would correspond with the
independence of variables (aspects) 60 and 94.
Both of the above-mentioned dependencies
confirm the reliability of the survey conducted.

Those organizations that plan strategically also
use long-term financial planning, and vice versa.
Other combinations in the table (after multiple
comparisons) do not appear to be statistically
significant.
Overall Summary of the 2015 Survey –
Fundraising and the Prospect of its Use by
Nonprofit Organizations in the Future

In terms of fundraising (i.e., multisource funding), the results of the research conducted and
the literature search clearly indicate (see, for
example, the 2014 Civil Society Organization
Sustainability Index for the Czech Republic
 – The Association of Public Benefit
(AVPO CR
Organizations in the Czech Republic, 2015)) that
nonprofit organizations, particularly the larger
ones (later referred to as “professional” organizations) are better able to prepare projects and
draw up grant applications. However, due to the
growing number of “players” and the amount of
resources available in subsidy programs not
increasing proportionately to the number of
existing nonprofit organizations, the amounts
allocated as part of projects, grants, and subsidy
programs have been decreasing. In 2014, the
Czech Republic saw a growing trend of nonprofit
organizations engaging in on-line methods of
fundraising activities. Making donations in the
virtual space is typical mainly of young people.

8

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

According to Act No. 586/1992 Coll., on
Income Taxes, subsidies, grants, and donations to
nonprofit organizations continue to be exempt
from tax. Organizations in the nonprofit sector
are entitled to reduce their tax base by up to
CZK 300,000. A new obligation for nonprofit
organizations is to clearly separate their activities
related to the performance of their mission from
their business activities.
According to the 2014 Civil Society
Organization Sustainability Index for the Czech

Republic Final Report (AVPO CR
– The
Association of Public Benefit Organizations in
the Czech Republic, 2015), mainly stable and
large nonprofit organizations use regular strategic
planning in an effort to ensure multi-source
funding, while smaller organizations usually plan
for one year at a time. The realization of strategic
planning by nonprofit organizations in 2014 was
also required by corporate donors assessing the
sustainability of projects they were interested in
supporting, and thus indirectly also the sustainability of the entire organization.
The nonprofit sector in the Czech Republic is
very varied in terms of the areas in which individual organizations operate, and they cannot be
approached in a uniform manner, which would be
most convenient mainly for government purposes.
Part of the “John Hopkins Comparative
Nonprofit Sector Project” research project also
dealt with fundraising sources. Compared to other
countries that took part in the research project,
the Czech Republic displays the second highest
share of resources from the state and public
administration – 65%, while 22% was made up by
payments and 13% philanthropy (Salamon, 2013).
A major shift in the data acquired in recent
years occurred as a result of the change in the
Civil Code that became effective on January 1,
2014. The transformation of some forms of nonprofit organizations, the termination of some and
the formation of new forms of nonprofit organizations has resulted in the inability to continually
track the development of responses to questions
regarding the legal form of the respondents and
compare them with the period prior to 2014.
It is very interesting to continually watch the
results of the study of the nonprofit sector in the
Czech Republic, to be able to compare the results

of the responses to the same or similar questions
over the years. It’s not so much the current
results, but their comparison that speaks of the
changes and trends that have occurred over time.
A continuing problem for the nonprofit sector
is the shortage of financial space-time. Nonprofit
organizations exert a lot of effort to gain various
subsidies; however, these are usually rather
unsystematically distributed not only at the
regional, but also national level. Such fundraising
is rather time-consuming and not very effective.
As a result, there is little capacity left for other
processes within an organization, such as marketing activities.
Especially in small nonprofit organizations,
funding is addressed at random and with no systematic approach, which reduces the chances of the
organization’s sustainability. Just like other management processes, financial management must
also be based on a good quality, elaborate, and
long-term financial plan. Organizations should
analyze both the existing and potential sources of
funding. They should have their database and
information on various subsidy programs up-todate and should respect and apply unwritten conventions in fundraising (e.g., to give thanks for a
payment or donation, to be able to answer questions about how the resources will be used, and to
respect people’s right to refuse to help, etc.).
If nonprofit organizations realized the power
and significance of effectively applied marketing
activities and also focused on the latest marketing
trends, with time they could gain a competitive
advantage, improve and facilitate access to multisource funding, strengthen their position in the
market and even contribute to the growth and
further development of their activities and sustainability. One such trend in the area of fundraising is clearly crowdfunding.
In his article “The Sustainability Formula –
How Nonprofit Organizations Can Thrive in the
Emerging Economy”, Peter York (2015) from
TCC Group presents the sustainability formula,
see Figure 5.
Management/Leadership

Under the term “management”, York (2015)
understands a clearly defined vision and mission

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH

Management /
Leadership

Adaptability

Production
capacity

9

Sustainability

Figure 5. The basic formula to calculate the sustainability of a nonprofit organization.

of an organization, shared not only across the
organization’s management, strategic planning in
cooperation with internal as well as external
stakeholders, and the elaboration of a cost analysis of the efficiency of the planned programs.
What is important is not only systematic work
with the organization’s management, but also
with its staff (employees or volunteers) and external stakeholders.
Bacuvcık (2011) explains and elaborates on the
difference between the terms “management” and
“leadership”. A successful management should
not only “do things right”, but most importantly,
they should “do the right things”, which means
they should be able to decide on the optimum
path and convince their subordinates to embark
on this path with them. A good manager should
also be a leadership figure.
The fundamental structure of the management
process is made up of eight segments – analyses,
definition of the vision/mission, definition of the
goals, segmentation of the target groups, choosing and preparing the strategy, planning and realization of measures and individual projects in the
nonprofit sector, implementation of the management concept, and subsequent inspection.
Adaptability

We can distinguish between financial and practical adaptability. In terms of the financial point
of view, it is important for nonprofit organizations to build long-term relationships with institutions, companies, and individuals who
significantly support their activities. Sophisticated
financial management should apply principles of
transparent management in the sense of the strategy of cost efficiency rather than only cost effectiveness. If a nonprofit organization concerns
itself with the cost efficiency of its efforts, it can

set, in line with the organization’s vision, its efficiency indicators in a more sophisticated manner
than just the mere sum of costs per output or the
number of strategies applied, thus creating an
important tool for decision making in the
organization.
A financial plan should reflect the local,
regional, national, and in many cases also international trends. The document (agenda) should
be objectively evaluated and its output should be
in line with the organization’s vision and mission.
It should not diverge too far to ensure the nonprofit organization’s consistency on the outside.
Both ways of understanding adaptability are
based on human resources, which again points to
the questions and rules of people management in
the particular organization.
Production Capacity

The provision of services thanks to an optimized
program, appropriate knowledge and experience
of the staff and the possibility of development of
an effective program – all that combined determines production capacity.
Experience and knowledge are connected with
information and data that need to be worked
with, analyzed, updated, and interpreted. An
organization that strives for an optimum way of
working with data can be called a learning
organization.
In his work, York (2015) puts forth ten recommendations on how to ensure sustainability of
nonprofit organizations in the newly emerging
economy. His recommendations and the introduction of four key elements contributing to sustainability in the nonprofit sector are based on
the results from the past ten years at the local,
regional, and national level of research into core
capacity. The output of this research is the CCAT

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

10

methodology (The Core Capacity Assessment
Tool) (Figure 6) for the evaluation of effectiveness
in the nonprofit sector. This methodology was
tested on 700 organizations over a period of
2.5 years. The basis for the assessment was a
regression analysis with one or multiple independent variables.
The research results, see Figure 6, indicate that
28% of the responding nonprofit organizations
perceive themselves as strong organizations meeting the requirements for sustainability, while 30%
of the respondents and tested organizations are
not managed and operated in the spirit of sustainable development. 42% of the responding
organizations showed a satisfactory state in terms
of sustainability in the changing economy.
In the Czech Republic, sustainability, or more
precisely, factors in the success of nonprofit
organizations, were dealt with, among others, by
Novotny and Lukes, who conducted research in
230 nonprofit organizations in the Czech
 402/
Republic as part of research grant GA CR
06/0686. Based on this research, they defined factors in the success of nonprofit organizations,
which, after data collection, were analyzed using
methods such as regression analysis, the same as
in the case of the CCAT methodology. Individual
sections of the questionnaire corresponded with
the five basic elements of sustainability in the
nonprofit sector. Some sections were elaborated
in more detail than others.
The success of an organization was calculated
as a combination of financial indicators, the
increase in the number of people associated with
the organization and also the setting of weights
on the part of the assessor.

To calculate the success rate, they used the following formula: (Novotny & Lukes, 2008).
The success of a nonprofit organization ¼
0.75  fin2 þ 0.1  log of the average number of
members and clients þ 0.1  log of the increase
in the number of employees þ 0.05  their own
subjective evaluation of their success, where
fin2 ¼ 0.7  log of the average annual increase in
revenue þ 0.2  the size of the organization (divided
into
six
groups
according

to revenue) þ 0.1 (the number of profitable  unprofitable years).
As part of their research, Novotny et al.
defined statistically significant factors affecting
the success of an organization as follows:
(Novotny & Lukes, 2008)
) Utilizing the variable component of the salary
depending on work performance
) Systematic further education of staff depending
on their competencies
) Systematic promotion of activities and the
organization itself in line with strategy
) Systematic assessment of the effectiveness of
promotional activities
) Written long-term financial plan
) Regular review of the cost and revenue plan vs.
actual results
) Elaborate fundraising activities
) Innovative approach of the organization and
being first to come up with new projects.

The research suggests that nonprofit organizations are generally willing to share their knowhow for success free of charge – 68% of the
responding NGOs said so (Novotny &
Lukes, 2008).
According to Novotny and Lukes (2008), a
successful nonprofit organization is that which:

30%
42%

weak
strong
satisfactory

28%

n = 700

Figure 6. The perception of nonprofit organizations in terms
of sustainability – CCAT methodology.

) Is trustworthy and has a good reputation and
brand – it is also positively viewed by the
organization’s employees and others with whom
the company cooperates
) Has a clearly defined SMART goal
) Is transparent – publishes annual reports
) Has quality PR
) Has a wide range of supporters, donors and
sponsors – proof of well-executed fundraising

JOURNAL OF SOCIAL SERVICE RESEARCH

For an organization to be sustainable in the
long-term, it must use the kind of marketing
management that, while respecting the vision and
mission of the organization, helps to achieve the
goals of the organization and communicates a
targeted and consistent message to groups of
stakeholders (clients, volunteers, donors, the public, and others). Moreover, if all these sections of
the organization work together and present themselves consistently to the outside world, it makes
the organization more recognizable and identifiable and increases its significance.
Marketing orientation provides the organization with systematic means to coordinate activities in such a way as to attract resources. If the
various areas of the nonprofit sector focus on its
management and priorities, the efforts to bring in
contributions, grants, volunteers, corporate support, etc., reflect organizational priorities rather
than those of the program director or the priorities of individual members of the board of directors. The energy of the core employees focuses
on areas that are most likely to offer the greatest
benefit for the organization.
Crowdfunding – New Trend in Fundraising

In the book “Nonprofit Marketing: Marketing
Management for Charitable and Nongovernmental
Organizations”, Wymer, Knowles, and Gomes
(2006) presents the significance of the Internet for
nonprofit organizations. As the limiting factors he
sees the availability of ICT equipment and the creativity (to which we add the competence and
knowledge) of managers of nonprofit organizations.
It is through the Internet that nonprofit organizations communicate with external groups. The more
professional an impression an organization makes
and the more professional website it has, the more
trustworthy and professional it appears. Apart from
communicating the vision and mission of organizations, attracting volunteers, direct mailing (e-newsletters, e-mails, and offers of services), and
distributing educational materials, websites are used
for the purpose of fundraising activities. Products
can be sold on-line. (Wymer et al., 2006) When the
above-mentioned book was published, crowdfunding, i.e., community funding, was not yet a wellknown concept. Belleflamme, Lambert, and

11

Schwienbacher (2013) also confirm in their article
“Individual crowdfunding practices” that this new
fundraising tool has not been addressed in scientific
literature and that we are only now beginning to
gain knowledge of it.
The largest boom in crowdfunding servers
occurred worldwide after 2006, and in the Czech
Republic it was after 2008. The Internet is an
environment conducive for the development of
new trends, just consider Web 2.0 type applications, and also the use of social media, the socalled crowdsourcing (an open appeal to society
to get engaged in the preparation and development of a product), and a subset of all these is
crowdfunding (group or community funding),
also known as crowdsourced capital.
Crowdfunding is a new concept of funding
projects that has seen a significantly growing
trend in the Czech Republic and whose application and benefits are noticeable mainly in the
public sector.
Conclusions

Fundraising as a set of methods aimed at raising
the funds necessary for the execution of activities
of a nonprofit organization is only an important
means to an end. It must not become the objective of the organization’s nonprofit activities, as
this would significantly jeopardize its sustainability. Fundraising can be successful only on
condition that the activities the nonprofit organization offers are beneficial for the community
and thus contribute to society’s sustainable
development.
Marketing management, taking into account
the current development trends in both marketing and society, offers a wide range of possibilities for building competitiveness and a strong
position and growth of nonprofit organizations
in the market. What continues to be a problem
in the Czech Republic is the substantial inability
of nonprofit organizations to utilize and effectively implement these tools in their marketing
orientation and strategic approach.
Acknowledgments
This article was supported by the Internal Grant Agency of
Faculty of Economics and Management, Czech University

12

 AND L. SEVEROVA

D. HOMMEROVA

of Life Sciences Prague (Projects No. 20161004 – Analysis
of Price Competition Models in Oligopolistic Markets with
Food Commodities).

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

References
Agresti, A. (2013). Categorical data analysis. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.

AVPO CR
– The Association of Public Benefit
Organizations in the Czech Republic. (2015). Index
 e republice
udrzitelneho rozvoje obcanskeho sektoru v Cesk
za rok 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2015, from http://www.
avpo.cz/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/INDEX-UDR%C5%
BDITELN%C3%89HO-ROZVOJE-OB%C4%8CANSK%C3
%89HO-SEKTORU-V-%C4%8CESK%C3%89-REPUBLICEZA-ROK-2014.pdf
Bacuvcık, R. (2011). Marketing neziskovych organizacı. Zlın:
VeRBuM.
Belleflamme, P., Lambert, T., & Schwienbacher, A. (2013).
Individual crowdfunding practices. Venture Capital, 15,
313–333.
Brady, E., Brace-Govan, J., Brennan, L., & Conduit, J.
(2011). Market orientation in nonprofit organizations.
Indications for fundraising from Victoria. International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 16,
84–98.
Cappela, L. M., Arnold, D. R., & Mitchell, M. (1993). The
marketing concept: Potential implementation problems
for not-for-profit organizations. Journal of Marketing
Theory & Practice, 1, 199417–199428.
Dolnicar, S. I. H., & Lazarevski, K. (2009). Marketing in
non-profit organizations: An international perspective.
International Marketing Review, 26, 275–291.

Helmig, B., & Boenigk, S. (2012). Nonprofit management.
M€
unchen: Verlag Franz Vahlen GmbH.
Hommerova, D., & Sanek, P. (2015). Studie vedenı a rızenı

nestatnıch neziskovych organizacı v CR
2014, 2015.
Internal source. Plze
n: Sanek Ponte, o.s.
 zuchova, M. (2016).
Hyanek, V., Skarabelova, S., & Re
Rozbor financovanı nestatnıch neziskovych organizacı
z vybranych verejnych rozpoctů: metody, problemy,
resenı. Retrieved January 3, 2016, from http://cvns.econ.
muni.cz/prenos_souboru/is/soubory/web/135-scan19-rozbormetody-problemy-reseni.pdf
spechu
Novotny, J. & Lukes, M. a kol. (2008). Faktory u
nestatnıch neziskovych organizacı. Praha: Oeconomica.
Pehe, J. (2015). Financovanı neziskovych organizacı.
Retrieved January 9, 2015, from https://moodle.unob.cz/
pluginfile.php/28577/mod_folder/content/0/6Typologie%
20neziskov%C3%BDch%20organizac%C3%AD_P%C5%99
%C3%ADklady%20financov%C3%A1n%C3%AD%20vybran%C3%BDch%20NNO.pdf?forcedownload¼1.
Polackova, Z. (2005). Fundraisingove aktivity: jak zıskat
financnı prostredky od mıstnı komunity. Praha: Portal.
Pope, J. A., Sterrett Isely, E., & Asamoa-Tutu, F. (2009).
Developing a marketing strategy for nonprofit organizations: An exploratory study. Journal of Nonprofit &
Public Sector Marketing, 21, 184–201.
Salamon, L. M. (2013). The state of global civil society and
volunteering. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Center for Civil
Society Studies.
Soban
ova, P. (2010). Fundraising: Zaklady ekonomiky, teorie
a rızenı. Ostrava: Ostravska univerzita v Ostrave.
Wymer, W., Knowles, P. A., & Gomes, R. (2006). Nonprofit
marketing: Marketing management for charitable and
nongovernmental organizations. Thousand Oaks: SAGE
Publications.
York, P. (2015). The sustainability formula – How nonprofit
organizations can thrive in the emerging economy.
Retrieved April 14, 2015, from http://tccgrp.com/pdfs/
SustainabilityFormula.pdf.

