Institute for  
Market-Oriented Management 
University of Mannheim 
P.O. Box 10 34 62 

68131 Mannheim 

Germany 

Series: 
Research Papers 
No.: W123e 

Institute for 
Market-Oriented Management 

Homburg, Ch. / Wieseke, J. / Hoyer, W. D. 

Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain     

Mannheim 2008 

Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. mult. Christian Homburg 
is Professor of Business Administration and Marketing, Chair of the Marketing Department, Director of 
the Institute for Market-Oriented Management (IMU), University of Mannheim. 

Dr. Jan Wieseke 
is Assistant Professor of Marketing at the University of Mannheim. 

Prof. Dr. Wayne D. Hoyer 
is Professor of Business Administration and Marketing at the McCombs School of Business, The 
University of Texas at Austin. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Institute for Market-Oriented Management 

Institute for Market-Oriented Management 

The Institute for Market-Oriented Management (IMU) at the University of Mannheim (Germany) con-
siders itself to be a forum for dialogue between scientific theory and practice. The high scientific and aca-
demic standard is guaranteed by the close networking of the IMU with the three Chairs of Marketing at the 
University of Mannheim, which are highly renowned on a national and international level. The Academic 
Directors of the IMU are 

Prof. Dr. Hans H. Bauer, Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. mult. Christian Homburg and Prof. Dr. Sabine Kuester. 

The IMU offers the following services and expertise: 

(cid:139) Management Know-How  

The IMU publishes papers geared towards managers in companies. Subjects highly relevant to busi-
ness practice are presented here in a compact and concise manner, and scientific research results are 
efficiently  communicated.  In  many  cases,  these  publications  are  based  on  application-oriented  re-
search and cooperation projects involving a large number of global companies.  

(cid:139) Scientific Working Papers 

The  scientific  studies  conducted  by  the  IMU  analyze  new  trends  that  have  an  impact  on  market-
oriented management. On this basis, practice-oriented findings are derived and published in our series 
of scientific working papers. Today, many of our publications have been printed in prominent journals 
and honored with awards at international conferences (e.g., by the American Marketing Association). 

(cid:139) Series Publication 

In  addition  to  publishing scientific  working  papers, the  IMU,  in  cooperation  with  Gabler  publishing 
house, issues a series featuring exemplary scientific findings from the field of market-oriented man-
agement. 

(cid:139) Application-oriented Research 

At  IMU,  research  aims  at  generating  scientific  results  that  are  relevant  to  market-oriented  manage-
ment.  Therefore,  the  IMU  offers  you  the  option  of  submitting  concrete  questions  arising  from  your 
company practice, which are then scientifically analyzed. 

If  you  require  additional  information  or  have  any  questions,  please  contact  the  Institute  for  Market-
Oriented Management, University of Mannheim, L5, 1, 68131 Mannheim, Germany (phone: +49 621 
/ 181-1755) or visit our website at: www.imu-mannheim.de. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Institute for Market-Oriented Management 

The work of the IMU is supported by a group of partners comprising: 

AUDI AG, 
n.n. 
BASF AG,  
Hans W. Reiners 
Bremer Landesbank, 
Dr. Stephan-Andreas Kaulvers 
BSH GmbH,  
Matthias Ginthum 
Carl Zeiss AG, 
Dr. Rainer Ohnheiser 
Cognis Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG,  
Dr. Jürgen Scherer 
Continental AG,  
Tor O. Dahle 
Coty GmbH 
Bernd Beetz 
Deutsche Bank AG, 
Rainer Neske 
Deutsche Messe AG,  
Ernst Raue 
Deutsche Post AG,  
Thomas Kipp 
Deutsche Telekom AG, 
Dr. Christian Illek 
Dresdner Bank AG, 
Andree Moschner 
Dürr AG,  
Ralf W. Dieter 
E.On Energie AG, 
Dr. Bernhard Reutersberg 
EvoBus GmbH, 
Michael Göpfarth 
Hans Fahr 
Fiege Holding Stiftung & Co. KG, 
Heinz Fiege 
Freudenberg & Co. KG, 
Jörg Sost 
Focus Magazin Verlag, 
Frank-Michael Müller 
Fuchs Petrolub AG,  
Stefan Fuchs 
Stephan M. Heck 
Heidelberg Druckmaschinen AG,  
Dr. Jürgen Rautert 
HeidelbergCement AG,  
Andreas Kern 
Hoffmann-La Roche AG,  
Dr. Hagen Pfundner  
HUGO BOSS AG, 
n.n. 

IBM Deutschland GmbH,  
Jörg Peters 
K + S AG,  
Dr. Ralf Bethke 
KARSTADT Warenhaus GmbH,  
Prof. Dr. Helmut Merkel 
Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. Richard Köhler 
Körber PaperLink GmbH,  
Martin Weickenmeier 
L’Oréal Deutschland GmbH, 
Rolf Sigmund 
Microsoft Deutschland GmbH,  
Achim Berg 
Nestlé Deutschland AG,  
Stefan De Loecker 
Pfizer Pharma GmbH, 
Jürgen Braun 
Dr. Volker Pfahlert,  
Thomas Pflug 
Procter & Gamble GmbH,  
Willi Schwerdtle 
Raab Karcher Baustoffe GmbH 
Udo H. Brandt 
Dr. h.c. Holger Reichardt 
Hans Riedel 
Robert Bosch GmbH,  
Uwe Raschke 
Roche Diagnostics GmbH,  
Jürgen Redmann 
Rudolf Wild GmbH & Co. KG, 
Carsten Kaisig 
RWE Energy AG, 
Dr. Andreas Radmacher 
R+V Lebensversicherung AG, 
Heinz-Jürgen Kallerhoff 
Thomas Sattelberger,  
SAP Deutschland AG & Co. KG 
Luka Mucic 
Prof. Dr. Dieter Thomaschewski 
FH Ludwigshafen 
TRUMPF GmbH & Co. KG,  
Dr. Mathias Kammüller 
United Internet Media AG,  
Matthias Ehrlich 
VDMA e.V.,  
Dr. Hannes Hesse 
Voith AG, 
Bertram Staudenmaier 

 
 
 
 
The Institute for Market-Oriented Management 

Research Papers 

W123e Homburg, Ch. / Wieseke, J. / Hoyer, W. D.: Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain, 2008 
W121e Bauer, H. H. / Falk, T. / Hammerschmidt, M. / Schepers, J. J. L.: New Insights in the Quality-Satisfaction Link. Identifying 

Asymmetric and Dynamic Effects, 2008 

W120e Bauer, H. H. / Falk, T. / Schepers, J. J. L. / Hammerschmidt, M.: Exploring Cross Channel Dissynergies in Multichannel 

Systems, 2008. 

W117e Bauer, H. H. / Donnevert, T. / Hammerschmidt, M.: Making Brand Management Accountable – The Influence of Brand 

Relevance, Globalness and Architecture on Brand Efficiency, 2008 

W116e Wieseke, J. / Ullrich, J. / Christ, O. / van Dick, R.: Organizational Identification as a Determinant of Customer Orientation in 

Service Organizations, 2008 

W105e Homburg, Ch. / Hoyer, W. / Stock-Homburg, R.: How to get lost customers back? Insights into customer relationship revival 

activities, 2006 

W104e Homburg, Ch. / Fürst, A.: See No Evil, Hear No Evil, Speak No Evil: A Study of Defensive Organizational Behavior towards 

Customer, 2006 

W102e Homburg, Ch. / Jensen, O.: The Thought Worlds of Marketing and Sales: Which Differences Make a Difference?, 2006 

W101e Homburg, Ch. / Luo, X.: Neglected Outcomes of Customer Satisfaction, 2006 

W094e Bauer, H. H. / Reichardt, T. / Schüle, A.: User Requirements for Location Based Services. An analysis on the basis of 

literature, 2005 

W091e Homburg, Ch. / Bucerius, M.: Is Speed of Integration really a Success Factor of Mergers and Acquisitions? An Analysis of 

the Role of Internal and External Relatedness, 2006 

W084e Homburg, Ch. / Kuester, S. / Beutin, N. / Menon, A.: Determinants of Customer Benefits in Business-to-Business Markets: 

A Cross-Cultural Comparison, 2005 

W083e Homburg, Ch. / Fürst, A.: How Organizational Complaint Handling Drives Customer Loyalty: An Analysis of the Mechanistic 

and the Organic Approach, 2005 

W080e Homburg, Ch. / Bucerius, M.: A Marketing Perspective on Mergers and Acquisitions: How Marketing Integration Affects 

Post-Merger Performance, 2004 

W079e Homburg, Ch. / Koschate, N. / Hoyer, W. D.: Do Satisfied Customers Really Pay More? A Study of the Relationship be-

tween Customer Satisfaction and Willingness to Pay, 2004 

W070e Bauer, H. H. / Mäder, R. / Valtin, A.: The Effects of Brand Renaming on Brand Equity: An Analysis of the Consequences of 

Brand Portfolio Consolidations, 2007 

W068e Homburg, Ch. / Stock, R.: The Link between Salespeople's Job Satisfaction and Customer Satisfaction in a Business-to-

Business Context. A dyadic Analysis, 2003 

W057e Bauer, H. H. / Hammerschmidt, M. / Staat, M.: Analyzing Product Efficiency. A Customer-Oriented Approach, 2002 

W055e Homburg, Ch. / Faßnacht, M. / Schneider, J.: Opposites Attract, but Similarity Works. A Study of Interorganizational Simi-

larity in Marketing Channels, 2002 

W036e Homburg, Ch. / Pflesser, Ch.: A Multiple Layer Model of Market-Oriented Organizational Culture. Measurement Issues and 

Performance Outcomes., 2000 

W035e Krohmer, H. / Homburg, Ch. / Workman, J.P..: Should Marketing Be Cross-Funktional? Conceptual Development and 

International Empirical Evidence, 2000 

W030e Homburg, Ch. / Giering, A. / Menon, A.: Relationship Characteristics as Moderators of the Satisfaction-Loyalty Link. Find-

ings in a Business-to-Business Context, 1999 

W029e Homburg, Ch. / Giering, A.: Personal Characteristics as Moderators of the Relationship Between Customer Satisfaction 

and Loyalty. An Empirical Analysis, 1999 

For more working papers, please visit our website at: www.imu-mannheim.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Abstract 

The  conventional  service  profit  chain  (SPC)  proposes  that  a  firm’s  financial 

performance  can  be  improved  via  a  path  that  connects  employee  satisfaction, 

customer  orientation,  customer  satisfaction  and  customer  loyalty.  In  this  paper,  a 

complementary SPC is introduced which is built on both a conventional path as well 

as a social identity-based path. The latter SPC part centrally builds on customer and 

employee  company  identification  as  a  core  construct.  On  the  basis  of  a  large  scale 

triadic  data  set  that  included  data  from  employees,  customers  and  firms,  we  find 

strong support for the extended SPC, which accounts for important customer (loyalty 

and willingness to pay) and firm outcomes (financial performance). Also, the effects 

of  company  identification  exist  incrementally  beyond  the  effects  of  the  conventional 

SPC path.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Table of Contents 

Abstract ...................................................................................................................... 2 

1 

Introduction ........................................................................................................ 1 

2  Overview of Framework ..................................................................................... 4 

2.1  The Satisfaction-Based Path of the Service Profit Chain................................... 4 
2.2  The Social Identity-Based Path of the Service Profit Chain .............................. 7 
2.3  Hypotheses regarding the Social Identity-Based Path of the Service Profit 

Chain .......................................................................................................................... 9 
2.4  Control Variables and Moderators ....................................................................... 14 

3  Methodology..................................................................................................... 15 

3.1  Collection of Triadic Data ...................................................................................... 15 
3.2  Measures ................................................................................................................. 17 
3.3  Analytical Approach................................................................................................ 18 

4 

5 

Results ............................................................................................................. 18 

Discussion........................................................................................................ 21 

5.1  Research Issues ..................................................................................................... 21 
5.2  Managerial Implications......................................................................................... 24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

1 

Introduction 

A strong focus in contemporary sales and service management has been on the service profit 

chain (SPC) which refers to a causal chain linking employee satisfaction to a firm’s financial 

performance through mediating constructs such as customer satisfaction and customer loyalty 

(Heskett et al. 1994; 2003; Loveman 1998; Anderson and Mittal 2000). According to Heskett 

et.al. (1994; 2003), internal service quality leads to employee satisfaction which then drives 

employee loyalty and productivity. Employee productivity, in turn, drives value which is the 

basis  for  customer  satisfaction.  Customer  satisfaction  determines  customer  loyalty  which 

leads  to  profitability  and  growth.  This  conventional  SPC  logic  stands  as  a  widely  accepted 

element  of  current  management  wisdom,  especially  in  contexts  where  employee-customer 

interaction  occurs.  As  Rucci  et  al.  (1998,  p.  84)  note  in  their  widely  acknowledged  paper: 

“The  basic  elements  of  an  employee-customer-profit  model  are  not  difficult  to  grasp.  Any 

person with even a little experience […] understands intuitively that there is a chain of cause 

and effect running from employee behavior to customer behavior to profits […].” 

As  we  will  detail  below,  there  has  been  a  considerable  amount  of  academic  research  which 

has examined specific links in this SPC as well as the entire chain (Loveman 1998; Kamakura 

et.al. 2002). Many of these studies find support for the proposed chain linkages. However, not 

all of the academic research on the conventional SPC has been positive. Some studies report 

either  small  effect  sizes  or  non-significant  effects  (e.g.,  Brown  and  Chin  2004;  Brown  and 

Mitchell 1993; Herrington and Lomax 1999; Szymanski and Henard 2001). Thus, despite the 

widespread appeal and interest in the conventional SPC, further research is needed.  

Moreover,  from  a  practical  perspective,  there  are  some  implementation  problems  related  to 

the  conventional  SPC.  These  are  mainly  related  to  the  construct  of  customer  satisfaction 

which,  as  mentioned  above,  stands  at  the  heart  of  the  conventional  SPC.  Even  though  the 

fundamental role of customer satisfaction remains undisputed, it has been acknowledged that 

a  permanent  increase  in  customer  satisfaction  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  achieve 

and firms are therefore searching for alternative ways to raise customers’ loyalty.  

A key reason for this centers on customer expectations. According to the most common view, 

satisfaction results from a comparison of expectations to performance (e.g., Bearden and Teal 

1983;  Oliver  1980;  Oliver  and  DeSarbo  1988).  If  performance  meets  expectations,  the 

customer  is  satisfied;  if  not,  dissatisfaction  results.  Thus,  a  core  assumption  is  that  by 

1 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

improving  performance  one  can  also  increase  satisfaction.  A problem  with  this  view  is  that 

performance at time 1 sets the expectations for time 2 (Bolding et. al. 1993; Bolton and Drew 

1991a;  Mittal  et  al.  1999).  This  is  illustrated  by  the  following  quote  from  the  industry: 

“Customers expect what they are now receiving, and in a sense, they keep upping the ante” 

(Horowitz  2005,  p.  38).  As  a  result,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  meet  or  exceed 

customer  expectations.  In  fact,  some  authors  have  even  proposed  the  need  to  go  beyond 

customer  satisfaction  to  ‘delight’  customers  (Oliver,  Rust,  and  Varki  1997;  Rust  and  Oliver 

2000). Unfortunately this usually requires a considerable amount of effort and investment in 

financial  resources  and  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  performance  outcomes  justify  this 

investment.   

The natural limits of customer satisfaction management lead to the question of whether there 

are  additional  ways  to  foster  strong  customer-company  bonds  in  order  to  improve  financial 

performance  (Ahearne  et  al.  2005).  Representing  this  view,  Bhattacharya  and  Sen  (2003,  p. 

76)  aptly  state:  “In  their  quest  for  sustained  success  in  a  marketplace  […]  more  and  more 

companies  are  attempting  to  build  deep,  meaningful,  long-term  relationships  with  their 

customers.” 

In response to this view, we propose and test a complementary SPC which is built on social 

identity  theory  (Tajfel  and  Turner  1986).  The  two  additional  constructs  in  this  SPC  are 

customer and employee company identification which involve the degree to which customers 

and  employees  identify  with  a  company  to  fulfill  self-definitional  needs  and  the  resulting 

emotional reactions from this identification (e.g., Ahearne et al. 2005; Bhattacharya and Sen 

2003,  Mael  and  Ashforth  1992,  Reed  2002).  Accordingly,  customer  company  identification 

represents a different aspect of the customer-firm relationship relative to the classic customer 

satisfaction construct. Because of the self-definitional and emotional components of customer 

company identification, we propose it as an additional driver (on top of customer satisfaction) 

of  a  firm’s  customer  outcomes  (e.g.,  loyalty  and  willingness  to  pay)  and  financial 

performance. Similarly, we suggest that employee company identification may be a powerful 

predictor of relevant outcomes in addition to job satisfaction.  

We  propose  that  the  two  SPC-paths  (i.e.,  conventional  and  the  social  identity-based)  are 

complementary. In other words, we argue that firms that successfully manage both SPC paths 

will  generally  perform  better  than  firms  that  are  successful  in  only  managing  either  the 

2 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

satisfaction or the social identity-based path. That is, we argue in favor of an extended model 

which includes both the ‘old’ and the ‘new’ SPC paths. 

In the present study, we tested the extended SPC on the basis of a large scale triadic data set. 

This  set  included  matched  responses  from  258  employees  and  597  customers  of  109  travel 

agencies as well as secondary data on the financial performance of the travel agencies.  

This study has two important assets which are different from most previous studies on SPC-

issues. First, we tested both the social identity-based SPC and the conventional, satisfaction-

based  SPC  paths  simultaneously.  This  addresses  calls  for  comprehensive  approaches  for 

modeling the (conventional) SPC, “as most studies have only focused on discrete aspects of 

the SPC” (Kamakura et al. 2002, p. 294).  

A second important feature of our study is that we collected data from employees, customers 

and firms. Previous research has indicated that this is important in relating service aspects to 

customer variables (Schneider et al. 1980; Loveman 1998). It is also in line with recent calls 

to  connect  individual  customer  data  with  data  of  employees  and  the  firm  (e.g.,  Payne  and 

Webber  2006)  because  previous  research  was  mostly  based  on  aggregate  or  single-level 

analyses.  

This study has important academic implications because the customer and employee company 

identification constructs have received little research attention in marketing. Despite this, it is 

a very important construct because it represents an alternative potential means of developing a 

strong bond with customers, an issue that has been of great relevance and importance recently 

in academic marketing theory and research. In addition, our study should help researchers to 

broaden their perspective on the SPC by developing an additional, social identity-based SPC-

logic. 

For  practitioners,  the  social  identity-based  SPC  extension  has  important  managerial 

implications  since  it  offers  an  additional  way  to  influence  firm  profits  relative  to  the 

conventional  SPC.  Compared  to  the  management  of  a  satisfaction-based  SPC,  the 

management of social identification would require a largely different approach.  

3 

 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

2  Overview of Framework 

Our research framework is presented in Figure 1. This framework incorporates two paths to a 

firm’s  financial  success.  The  upper  part  of  the  framework  presents  the  conventional, 

satisfaction-based  SPC  (job  satisfaction  –  customer  satisfaction  –  customer  outcomes  [e.g., 

loyalty and willingness to pay] – firms’ financial performance), while the lower path depicts 

the complementary, social identity-based SPC (employee company identification – customer 

company  identification  –  customer  outcomes  [e.g.,  loyalty  and  willingness  to  pay]  –  firms’ 

financial  performance).  Both  paths  have  a  commonality  in  the  construct  of  customer 

orientation  which  mediates  between  employee  and  customer  variables.  We  include  this 

construct because recent studies on the conventional SPC have found customer orientation to 

mediate between job satisfaction and customer satisfaction (e.g., Homburg and Stock 2004). 

In  the  following,  we  first  briefly  describe  the  constructs  of  the  conventional  SPC  and 

summarize the related research on SPC-linkages. However, because the linkages of this chain 

are well known in the literature we do not develop explicit hypotheses for them. Thereafter, 

we introduce in more detail, the theoretical foundation for the social identity-based SPC and 

derive  specific  hypotheses  with  respect  to  the  linkages  between  employee  company 

identification,  customer  orientation,  customer  company  identification  and  firms’  financial 

performance.  

-------------------------- Insert Figure 1 about here ------------------------------ 

2.1  The Satisfaction-Based Path of the Service Profit Chain  

As  mentioned  earlier,  the  key  constructs  in  the  conventional  SPC  part  are  employee  job 

satisfaction, customer orientation, customer satisfaction, and customer loyalty. Employee job 

satisfaction is defined as a positive attitude which results from a positive evaluation of one’s 

job  experiences  (e.g.,  Brown  and  Peterson  1993;  Homburg  and  Stock  2004;  Locke  1976). 

Customer  orientation  “refers  to  the  employee’s  behaviors  that  are  geared  toward  satisfying 

customers’ needs adequately” (Stock and Hoyer 2005, p. 536). Customer satisfaction occurs 

when  the  performance  of  a  product  or  service  meets  the  customer’s  expectations  (e.g., 

Bearden and Teal 1983; Oliver 1980; Oliver and DeSarbo 1988). Finally, customer loyalty is 

“a deeply held commitment to rebuy or repatronize a preferred product/service consistently in 

the future, thereby causing repetitive same-brand or same-set purchasing, despite situational 

4 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

influences  and  marketing  efforts  having  the  potential  to  cause  switching  behavior”  (Oliver 

1997,  p.  392).  Willingness  to  pay  can  be  defined  as  the  maximum  price  that  a  customer  is 

willing to spend for a product or service (e.g., Cameron and James 1987; Krishna 1991).  

Interestingly,  SPC  research  represents  an  intersection  of  research  in  human  resources, 

organizational behavior, and marketing. The initial part of the chain deals largely with human 

resource issues. In other words, in order for employees to deliver high levels of service, it is 

critical  that  companies  pay  attention  to  issues  such  as  employee  selection,  training,  and 

support.  In doing so, they create higher levels of employee satisfaction which in turn, leads to 

higher employee loyalty (Schlesinger and Heskett 1991a, b). Snipes et al. (2005) also found 

that  job  satisfaction  has  a  significant  positive  impact  on  internal  service  quality.  Similarly, 

according  to  Hartline  and  Ferrell  (1996)  employees’  job  satisfaction  is  needed  to  produce 

customer perceptions of service quality. 

There is also evidence for the employee satisfaction – customer satisfaction link. This effect 

has  been  demonstrated  in  the  insurance  (Schlesinger  and  Zornitsky  1991)  and  banking 

industries (Rucci et al. 1998; Schneider et al.1980; Schneider and Bowen 1985).  

Considerable support for the link between customer satisfaction and customer loyalty can be 

found  in  a  variety  of  areas.  A  multi-industry  study  by  Zeithaml  et  al.  (1996)  found  strong 

evidence for the link between service quality and several behaviors related to customer loyalty 

including customer retention and willingness to pay. Research on the Swedish and American 

Customer  Satisfaction  Index  has found  a  strong  link  to  loyalty  in  both  cases  (Fornell  1992; 

Fornell et. al. 1996). A variety of other studies have provided similar support (e.g., Anderson 

and Sullivan 1993: Bearden and Teel 1983; Bolton and Drew 1991a, b; Boulding et. al. 1993; 

Fornell 1992; Oliver 1980; Oliver and Swan 1989a, b). 

There  has  also  been  some  evidence  that  there  is  a  positive  relationship  between  CS/loyalty 

and financial performance. According to Anderson et al. (1994, p. 63):  “firms that actually 

achieve high customer satisfaction also enjoy superior economic returns.” Similar theoretical 

and  empirical  support  has  been  provided  in  other  studies  (e.g.,  Anderson  et  al.1997; 

Reichheld and Sasser 1990; Rust and Zahorik 1993). 

Loveman (1998) provided an empirical examination of the entire conventional SPC and finds 

support for all the links in the chain. In particular, the strongest links were between internal 

service  quality  and  employee  satisfaction,  employee  satisfaction/loyalty  and  customer 

5 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

satisfaction,  and  customer  loyalty  and  profitability.  The  link  between  employee  satisfaction 

and  a  variety  of  outcomes  (such  as  customer  satisfaction,  productivity,  and  profit)  has  also 

been established by Harter et al. (2002). In a retail setting, Maxham et al. (2007) found that 

employee performance and perceptions influence customer evaluations of the retailer, which, 

in  turn,  affects  store  performance.  Kamakura  et.al  (2002)  provided  general  support  for  the 

service  chain  but  note  that  firms  must  be  careful  to  effectively  manage  both  the  employee 

inputs  as  well  as  customer  perceptions  in  order  to  increase  profitability.  Schneider,  et.al. 

(2005)  found  moderate  support  for  a  framework  that  links  service-focused  leadership  to 

service climate and customer focused behavior, which, in turn, increases customer satisfaction 

and unit sales. Finally, Schneider et. al. (2003) provided evidence that employee satisfaction 

is causally prior to market and financial performance. 

In  contrast,  there  are  also  a  number  of  studies  that  did  not  find  empirical  support  for  the 

proposed  linkages  in  the  conventional  SPC.  According  to  Schneider  (1991),  employee  and 

customer  attitudes  can  be  related  to  profits,  but  they  aren’t  always.  In  a  hospital  context, 

Nelson  et.  al.  (1992)  found  that  important  indicators  of  patient  satisfaction  (e.g.,  nursing 

services) were not correlated with hospital profitability. In a study by Bernhardt et al. (2000), 

customer  satisfaction  is  related  to  profitability  in  individual  fast  food  outlets  but  not  on  a 

national basis. Similarly, Kordupleski et al. (1993) point out that not all investments in service 

quality  will  lead  to  increased  financial  returns;  these  investments  must  be  tied  closely  to 

aspects which are valued by customers. Finally, in a test of the SPC, Kamakura et.al. (2002) 

found that higher service quality does not guarantee profitability.   

It is worth noting that the SPC related research is related to the research streams on customer 

equity (e.g., Rust et al. 2004) and return on quality (e.g. Rust et al. 2002; Rust et al. 1995). 

Generally  speaking,  these  models  have  in  common  that  they  link  customer  perceptions  and 

marketing  activities  to  financial  metrics  (Kamakura  et  al.  2002).    Also,  Hogan  et  al.  (2002) 

note,  the  SPC-related  literature  provides  one  basis  for  customer  equity  research.  However, 

customer  equity  research  takes  a  broader  perspective  which  is  not  limited  to  services  and 

deals  with  the  linkage  between  the  entire  marketing  mix  and  customer  profitability  (e.g. 

Kumar and George 2007). Also, while SPC and return on quality models focus on improving 

firms’ internal service operations for a given customer base, the customer equity model deals 

with  the  identification  of  profitable  customers.  The  return  on  quality  concept  differentiates 

6 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

itself by explicitly modeling both costs and benefits of quality related investments, which are 

not explicitly considered in the SPC framework (Kamakura et al. 2002). 

2.2  The Social Identity-Based Path of the Service Profit Chain 

The social identity approach involves a theoretical framework that deals with the relationship 

between self-concept, group and intergroup phenomena (Bergami and Bagozzi 2000; Haslam 

2004). The central assumption of this approach is that group membership contributes to self-

definition. That is, people define themselves in terms of unique individualizing attributes as 

well as in terms of collective attributes of groups to which they belong.  

The main elements of the social identity approach are self-categorization theory (e.g., Turner 

et  al.  1987)  and  social  identity  theory  (e.g.,  Tajfel  and  Turner  1986).  Self-categorization 

theory suggests that human beings have a need to simplify the social world by categorizing 

people  into  groups  (e.g.,  occupation,  nationality,  clubs,  social  groups  etc.).  People  perceive 

themselves as belonging to a particular group or category. According to social identity theory, 

individuals strive for positive self-esteem and try to accomplish this by enhancing their social 

identity. As we discuss in detail below, this basic motivation leads to a number of behaviors 

on behalf of the group(s) to which one belongs.  

Moreover, identification also embodies a significant hedonic element in the sense that group 

identification directly involves favorable feelings and emotions (Edwards 2005). According to 

Tajfel  (1981,  p.  225),  self-definition  is  “that  part  of  the  individual’s  self-concept  which 

derives  from  knowledge  of  his  membership  of  a  social  group  (or  groups)  together  with  the 

value and emotional significance attached to that membership.”  

Inherent in the assumptions of self-categorization theory is the idea that one person can have 

multiple group memberships. For example, one might identify as a male, as an American, as a 

supporter of the Boston Red Sox, and as an employee of Starbucks. Organizations have often 

been  considered  as  one  of  the  most  important  group  memberships  for  employees  (e.g., 

Haslam  2004).  Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  social  identity  approach  has  been  applied 

successfully  to  explain  employee  behavior  (e.g.,  Riketta  2002;  Riketta  and  van  Dick  2005; 

van  Dick  2004)  and  the  development  of  organizational  phenomena  such  as  mergers  and 

acquisition. In fact, since the seminal paper of Ashforth and Mael (1989), many researchers 

have  found  employee  company  identification  to  be  a  predictor  of  organizational  citizenship 

7 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

behavior  (Riketta  2005),  turnover  (Mael  and  Ashforth  1995),  organizational  organization-

based self-esteem (Bergami and Bagozzi 2000), and work motivation and performance (van 

Knippenberg 2000).  

Recently,  Bhattacharya  and  Sen  (2003)  transferred  the  social  identity  approach  into  the 

customer  domain  and  developed  a  conceptual 

framework 

for  customer-company 

identification. Their core suggestion is that, similar to employees, customers can identify with 

a  company.    Further  this  group  identification  can  even  occur  in  the  absence  of  formal 

membership  (see  also  Pratt  1998;  Reed  2002).  In  other  words,  customers’  self-definitional 

needs  can  be  partially  fulfilled  by  the  companies  they  patronize.  As  one  example,  users  of 

Apple  computers  strongly  identify  with  the  company  and  this  relates  to  how  they  define 

themselves as individuals.  Thus, customer company identification helps to clarify one’s self-

concept  and  to  gain  a  positive  self-appraisal  through  a  positive  company  appraisal.  As 

Bhatthacharya  and  Sen  (2003,  p.  77)  put  it:  “in  today's  era  of  unprecedented  corporate 

influence  and  consumerism,  certain  companies  represent  and  offer  attractive,  meaningful 

social identities to consumers that help them satisfy important self-definitional needs.”  

In  addition,  as  with  any  other  type  of  group  identification,  there  is  also  an  emotional 

component  in  customer  company  identification.  Einwiller  et  al.  2006  (p.  192)  describe  the 

emotional  part  of  customer  company  identification  as  follows:  “Strong  identification  occurs 

when a company becomes personally relevant for consumers, and personal relevance creates 

the potential for emotional reactions.”  

It  is  worth  noting  that  customer  company  identification  is  different  from  the  construct  of 

customer commitment (e.g. Bansal et al. 2004; Garbarino and Johnson 1999; Hennig-Thurau 

et al. 2002; Morgan and Hunt 1994; Bettencourt 1997). Even though some authors perceive a 

close  relation  between  commitment  and  identification  (e.g.,  Miller  et  al.  2000),  there  is  a 

consensus  that  identity  and  commitment  are  distinguishable  in  terms  of  their  essential 

meaning.  The  key  distinction  is  that  identification  includes  both  a  self-definitional  and  an 

emotional  meaning  for  the  individual,  while  commitment  does  not  reflect  the  cognitive 

element  of  psychological  oneness  and  self-definition  that  identification  does  (Ashforth  and 

Mael 1989; Van Knippenberg and Sleebos 2006). Also, there is mounting empirical evidence 

that identification and commitment are empirically distinct from each other (e.g., Brown et al. 

2005;  Bergami  and  Bagozzi  2004,  Van  Knippenberg  and  Sleebos  2006).  Meta-analytical 

8 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

evidence  shows  that  these  two  constructs  produce  different  results  with  respect  to  outcome 

variables (Riketta, 2005).  

Taking all this together, we believe that the social identity concept represents an attractive and 

promising way to develop a strong bond with customers. Based on this assumption, we now 

derive hypotheses for the linkages of the social identity-based path of the SPC. 

2.3  Hypotheses regarding the Social Identity-Based Path of the Service Profit 

Chain 

Employee  company  identification  –  customer  company  identification.  The  first  link  in  the 

social  identity-based  part  of  the  SPC  is  between  employee  company  identification  and 

customer  company  identification.  Three  conceptual  explanations  are  offered  to  support  this 

link. 

First,  in  the  identity-related  literature  it  has  been  acknowledged  that  people's  identification 

with an organization is based on their perception of its core characteristics (Bhattacharya and 

Sen 2003; Dutton et al. 1994). In a sense, customer contact employees are the long arm of a 

company who transport these core defining characteristics to the customers (i.e., they are the 

‘face’ of the organization; Hartline et al. 2000). Therefore, we adopt Ahearne et al.’s (2005, p. 

575) view that: “Boundary-spanning agents reveal a lot about the quality and character of the 

company  they  represent;  thus,  we  posit  that  identification  is  likely  to  be  stronger  when 

customers  have  favorable  perceptions  of  the  boundary-spanning  agent  with  whom  they 

interact  (e.g.,  the  company’s  salesperson,  customer  service,  technical  representatives,  etc.).” 

Given  that  employees  who  identify  with  the  company  are  prone  to  act  favorable  for  the 

company, a higher level of employee company identification should lead to a higher level of 

customer company identification. 

Our second line of reasoning focuses on the concept of prototypicality, which is an integral 

part  of  the  social  identity  approach.  Based  on  the  existing  identification  literature,  it  can  be 

argued  that  (1)  employee  company  identification  leads  to  employee  prototypicality  for  the 

company (i.e. prototypical employees capture features that are typical for their own company) 

and  (2)  employee  prototypicality  perceived  by  customers  leads  to  customer  company 

identification. Concerning the first part of this argument, social identity theorists have stated 

that  employees  who  identify  strongly  with  their  organization  become  more  prototypical  for 

9 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

this group because they are more inclined to conform with its norms and peculiarities.  As a 

result, they more strongly adopt and signal the attitudes, behaviors, and orientations that are 

specific to this organization (van Knippenberg and Hogg 2003).  

The second point which deals with the link between employees’ prototypicality and customer 

company  identification  is  suggested  by  Bhattacharya  and  Sen  (2003)  in  their  conceptual 

model  on  constituents  and  communicators  of  company  identity.  Research  in  social 

psychology (van Knippenberg 2000; van Knippenberg et al. 1994) has confirmed that people 

are more likely to attend to communications from prototypical group members than from non-

prototypical  members,  and  are  more  likely  to  align  their  attitudes  with  the  attitudes  of 

prototypical members. One reason for this effect is that prototypical members are more able to 

clearly  communicate  the  norms  or  the  group  or  firm  because  they  have  a  much  higher 

motivation  to  act  in  favor  of  the  specific  group  or  firm  and  to  adopt  its  unique  symbols, 

speech and behaviors.  

Third, emotional contagion may also play an important role. As stated earlier, identification 

includes  an  hedonic  dimension  (Tajfel  1981,  Dutton  et  al.  1994).  It  would  be  expected  that 

employees who identify strongly with the company will express more positive emotions than 

employees  who  do  not  identify.  According  to  the  theory  of  emotional  contagion,  these 

emotions are “caught” by the respective customers (either consciously or unconsciously) and 

in  turn,  positively  influence  their  company  identification.  Based  on  these  three  lines  of 

reasoning, we put forward the following hypothesis:  

Hypothesis  1:  The  higher  the  employees’  company  identification,  the  higher  the  customers’ 

company identification. 

Employee  company  identification  –  customer  orientation.  As  stated  above,  it  has  been 

repeatedly shown that identification with a group leads to a deep-lying motivation to enhance 

the value of the respective group (e.g., Ellemers et al. 2004). In line with previous research, 

we  argue  that  among  other  actions  (e.g.,  in-role  behavior,  organizational  citizenship 

behavior),  engaging  in  customer  orientated  behavior  can  be  one  way  of  acting  positively 

toward  of  the  organization.  In  support  of  this  view,  it  has  repeatedly  been  found  that 

employees  with  a  deep-level  bond  to  their  organization  display  a  higher  level  of  customer 

orientation (Hoffman and Ingram 1991; Pettijohn et al. 2002; Siguaw et al. 1994). Hence, we 

propose: 

10 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Hypothesis 2: The higher the employees’ company identification, the higher the employees’ 

customer orientation. 

Employee  customer  orientation  –  customer  company  identification.  Through  their  customer 

interactions, frontline employees are signaling the character and identity of their company to 

the  customers  (Ahearne  et  al.  2005;  Liao  and  Chuang  2004).  Bhattacharya  and  others  have 

argued  that  the  more  favorable  the  behavior  of  the  frontline  employee  is  perceived  by  the 

customer (i.e., in terms of customer orientation), the more likely this customer will consider 

the company as a target for social identity fulfillment (Ahearne et al. 2005; Bhattacharya and 

Sen 2003). According to Ahearne et al. (2005, p. 577): “this is because such interactions make 

it easier for the customer to retrieve favorable, self-relevant information from memory, which 

scholars have suggested is an important driver of company identification.” Our reasoning is in 

accordance  with  Bhattacharya  et  al.  (1995,  p.  55)  who  found  “that  a  strong  and  often 

distinctive  customer  orientation  is  a  necessary  condition  for  fostering  identification.”  Thus, 

we propose: 

Hypothesis  3:  The  higher  the  employees’  customer  orientation,  the  higher  the  customers’ 

company identification. 

Customer company identification – customer loyalty and willingness to pay. A key link in the 

framework is between customer company identification and customer loyalty and willingness 

to pay. As mentioned above, it is proposed that customers who identify with a company will 

be motivated to act in favor of this company in order to raise the status of this group. In line 

with this reasoning, Bhattacharya and Sen (2003) propose a conceptual framework in which 

customer  company  identification  predicts  customer  loyalty  toward  a  company.  In  support, 

Ahearne  et  al.  (2005)  found  customer  company  identification  to  be  related  to  beneficial 

customer outcomes (i.e. product utilization and extra role behaviors such as recommendation 

of the company to friends).  

Applying these findings and reasoning to our framework, we propose a positive relationship 

between  customer  company  identification  and  the  outcomes  of  customer  loyalty  (e.g., 

repurchase,  recommendation)  and  customers’  willingness  to  pay.  With  respect  to  customer 

loyalty,  we  argue  that  customers  who  identify  strongly  with  the  company  tend  to  engage  in 

loyal behavior such as repurchasing and recommending the company because of three social 

identity  theory  inherent  reasons.  First,  being  loyal  validates  and  reinforces  the  feeling  of 

11 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

belongingness to the company and thus fulfills a self-definitional need. Second, according to 

social identity theory, people strive to raise the status of the group to which they belong (in 

this  case  the  company).  Loyal  behavior,  such  as  repeated  purchase  and  positive  word  of 

mouth communication, in turn, can be seen as ways to help the organization in this respect. 

Third,  as  stated  earlier,  customer  company  identification  fulfills  an  emotional  need  for 

customers (Ahearne et al. 2005; Bhattacharya and Sen 2003). If customers switch to another 

firm, they would no longer receive this emotional benefit. This should raise their propensity to 

stay loyal to the company with which they identify. Thus, we propose:  

Hypothesis 4a: The higher the customers’ company identification, the higher the customers’ 

loyalty. 

Willingness  to  pay  is  the  maximum  amount  of  money  a  customer  is  willing  to  spend  for  a 

product  or  service  or  the  value  a  person  assigns  to  a  consumption  experience  in  monetary 

units (Cameron and James 1987; Homburg et al. 2005; Krishna 1991). Given that customer 

company identification serves as a motivator to act on behalf of a group, it should also raise 

the willingness to pay for products or services of the company (Arnett et al. 2003). Moreover, 

since customer company identification helps in defining oneself, this would be of significant 

value to the customer and this additional value would be taken into account  in terms  of the 

price the customer is willing to pay. Thus, we hypothesize: 

Hypothesis 4b: The higher the customers’ company identification, the higher the customers’ 

willingness to pay. 

Customer loyalty – firm’s financial performance. Customers who are more loyal should buy 

more from a firm, recommend the firm’s products and services to others, and be more likely 

to adopt a firm’s new add-on services or new products (Mooradian and Oliver 1997; Rust et 

al. 1995). In addition, a more loyal customer base leads to reduced costs in future customer 

transactions and customer acquisition (e.g., costs of customer communications; Reichheld and 

Sasser 1990; Srivastava et al. 1998). Thus, we propose:   

Hypothesis  5a:  The  higher  the  customer  loyalty  of  a  firm,  the  higher  the  firm’s  financial 

performance. 

Customer  willingness  to  pay  –  firm’s  financial  performance.  Finally,  in  our  framework  we 

adopt  the  accepted  notion  that  the  customer’s  willingness  to  pay  is  an  important  factor  in 

determining  a  firm’s  financial  performance.  A customer’s  higher  willingness  to  pay  implies 

12 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

that firms can charge higher prices. It has been argued that price is a key element in a firm’s 

profit  equation  (Homburg  et  al.  2005)  and  even  small  price  differences  are  of  significant 

importance for firms’ profit (Garda and Marn 1993). Therefore, customer willingness to pay 

should be directly linked to firms’ financial performance. Accordingly, we propose: 

Hypothesis 5b: The higher the willingness to pay of a firm’s customers, the higher the firm’s 

financial performance. 

2.4  Control Variables and Moderators 

In  addition  to  the  proposed  main  effects  of  the  SPC-framework,  there  are  other  variables 

which  might  moderate  these  effects.  As  depicted  in  figure  1,  we  tested  for  the  moderating 

effect  of  three  variables:  the  length  of  customer  relationship,  employee-customer  similarity, 

and competitive intensity.  

Concerning the links between customer satisfaction and customer company identification and 

customer  loyalty  and  willingness  to  pay,  we  propose  that  the  effects  are  stronger  for 

customers who have a longer relationship with the firm. In support of this view, Homburg et 

al. (2005) found that the impact of customer satisfaction on willingness to pay is stronger for 

cumulative  situations  (i.e.  longer  relationships)  than  for  transaction  specific  situations  (i.e. 

shorter  relationships).  Also,  it  is  likely  that  the  transfer  of  satisfaction  and  identification 

between employees and customers is stronger in case of longer customer relationships where 

customers know the firm and its employees comparably well. 

Employee-customer  similarity  is  of  potential  importance  for  the  link  between  employee 
company identification and customer company identification.1 This is due to a possible “self-

selection”  process  on  the  part  of  both  the  employees  and  customers.  The  identification 

literature suggests that choosing a company with which to identify is a selective and volitional 

act  on  the  part  of  the  consumer  or  employee  (Bhattacharya  and  Sen  2003;  Haslam  2004). 

Thus, both employees and customers potentially choose to identify with those companies that 

are  attractive  targets  for  social  identity  fulfillment.  Thus,  one  might  expect  demographic  or 

psycho-graphic similarities between employees and consumers of a certain firm (particularly 

when  there  is  face-to-face  contact).  We  propose  that  for  a  similar  employee-customer  dyad 

there  is  likely  to  be  a  stronger  transfer  of  company  identification  than  for  dissimilar 

13 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

employee-customer dyads. In our study we tested this notion in terms of the age and gender 

similarity  between  employees  and  customers.  The  unit  of  analysis  for  the  age  and  gender 

discrepancy variable was the customer. 

Concerning  the  impact  of  customer  loyalty  and  willingness  to  pay  on  the  firm’s  financial 

performance,  we  included  competitive  intensity  as  a  moderator.  This  is  in  line  with  the 

argument that a firm may perform well when competitive intensity is low, even in case of low 

customer loyalty intentions / willingness to pay, because in such cases “customers are stuck 

with the organization’s products and services” (Jaworski and Kohli 1993, p. 57). In contrast, 

under  conditions  with  high  competitive  intensity,  customers  with  low  loyalty  have  many 

alternative options to satisfy their needs and wants and thus, can easily switch to competitors’ 

products and services (e.g., Houston 1986; Kohli and Jaworski 1990). 

Finally, we controlled for the customers’ perception of the firm’s quality and store location. 

Both  of  these  variables  have  been  proposed  to  be  influential  for  customer  decision  making 

and subsequent firm performance (e.g., Rust et al. 2004; Reinartz and Kumar 1999). 

3  Methodology  

3.1  Collection of Triadic Data 

In  order  to  test  the  proposed  linkages  of  the  extended  SPC  we  conducted  a  large  scale 

quantitative study with German travel agencies. We chose the travel agency context because 

the high level of employee – customer interaction facilitated the testing of the hypotheses of 

our-framework.  Also,  because  travel  agencies  are  relatively  small  companies,  this  context 

facilitates  the  investigation  of  causal  effects  between  the  employee-,  customer-  and  firm-

levels.  

An important feature of our study is that it is based on triadic data from frontline employees, 

customers  and  the  firm  (i.e.  firm’s  financial  performance).  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  data  on 

employee  job  satisfaction  and  employee  company  identification  was  collected  from 

employees.  Data  on  customer  orientation,  customer  satisfaction,  customer  company 

identification, customer loyalty and customer willingness to pay was gathered from customers 

and. Information on firms’ financial performance was collected from a secondary data source. 

1 We are thankful to an anonymous reviewer who made this observation.  

14 

 
                                                                                                                                                         
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

In  selecting  the  travel  agencies,  we  took  a  number  of  steps  in  order  to  make  the  sample  as 

balanced as possible. A key issue was to include travel agencies from different locations (e.g., 

shopping malls, large-sized cities, medium-sized cities, small-sized cities), in order to control 

for  possible  external  effects  that  could  systematically  bias  results  in  a  locally  clustered 

sample.  

In  order  to  achieve  the  best  possible  response  and  matching  rates  (between  employees  and 

customers), questionnaires were personally administered to travel agents by members of the 

research  team.  Subsequently,  the  interviewers  then  spent  one  day  in  the  respective  travel 

agencies and asked customers for an interview after their interaction with a travel agent. All 

employees  

who were at work on the days of the interviews agreed to participate in the study.  

The  purpose  of  the  study  presented  to  both  customers  and  employees  was  that  “as  an 

independent  research  institute,  we  are  interested  in  investigating  success  factors  of  travel 

agencies.” It was also stated that this success is obviously dependent on both customer- and 

employee-related factors and thus, both would be covered in the questionnaire. 

A key task of the interviewers was to correctly match employee and customer data. This was 

accomplished using code numbers. With respect to the employee-customer link, interviewers 

assigned the customers to the respective employee’s code number. The final matched sample 

consisted of 258 employees and 597 customers (response rate: 40.9 %) in 109 travel agencies. 

The mean number of customers interviewed per travel agency was 5.5, ranging between 1 and 

25  interviews.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  robustness  of  our  findings  was  checked  by 

examining  how  much  the  results  changed  if  travel  agencies  with  only  very  few  customer 

interviews  (1-3  interviews)  or  many  customer  interviews  (15-25  interviews)  were  excluded 

from  the  analyses.  However,  no  substantial  changes  in  our  results  were  found.  The  mean 

number of employees per travel agency in our study was 2.3 (ranging between 1 and 12). No 

substantial  changes  were  found  when  excluding  travel  agencies  with  very  few  or  many 

employees. 

In order to test for non-response bias in the customer sample, all customers who visited the 

agency  during  the  interview  days  were  offered  the  chance  to  participate  in  a  lottery.  This 

lottery  was  independent  of  the  participation  in  the  interviews.  In  order  to  take  part  in  the 

lottery, customers had to provide their contact details. Subsequently, we collected additional 

15 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

data  from  70  non-respondents  by  contacting  them  by  telephone.  There  were  no  significant 

differences  between  the  respondents  in  our  original  sample  and  the  initial  non-respondent 

sample  in  terms  of  the  scale  means  of  the  customer  constructs  included  in  our  framework. 

These results indicate that non-response bias is not a major issue with our data. 

3.2  Measures 

All  scales  used  for  the  quantitative  study  were  drawn  from  previous  research.  In  order  to 

pretest  applicability  of  the  scale  items  used  in  the  study  and  to  understand  the  motivations 

behind customer and employee to identification with travel agencies, 64 in-depth interviews 

were  conducted  with  travel  agency  customers  and  15  travel  agents  prior  to  the  quantitative 

study.  

Appendix A provides a complete list of items used in the quantitative study. Table 1 displays 

the  psychometric  properties  of  the  measures.  Cronbach’s  alpha,  composite  reliability,  and 

average  variance  extracted  for  all  measurement  scales  indicate  sufficient  reliability  and 

convergent  validity  of  our  construct  operationalizations.  More  specifically,  no  coefficient 

alpha  values  and  composite  reliabilities  are  lower  than  .70,  thus  meeting  or  exceeding  the 

recommended thresholds (Bagozzi and Yi 1988). We assessed the discriminant validity of the 

construct  measures  using  the  criterion  proposed  by  Fornell  and  Larcker  (1981),  which 

suggests that discriminant validity is supported if the average variance extracted exceeds the 

squared correlations between all pairs of constructs. All constructs fulfilled this requirement. 

To control for multicollinearity,  we inspected the variance inflation factors of the variables. 

The control variables and the antecedents yielded values between 1.0 and 1.9, indicating the 

absence of serious multicollinearity problems (Kleinbaum et al. 1988). 

To  measure  firm  financial  performance),  we  used  firms’  annual  sales  per  employee.  This 

index  has  beenused  in  previous  SPC  research  (Loveman  1998;  Schneider  et  al.  2005).  We 

validated  this  measure  with  a  profitability  measure  (Homburg  et  al.  2002)  in  an  extra  data 
collection from a sample of 70 travel agencies.2 Analyzing the relation between profit before 

2 We conducted an additional telephone data collection in order to acquire information on the firms’ profit 
(before tax). We employed a measure that was used in previous studies (e.g. Homburg, Hoyer, and Fassnacht 
2002): ”What was the profit (before tax) as a percentage of sales (before tax) of your travel agency on average 

16 

 
 
                                                 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

tax  and  sales  per  employee  we  find  a  strong  correlation  of  .75  (p  <  .01).  This  strongly 

validates our measure of firms’ financial performance. 

-------------------------- Insert Table 1 about here ------------------------------ 

3.3  Analytical Approach 

The data structure underlying the present study comprised three levels: Customers (level 1), 

employees  (level  2)  and  firms  (level  3).  In  order  to  properly  take  this  data  structure  into 

account,  a  two-step  approach  was  followed  as  suggested  by  Liao  and  Chuang  (2004).  First, 

concerning the top-down linkages between employees’ and customers’ variables, hierarchical 

linear modeling was employed (HLM, e.g., Raudenbush and Bryk 2002; Kozlowski and Klein 

2000). A HLM path model was used to test H1 through H4. The basis for these analyses was 

258 employees and 597 customers. These analyses were conducted using the Mplus software 

(Version 4.2; Muthén and Muthén 2006) since this program permits the analysis of top-down 

linkages  in  multilevel  data  sets.  Moreover,  it  also  allows  for  a  simultaneous  test  of  the 

conventional and social identity-based SPC paths in one HLM path model.  

Second,  the  bottom-up  linkages  (from  individual  customers  to  aggregated  firm’s  financial 

performance)  hypothesis  (H5)  was  excluded  from  the  HLM  path  model  because  such  data 

structures can not be appropriately handled by HLM models. Therefore, as suggested by Liao 

and Chuang (2004), the data on customer loyalty and willingness to pay of the 597 customers 

in  the  109  travel  agencies  was  aggregated  before  running  ordinary  least  squares  (OLS) 

regressions with the dependent variable of firms’ financial performance.  

4  Results 

As  shown  in  Figure  1,  the  HLM  path  model  included  links  between  the  employee  and 

customer  variables  as  well  as  links  among  customer  variables.  The  model  also  included 

correlations  between  the  exogenous  variables  (employee  job  satisfaction  and  employee 

company  identification),  and  the  error  terms  of  the  endogenous  variables  (customer 

satisfaction  and  customer  company  identification  as  well  as  customer  loyalty  and  customer 

over the last three business years?” (1 = negative, 2 = 0%-.4%, 3 = .5%-.9%, 4 = 1%-1.4%, 5 = 1.5%-1.9%, 6 = 
2%-3.9%, 7 = 4% and more). 

17 

 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

willingness  to  pay).  Regarding  the  global  fit  of  the  model  (χ2/df=1.81;  CFI=.99;  TLI=.97; 

RMSEA=.04), it can be concluded that this model acceptably fits the empirical data. 

Table  2  presents  the  correlations  between  the  key  SPC  variables.  Table  3  provides  an 

overview  of  the  results  for  the  HLM  path  model  as  well  as  OLS-models.  We  found  strong 

support  for  the  social  identity-based  SPC  path.  That  is,  there  was  a  significant  effect  of 

employee  company  identification  on  customer  company  identification  (t  =  2.96,  p  <  .01  - 

supporting H1) and on customer orientation (t = 3.89, p < .01 - supporting H2). Further, we 

found that customer orientation was strongly related to customer company identification (t = 

10.22,  p  <  .01  -  as  predicted  in  H3),  which  is  in turn,  was  significantly  related  to  customer 

loyalty (t = 7.22, p < .01 - consistent with H4a) and customers’ willingness to pay (t = 2.38, p 

< .05 - supporting H 4b).   

-------------------------- Insert Table 2 about here ------------------------------ 

-------------------------- Insert Table 3 about here ------------------------------ 

In  contrast,  the  findings  provided  less  support  for  the  direct  links  of  the  conventional  SPC. 

We did find a significant relationship between customer orientation and customer satisfaction 

(t = 12.22, p < .01) as well as customer satisfaction and customer loyalty (t = 7.20, p < .01). 

However,  there  was  no  significant  relationship  between  employee  job  satisfaction  and 

customer  satisfaction  (t  =  .79,  ns.)  and  customer  orientation  (t  =  .33,  ns.).  Also,  the 

relationship  between  customer  satisfaction  and  customer  willingness  to  pay  was  non-

significant (t = .31, ns.). 

As  we  explained  earlier,  we  examined  whether  the  length  of  a  customer  relationship  and 

employee-customer similarity were moderators of the above effects. Using Chow-test (Chow 

1960), we found that the latter variable yielded  no  significant moderating effects for any of 

the  relationships.  Also  we  conducted  further  regression  analyses  in  which  we  added  age-

discrepancy,  gender-discrepancy  as  well  as  the  interaction  effects  of  both  discrepancy 

variables  with  the  employee  variables.  These  regression  analyses  show  that  when  including 

these variables, our previous key findings remain stable.  

However,  length  of  customer  relationship  turned  out  to  significantly  moderate  the  link 

between customer satisfaction and customer willingness to pay (F = 8.81, p < .01), customer 

satisfaction  and  customer  loyalty  (F  =  4.77,  p  <  .01)  as  well  as  customer  company 

18 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

identification and willingness to pay (F = 11.72, p < .01). In all of the cases, a significantly 

stronger  effect  was  found  for  customers  with  a  comparably  longer  relationship  to  the  firm. 

This finding is in accordance with our reasoning for the including this variable. 

We  also  examined  whether  employee-company  identification  moderates  the  impact  of 

employee  satisfaction  on  customer  orientation  and  if  customer-company  identification 

moderates the impact of customer satisfaction on customer loyalty and customer willingness 

to pay. However, such moderation effects were not in evidence.  

In order to test for the links between customer loyalty and willingness to pay and the firms’ 

financial  performance  (H5),  the  data  for  customer  loyalty  and  willingness  to  pay  had  to  be 

aggregateed for each travel agency. To justify data aggregation, we calculated rwg, ICC(1) and 

ICC(2). Within-group agreement (rwg(j)) and intraclass correlation (ICC(1) and ICC(2)) are 

statistics frequently used to justify aggregation of data to higher levels of analysis (e.g., Bliese 

2000;  Shrout  and  Fleiss,  1979).  While  rwg(j)  is  the  most  commonly  referred  measure  of 

within-group  agreement  (James  1982),  ICC(1)  compares  the  variance  between  units  of 

analysis (travel agencies) to the variance within units of analysis using the individual ratings 

of each respondent. The ICC(2) assesses the relative status of between and within variability 

using the average ratings of respondents within each unit (Schneider et al. 1998). 

The average rwg coefficients were high for both customer loyalty (.75) and willingness to pay 

(.81).  Second,  we  calculated  ICC(1)  coefficients  (.10  for  customer  loyalty  and  .13  for 

willingness to pay) and ICC(2) coefficients, which were .39 for customer loyalty, and .46 for 

willingness to pay. Although there are no exact standards of acceptability for either ICC(1) or 

ICC(2),  these  values  fall  in  the  range  of  previously  stated  conventions  (Gibson  and 

Birkinshaw 2004; Glick 1985; James 1982; Schneider et al. 1998).  

With  respect  to  H  5  we  found  mixed  evidence  in  the  sense  that  the  link  between  customer 

willingness to pay and firms’ financial performance was significant as expected (t = 2.38, p < 

.01), while the overall effect of customer loyalty was non-significant (t = 1.04, ns.). However, 

consistent  with  previous  literature,  we  found  that  the  effect  of  customer  loyalty  was 

moderated  by  competitive  intensity.  Analyzing  the  simple  slopes  of  the  interaction  between 

customer  loyalty  and  competitive  intensity,  we  found  that  customer  loyalty  only  had  a 

significant  positive  effect  on  firms’  financial  performance  in  the  case  of  high  competitive 

intensity (F = 8.33, p < .01).  

19 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

In order to check the robustness of these effects, we also examined whether the inclusion of 

customer  perceptions  of  firms’  quality  and  store  location  influences  the  above  findings.  As 

shown in table 3, our results are robust to inclusion of these variables. 

Furthermore,  on  a  broader  level,  we  conducted  model  comparisons  in  which  the  extended 

model  (consisting  of  the  conventional,  ‘old’  SPC  and  the  social  identity-based,  ‘new’  SPC) 

was  compared  to  each  of  the  single  model  paths  (Fornell  and  Rust 1989;  Rust  et  al.  1995). 

Conducting nested model comparisons, it was found that the proposed overall model (old + 

new) provided the significantly better model fit compared to both the conventional (old; χ² - 

difference = 408.0, p < .001) as well as the alternative SPC (new; χ² - difference = 488.6, p < 

.001). This clearly indicates that the extended model is superior to both single models.  

5  Discussion 

The  point  of  departure  for  this  study  was  the  desire  among  researchers  and  practitioners  to 

move  beyond  customer  satisfaction  to  find  other  ways  to  build  more  deep-lying  bonds 

between  customers  and  companies  (e.g.,  Ahearne  et  al.  2005;  Bhattacharya  and  Sen  2003). 

Against  this  background,  we  developed  an  extended  SPC  that  we  believe  has  a  number  of 

important  academic  and  practical  implications,  particularly  in  terms  of  gaining  a  broader 

understanding of the SPC. 

5.1  Research Issues 

In our study, we found strong support for the proposition that in addition to the conventional, 

satisfaction-based  SPC,  social  identity-based  constructs  account  for  important  customer  and 

firm-level  outcomes.  Specifically,  we  provide  evidence  that  employees’  identification  with 

the  company  is  associated  with  a  stronger  customer  company  identification.    Employees’ 

identification  is  also  related  to  customer  orientation  which  further  reinforces  customer 

company  identification.  Importantly,  a  higher  level  of  customer  company  identification 

increases  the  customer’s  willingness  to  pay  which  in  turn,  improves  financial  performance. 

Thus,  employee  and  customer  company  identification  appear  to  represent  promising 

constructs  which  positively  impact  on  the  firm’s  financial  performance.  The  relevance  of 

these findings is especially high since our results are based on a large scale triadic data set. 

20 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

The  importance  of  the  identification  construct  within  the  SPC  can  be  explained  by  the  core 

ideas  of  the  social  identity  approach.  According  to  this  approach  the  identification  of 

employees  and  customers  with  a  company  fulfills  a  deep-lying  self-definitional  need.  As 

previous literature indicates, companies can serve as a potentially important category within 

the  self-concept  of  both  employees  (Ashforth  and  Mael  1989)  as  well  as  customers 

(Bhattacharya  and  Sen  2003).  Moreover,  identification  also  embodies  a  significant  hedonic 

element  in  the  sense  that  it  directly  involves  favorable  emotions.  The  positive  outcomes  of 

identification within the extended SPC can be explained with the social identity theory tenet 

that individuals strive for positive self-esteem and try to accomplish this by enhancing their 

group membership.  

Our  study  makes  an  important  contribution  to  marketing  theory  and  research  because  it  is 

among  the  first  to  empirically  demonstrate  a  positive  role  for  the  social  identification 

construct  in  developing  strong  customer  relationships  which  lead  to  positive  market  and 

financial  outcomes.    Thus,  this  construct  provides  an  important  avenue  for  building  strong 

bonds  with  customers,  independent  of  the  traditional  focus  on  customer  satisfaction.  An 

important implication of our findings is that the social identity approach clearly deserves more 

attention in marketing research.  

Promising  avenues  for  future  research  can  be  derived  for  both  the  customer  and  employee 

levels. At the customer level, future research should further explore the link between customer 

company  identification  and  customer  behaviors  such  as  spreading  positive  word  of  mouth, 

engaging  in  repurchase  and  cross-buying,  and  resisting  competitor  offerings.  Of  particular 

interest  in  this  respect  is  the  incremental  explanatory  power  of  customer  company 

identification  over  and  above  the  influence  of  customer  satisfaction.  Also,  future  research 

should address the knowledge gap concerning the role of company identification on the level 

of customer contact employees. Because they represent the company to the customer, it would 

be of value to know more about the role of employee company identification with respect to 

constructs such as customer orientation and organizational citizenship behavior.  

Turning to the conventional SPC, our results are of great importance because the majority of 

research in this area has focused on single links within the SPC (e.g., between employee and 

customer  satisfaction)  or  has  relied  on  single  source  data  (e.g.,  letting  employees  rate  both 

21 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

customer  as  well  as  employee  satisfaction).  Against  this  background,  our  study  addresses 

recent  calls  for  testing  several  links  within  the  SPC  simultaneously  (Kamakura  et  al.  2002) 

and  doing  this  on  the  basis  of  multiple  data  sources  (Loveman  1998;  Payne  and  Webber 

2006). Our study is an important step in this direction because it is one of the first that tests 

several  links  of  the  SPC  by  combining  data  from  the  sources  of  employees,  customers  and 

firms.  

Interestingly, our findings do not provide support for all links of the classic SPC. Specifically, 

employee  job  satisfaction  affected  neither  customer  satisfaction  nor  customer  orientation  in 

our study. However, given that our study was conducted within a single industry, we feel that 

researchers  should  not  discount  the  conventional  SPC.  Nevertheless,  considering  that  the 

complementary  SPC  which  builds  on  employee  and  customer  company  identification  has 

more explanatory power in our study, additional research on both SPC paths is highly needed. 

Our results suggest that when testing the conventional satisfaction-based SPC, it is important 

to account for other constructs that cover more deep-lying bonds to the company. 

The  fundamental  nature  of  the  identification  construct  also  becomes  visible  in  terms  of  the 

customer  outcomes.  In  addition  to  customer  satisfaction  effects,  customer  company 

identification has a significant influence on customer loyalty and willingness to pay. In this 

respect, it should be noted that our results are consistent with the developing view that simply 

satisfying customers may not be enough to ensure positive financial performance (Oliver et al. 

1997; Reichheld 1996; Rust and Oliver 2000). This further suggests that in today’s business 

environment,  other  constructs  besides  customer  satisfaction  are  needed  in  order  to  improve 

financial performance. 

Finally, it is worth emphasizing that our study is only a first step towards understanding the 

social  identity-based  SPC.  Future  research  is  needed  in  order  to  explore  moderators  of  the 

links in this chain (e.g., concerning the link between employee and customer identification). 

Another important avenue for future research would be to conduct a more detailed analysis of 

the effects of different identification components – such as cognitive, affective and evaluative 

identification  –  using  elaborated  scales  as  suggested  by  Bergami  and  Bagozzi  (2000), 

Dholakia, Bagozzi, and Pearo (2004), and Bagozzi and Dholakia (2006).  

Additionally,  research  on  an  expanded  SPC  which  includes  manager  influences  would  be  a 

helpful  extension  of  our  study.  Also,  more  research  is  needed  in  order  to  test  the 

22 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

generalizability of our findings to other industries. Further, it would be interested to include 

the concept of company identification to related concepts  such  as the customer equity  (e.g., 

Rust et al. 2004) or return on quality models (e.g. Rust et al. 2002; Rust et al. 1995). 

5.2  Managerial Implications 

The  key  managerial  implication  from  our  study  is  that  firms  should  not  exclusively  rely  on 

customer  satisfaction  when  assessing  their  relationships  to  customers.  Additionally,  more 

deep-lying  constructs  are  helpful  in  the  effort  to  build  strong  customer  relationships 

(Bhattacharya  and Sen 2003). Our study indicates that customer company identification can 

be  such  a  construct.  Customers  can  develop  a  strong  identity  with  the  company  by 

incorporating the company identity within their own self-identity as well as by developing a 

strong  emotional  bond  with  the  company.  When  customers  do  this,  they  are  willing  to  pay 

more which in turn contributes to the firm's financial performance.   

This  leads  to  a  number  of  important  suggestions  for  managerial  practice.  First,  in  order  to 

generate  customer  company  identification,  it  is  important  to  measure  this  construct  in 

customer  surveys.  This  measurement  effort  could  serve  as  an  important  baseline  for 

improving  company  performance.  Also,  it  seems  to  be  important  to  measure  company 

identification  at  the  frontline  employee  level.  Given  that  employee  identification  affects 

customer  identification,  it  is  of  importance  to  permanently  monitor  the  employee 

identification-level and its fluctuations. 

Second,  firms  should  actively  stimulate  customer  company  identification.  The  main 

instrument in this respect are actions to raise the salience of the company as a group category, 

for  example  by  stressing  favorable  comparisons  between  the  in-group  (the  focal  company) 

and out-groups (e.g., other companies), and by organizing events that foster a group feeling 

among employees and customers. Companies could also develop a strong company or brand 

image  or  personality  which  is  consistent  with  the  key  target  segment.  In  this  respect  it  is 

important  to  understand  that  managing  customer  company  identification  requires  largely 

different means compared to the customer satisfaction approach.  

Third,  similar  to  customer  company  identification,  influencing  employees’  company 

identification  would  require  a  largely  distinct  approach  compared  to  influencing  employee 

satisfaction.  Firms  interested  in  raising  employees’  job  satisfaction  might  follow  the  widely 

accepted job characteristics model (Hackman and Oldham 1975) and work on specific aspects 

23 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

like skill variety or task significance. Identity-aimed actions, on the other hand, would again 

focus  on  group  salience,  group  feeling  and  favorable  comparisons  to  other  companies. 

Additionally, within personnel selection it would be of importance to clearly communicate the 

distinctive  characteristics  of  the  company  and  to  hire  employees  that  strongly  share  its  core 

dimensions.  For  example,  companies  that  have  a  strong  culture  of  corporate  social 

responsibility should attempt to attract job applicants who also see this as an important issue. 

24 

Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Table 1 

Psychometric Properties of Measures  

Variables 

1.   Employee Job  
     Satisfaction 

2.   Employee Company  
    Identification 

3.   Customer Orientation  

4.   Customer Satisfaction  

5.   Customer Company  
    Identification  

6.   Customer Loyalty 

7.   Customer Willingness to  
      Pay 

8.   Firms’ Financial 
Performance 1 

Controls: 

9.   Length of Customer  
    Relationship (in years) 

10. Employee-Customer Age-
    Discrepancy 

11. Employee Customer Gender-
    Discrepancy 

12. Competitive Intensity 

13. Perceived Quality of the 
    Travel Agency – Service and 
    Comfort 

14. Perceived Quality of the 
    Travel Agency – Price 

15. Perceived Quality of the 
    Travel Agency – Brands 

16. Perceived Quality of the 
    Travel Agency – Reliability  

17. Perceived Quality of the 
    Travel Agency – Experience 

Mean 

5.75 

6.05 

6.46 

6.41 

5.69 

6.09 

37.94 

690.9 

8.45 

18.13 

.45 

4.61 

6.39 

5.73 

5.84 

6.14 

5.96 

SD 

.86 

.80 

.72 

.89 

1.29 

1.28 

28.55 

333.9 

1.50 

11.61 

.49 

1.13 

.51 

.75 

.92 

.63 

.72 

α 

.82 

.80 

.89 

.86 

.88 

.88 

.78 

- 

- 

- 

- 

.89 

.88 

.93 

.93 

.94 

.90 

CR 

.86 

.82 

.89 

.87 

.89 

.89 

.91 

- 

- 

- 

- 

.89 

.88 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1 Firms’ financial performance was measured through annual sales per employee (in thousands) per travel 
agency.  

CR: composite reliability  
AVE: average variance extracted 

AVE 

.70 

.54 

.63 

.69 

.63 

.73 

.71 

- 

- 

- 

- 

.67 

.58 

- 

- 

- 

- 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Table 2 

Correlations of Key Variables  

Variables 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1.  Employee Job Satisfaction 

2.  Employee Company Identification 

.38** 

3.  Customer Orientation  

4.  Customer Satisfaction  

5.  Customer Company Identification  

6.  Customer Loyalty 

.09* 

.06 

.09* 

.05 

.16** 

.08* 

.14** 

.10* 

7.  Customer Willingness to Pay 
8.  Firms’ Financial Performance 1 
Employees n = 258; Customers n = 597; Notes. * p < .05; ** p < .01 

-.07 

.02 

.08 

.03 

.59** 

.48** 

.45** 

.07 

.03 

.50** 

.58** 

.07 

-.06 

.55** 

.16** 

-.01 

.06 

.03 

.27* 

Notes: Correlations between constructs residing at different levels of analysis are based on disaggregated employees scores. 
That is, the unit of analyses were the customers. Two-tailed significance tests. 
1  Firms’  financial  performance  was  measured  through  annual  sales  per  employee  (in  thousands)  per  travel  agency. 
Calculations of the intercorrelations for firms’ financial performance are based on aggregated (travel agency) scores. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Table 3 
Estimated Path Coefficients for the Extended Service Profit Chain 

Links of the Satisfaction-Based Part of the SPC: 
Employee Job Satisfaction (cid:198) Customer Satisfaction 

Employee Job Satisfaction (cid:198) Customer Orientation 

Customer Orientation (cid:198) Customer Satisfaction 

Customer Satisfaction (cid:198) Customer Loyalty 

Customer Satisfaction (cid:198) Customer Willingness to Pay 

Links of the Social Identity-Based Part of the SPC: 
H1: Employee Company Identification (cid:198) Customer Company  
       Identification 

H2: Employee Company Identification (cid:198) Customer Orientation 

H3: Customer Orientation (cid:198) Customer Company Identification 

H4a: Customer Company Identification (cid:198) Customer Loyalty 

H4b: Customer Company Identification (cid:198) Customer Willingness to  
         Pay 

Links related to both SPC parts:a 
H5a: Customer Loyalty (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance  
H5b: Customer Willingness to Pay (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Controls: 
Perceived Quality of the Travel Agency – Service and Comfort  
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 

Perceived Quality of the Travel Agency – Price 
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 

Perceived Quality of the Travel Agency – Brands 
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 

(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Perceived Quality of the Travel Agency – Experience 
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Shopping Mall 
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Large-sized City, First-class Location 
(cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Large-sized City, Suburb (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Medium-sized City (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Small-sized City (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
Location – Airport (cid:198) Firms’ Financial Performance 
a based on ordinary least squares (OLS) regression; * p < .05 ** p < .01  
Notes: Significance is based on one-tailed tests 

Unstandardized Coefficient 
(Standard Errors) 

t-value 

.024(.031) 

.010(.030) 

.765(.063) 

.603(.084) 

.429(1.390) 

.123(.041) 

.096(.025) 

.788(.077) 

.398(.055) 

2.739(1.149) 

.79 

.33 

12.22** 

7.20** 

.31 

2.96** 

3.89** 

10.22** 

7.22** 

2.38** 

28,378.9(27,285.5) 

2,211.4(927.8) 

1.04 

2.38** 

76,875.4(43,351.3) 

1.77* 

10,221.6(23,577.5) 

5,122.5(19,229.1) 

34,505.6(30,864.1) 

20,587.4(24,216.6) 

65,872.8(67,460.7) 

128,547.5(66,312.8) 

-13,624.7(38,562.6) 
-28.750(65,291.4) 
31,764.8(50,524.2) 

212,068.0(95,219.8) 

.43 

.27 

1.12 

.85 

.98 

1.94* 

-.35 
-.44 
.63 

2.23* 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Figure 1 

The Extended Service Profit Chain 

Data from Employees

Data from Customers

Objective Data

Employee
Job Satisfaction

Customer 
Satisfaction

Customer 
Orientation

Employee Company 
Identification 

Customer Company 
Identification

Links of the Satisfaction-Based
Service Profit Chain Part

Links of the Social Identity-Based
Service Profit Chain Part

Customer Loyalty

Customer 
Willingness to Pay

Moderator: 
• Employee-Customer

Similarity

Moderator: 
• Length of Customer 

Relationship

Moderator: 
• Competitive Intensity

Firms‘ Financial 
Performance 

Controls: 

• Perceived Quality

• Store Location

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Appendix A – Measures 

I. Employee Job Satisfaction (employees); Hackman and Oldham (1975); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally agree” 

1.  Generally speaking, I am very satisfied with this job. 
2. 
3. 

I am generally satisfied with the kind of work I do in this job. 
I frequently think of quitting this job (Reverse coded). 

II. Employee Company Identification (employees); Mael and Ashforth (1992); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally agree” 

I am very interested in what others think about this travel agency. 

1.  When someone criticizes this travel agency, it feels like a personal insult.  
2. 
3.  When I talk about this travel agency, I usually say “we” rather than “they”. 
4.  This travel agency’s success is my success. 
5.  When someone praises this travel agency, it feels like a personal compliment. 
6. 
If a story in the media criticized this travel agency, I would feel embarrassed. 

III. Customer Orientation (customers); Thomas et al. (2001); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally agree” 

1.  The travel agent tries to figure out what a customer’s needs are. 
2.  The travel agent has the customer’s best interests in mind. 
3.  The travel agent takes a problem solving approach in selling products or services to customers. 
4.  The travel agent recommends products or services that are best suited to solving problems. 
5.  The travel agent tries to find out which kinds of products or services would be most helpful to customers. 

IV. Customer Satisfaction (customers); Bettencourt (1997), Bitner and Hubbert (1994); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally 
      agree” 

1.  All in all I am very satisfied with this travel agency. 
2.  The visits in this travel agency meet my expectations of ideal visits in a travel agency. 
3.  The performance of this travel agency has fulfilled my expectations. 

V. Customer Company Identification (customers); Mael and Ashforth (1992) adapted; seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally  
     agree” 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4.  This travel agency fits well to me.  
5. 

I am well identified with this travel agency.  
I feel good to be a customer of this travel agency.  
I like to tell that I am a customer of this travel agency.  

I feel attached to this travel agency.  

VI. Customer loyalty (customers); Homburg and Giering (2001); seven-point scale: “very low” to “very high” 

1.  The likelihood of my booking in this travel agency in the future is… 
2.  The likelihood of my recommending this travel agency to friends is… 
3.  The likelihood of my coming back to this travel agency is… 

VII. Customer Willingness to Pay (customers); Homburg et al. (2005)   

1.  “Imagine you would have booked a last minute travel to Mallorca for two persons after a consulting service in this travel agency. The duration 
of the travel is 1 week and includes half-board in a 3-star hotel. The price is 300 Euro per person, that is 600 Euro in total. What is the 
maximum price you are willing to pay for the travel agency service?” 0 Euro, 6 Euro, 12 Euro, 18 Euro, 24 Euro, 30 Euro, 36 Euro, 42 
Euro, 48 Euro, 54 Euro, 60 Euro, 66 Euro, 72 Euro, 78 Euro, 84 Euro, 90 Euro, 96 Euro, 102 Euro, 108 Euro 

2.  “Imagine you would have booked a travel to Gran Canaria for two persons after a consulting service in this travel agency. The duration of the 

travel is 2 weeks and includes half-board in a 4-star hotel. The price is 1000 Euro per person, that is 2000 Euro in total. What is the 
maximum price you are willing to pay for the travel agency service?” 0 Euro, 20 Euro, 40 Euro, 60 Euro, 80 Euro, 100 Euro, 120 Euro, 140 
Euro, 160 Euro, 180 Euro, 200 Euro, 220 Euro, 240 Euro, 260 Euro, 280 Euro, 300 Euro, 320 Euro, 340 Euro, 360 Euro 

3.  “Imagine you would have booked a return flight from Frankfurt to Rome with Lufthansa after a consulting service in this travel agency. The 

price is 300 Euro (including tax and airport charge). What is the maximum price you are willing to pay for the travel agency service?” 0 
Euro, 3 Euro, 6 Euro, 9 Euro, 12 Euro, 15 Euro, 18 Euro, 21 Euro, 24 Euro, 27 Euro, 30 Euro, 33 Euro, 36 Euro, 39 Euro, 42 Euro, 45 Euro, 
48 Euro, 51 Euro, 54 Euro 

4.  “Imagine you would have booked a return flight from Frankfurt to Los Angeles after a consulting service in this travel agency. The price is 

1000 Euro (including tax and airport charge). What is the maximum price you are willing to pay for the travel agency service?” 0 Euro, 10 
Euro, 20 Euro, 30 Euro, 40 Euro, 50 Euro, 60 Euro, 70 Euro, 80 Euro, 90 Euro, 100 Euro, 110 Euro, 120 Euro, 130 Euro, 140 Euro, 150 
Euro, 160 Euro, 170 Euro, 180 Euro 

VIII. Firms’ Financial Performance; Schneider et al. (2005) 

Firms’ Annual Sales was divided by the number of employees per travel agency.  
Validation of this measure in 70 travel agencies with a profitability measure (Homburg et al. 2002).  
Telephone interviews with sales managers: ”What was the profit (before tax) as a percentage of sales (before tax) of your 
travel agency on average over the last three business years?” (1 = negative, 2 = 0%-.4%, 3 = .5%-.9%, 4 = 1%-1.4%, 5 = 
1.5%-1.9%, 6 = 2%-3.9%, 7 = 4% and more).”  

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

(Appendix A – continued) 

Control Variables: 

IX. Length of Customer Relationship (in years) 

X. Employee-Customer Similarity 

a) Absolute Employee-Customer Age-Discrepancy 
b) Absolute Employee-Customer Gender-Discrepancy 

XI. Competitive Intensity (leading firm managers); Jaworski and Kohli (1993); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally agree” 

1.  Competition in our industry is cutthroat. 
2.  Our competitors are relatively strong. 
3.  The competition to travel agencies in our region is immense. 
4.  We have a strong competition with online competitors. 

XII. Perceived Quality of the Travel Agency (customers); seven-point scale: “totally disagree” to “totally agree” 

“Please rate the following statements with respect to the quality of the travel agency. If I visit this travel agency…” 
Service and Comfort 
1.  … I have a very comfortable travel organization. 
2.  … I can get helpful guidance from the employees. 
3.  … I have the smallest possible effort. 
4.  … I keep the stress that is connected to travel organization as low as possible. 
5.  … I receive service and guidance from experts. 
Price 
1.  … I get low priced offers searched out. 
2.  … I get good value for money. 
Brands 
1.  … I can trust to get the products of well-known travel companies. 
2.  … I get the brand products of established tour operators. 
Reliability 
1.  … I make sure that the booked travel meets my expectations. 
2.  … I make sure to get what I want for my money. 
Experience 
1.  … the travel organization is just fun. 
2.  … pleasant anticipation of the travel is coming up. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

REFERENCES 

Ahearne, Michael, C.B. Bhattacharya, and Thomas Gruen (2005), “Antecedents and 

Consequences of Customer-Company Identification: Expanding the Role of Relationship 
Marketing,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 90 (3), 574-85. 

Anderson, Eugene W., Claes Fornell, and Donald R. Lehmann (1994), “Customer 

Satisfaction, Market Share, and Profitability: Findings from Sweden,” Journal of 
Marketing, 58 (July), 53-66. 

_________, _________, and Roland T. Rust (1997), “Customer Satisfaction, Productivity, 
and Profitability: Differences Between Goods and Services,” Marketing Science, 16 (2), 
129-45.  

_________ and Vikas Mittal (2000), “Strengthening the Satisfaction-Profit Chain,” Journal of 

Service Research, 3 (2), 107-120. 

_________ and Mary W. Sullivan (1993), “The Antecedents and Consequences of Customer 

Satisfaction for Firms,” Marketing Science, 12 (Spring), 125-43. 

Arnett, Dennis B., Steve D. German, and Shelby D. Hunt (2003), “The Identity Salience 

Model of Relationship Marketing Success: The Case of Nonprofit Marketing,” Journal of 
Marketing, 67 (April), 89-105. 

Ashforth, Blake E. and Fred Mael (1989), “Social Identity Theory and the Organization,” 

Academy of Management Review, 14 (1), 20-40. 

Bagozzi, Richard P. and Youjae Yi (1988), “On the Evaluation of Structural Equation 

Models,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 16 (1), 74-97. 

_________ and Uptal M. Dholakia (2006), “Antecedents and Purchase Consequences of 
Customer Participation in Small Group Brand Communities,” International Journal of 
Research in Marketing, 23 (1), 45–61. 

Bansal, Harvir S., P. G. Irving, and Shirley F. Taylor (2004), “A Three-Component Model of 

Customer Commitment to Service Providers,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 32 (3), 234-250. 

Bearden, William O. and Jesse E. Teal (1983), “Selected Determinants of Consumer 

Satisfaction and Complaint Reports,” Journal of Marketing Research, 20 (February), 21- 
28. 

Bergami, Massimo and Richard P. Bagozzi (2000), “Self-Categorization, Affective 

Commitment, and Group Self-Esteem as Distinct Aspects of Social Identity in the 
Organization,” British Journal of Social Psychology, 39 (4), 555–77. 

31 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Bernhardt, Kenneth L., Naveen Donthu, and Pamela A. Kennett (2000), “A Longitudinal 

Analysis of Satisfaction and Profitability,” Journal of Business Research, 47 (2), 161- 71. 

Bettencourt, Lance A. (1997), “Customer Voluntary Performance: Customers in Service 

Delivery,” Journal of Retailing, 73 (3), 383-406. 

Bhattacharya, C. B., Hayagreeva Rao, and Mary Ann Glynn (1995), “Understanding the Bond 

of Identification: An Investigation of Its Correlates Among Art Museum Members,” 
Journal of Marketing, 59 (October), 46-57. 

——— and Sankar Sen (2003), “Consumer-Company Identification: A Framework for 

Understanding Consumers’ Relationships with Companies,” Journal of Marketing, 67 
(April), 76-88. 

Bitner, Mary Jo and Amy R. Hubbert (1994), “Encounter Satisfaction vs. Overall Satisfaction 
vs. Quality: The Customer's Voice,” in Service Quality: New Directions in Theory and 
Practice, Roland T. Rust and Richard L. Olivier, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 72-94. 

Bliese, Paul D. (2000), "Within-Group Agreement, Non-Independence, and Reliability: 

Implications for Data Aggregation and Analysis", in Klein, Kathrine J. and Kozlowski, 
Steve W. J. (Eds), Multilevel Theory, Research, and Methods in Organizations: 
Foundations, Extension, and New Directions, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, 349-381. 

Bolding, William, Ajay Kalra, Richard Staelin, and Valarie A. Zeithaml (1993), “A Dynamic 
Process Model of Service Quality: From Expectations to Behavioral Intentions,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, 30 (February), 7-27. 

Bolton, Ruth N. and James H. Drew (1991a), “A Longitudinal Analysis of the Impact of 
Service Changes on Customer Attitudes,” Journal of Marketing, 55 (January), 1-9. 

________ and _________ (1991b), “A Multistage Model of Customers’ Assessments of 

Service Quality and Value,” Journal of Consumer Research, 7 (March), 375-84 

Brown, Karen A. and Terence R. Mitchell (1993), “Organizational Obstacles: Links with 

Financial Performance, Customer Satisfaction, and Job Satisfaction in a Service 
Environment,” Human Relations, 46 (6), 725-58. 

Brown, Steven P. and Wynne W. Chin (2004), “Satisfying and Retaining Customers through 

Independent Service Representatives,” Decision Sciences, 35 (3), 527-50. 

——— and Robert A. Peterson (1993), “Antecedents and Consequences of Salesperson Job 
Satisfaction: Meta-Analysis and Assessment of Casual Effects,” Journal of Marketing 
Research, 30 (February), 63- 77. 

32 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Brown, Tom J., Thomas E. Barry, Peter A. Dacin, and Richard F. Gunst (2005), “Spreading 
the Word: Investigating Antecedents of Consumers' Positive Word-of-Mouth Intentions 
and Behaviors in a Retailing Context,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33 
(2), 123-138. 

Cameron, Trudy A. and Michelle D. James (1987), “Estimating Willingness to Pay from 
Survey Data: An Alternative Pre-Test-Market Evaluation Procedure,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, 24 (November), 389-95. 

Chow, Gregory C. (1960), 'Tests of Equality Between Sets of Coefficients in Two Linear 

Regressions," Econometrica, 28 (July), 591-605. 

Dholakia, Uptal M., Richard P. Bagozzi, and Lisa K. Pearo (2004), “A Social Influence 

Model of Consumer Participation in Network- and Smallgroup-based Virtual 
Communities,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21(3), 241–263. 

Dutton, Jane E., Janet M. Dukerich, and Celia V. Harquail (1994), “Organizational Images 

and Member Identification,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 39 (2), 239-63. 

Edwards, Martin R. (2005), “Organizational identification: A conceptual and operational 

review,” International Journal of Management Reviews, 7 (4), 207-30. 

Einwiller Sabine A., Alexander Fedorikhin, Allison R. Johnson, and Michael A. Kamins 

(2006), “Enough Is Enough! When Identification No Longer Prevents Negative Corporate 
Associations,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34 (2), 185-94. 

Ellemers, Naomi, Dick de Gilder, and S. Alexander Haslam (2004), “Motivating and Groups 
at Work: A Social Identity Perspective on Leadership and Group Performance,” Academy 
of Management Review, 29 (3), 459-78. 

Fornell, Claes (1992), “A National Customer Satisfaction Barometer: The Swedish 

Experience,” Journal of Marketing, 56 (January), 6- 21. 

_________, Eugene A. Anderson, Barbara Everitt Bryant, Jaesung Cha, and Michael D. 
Johnson (1996) ”The American Customer Satisfaction Index: Nature, Purpose, and 
Findings,” Journal of Marketing, 60 (October), 7- 18. 

__________ and David F. Larcker (1981), “Evaluating Structural Equation Models with 
Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error,” Journal of Marketing Research, 18 
(February). 39-50. 

__________ and Roland T. Rust (1989), “Incorporating Prior Theory in Covariance Structure 

Analysis: A Bayesian Approach,” Psychometrika (June), 249-259. 

Garbarino, Ellen and Mark S. Johnson (1999), “The Different Roles of Satisfaction, Trust, 
and Commitment in Customer Relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 63 (2), 70-97. 

33 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Garda, Robert A. and Michael V. Marn (1993), “Price Wars,” McKinsey Quarterly, 29 (3), 

87-100. 

Gibson, Cristina B. and Julian Birkinshaw (2004), “The Antecedents, Consequences, and 

Mediating Role of Organizational Ambidexterity,” Academy of Management Journal, 47 
(2), 209-26. 

Glick, William H. (1985), “Conceptualizing and Measuring Organizational and Psychological 
Climate: Pitfalls in Multilevel Research,” Academy of Management Review, 10 (3), 601-
16. 

Hackman, J. Richard and Greg R. Oldham (1975), “Development of the Job Diagnostic 

Survey,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 60 (2), 159-70. 

Hartline, Michael D. and O. C. Ferrell (1996), “The Management of Customer-Contact 

Service Employees: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Marketing, 96 (4), 52-70. 

———, James G. Maxham III, and Daryl O. McKee (2000), “Corridors of Influence in the 
Dissemination of Customer-Oriented Strategy to Customer Contact Service Employees,” 
Journal of Marketing, 64 (April), 35-50. 

Harter, James K., Frank L. Schmidt, and Theodore L. Hayes (2002), “Business-Unit-Level 
Relationship Between Employee Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, and Business 
Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 87 (2), 268-79. 

Haslam, S. Alexander (2004), Psychlogy in Oraganizations: The Social Identity Approach, 

London: Sage Publications.  

———,  Kevin  P.  Gwinner,  and  Dwayne  D.  Gremler  (2002),  “Understanding  Relationship 
Marketing  Outcomes:  An  Integration  of  Relational  Benefits  and  Relationship  Quality,” 
Journal of Ser vice Research, 4 (1), 230–248. 

Herrington, Guy and Wendy Lomax (1999), Do Satisfied Employees Make Customers 
Satisfied? An Investigation into the Relationship Between Service Employee Job 
Satisfaction and Customer Perceived Service Quality, Kingston: Kingston University. 

Heskett, James L., Thomas O. Jones, Gary W. Loveman, W. Earl Sasser, and Leonard A. 

Schlesinger (1994), “Putting the Service-Profit Chain to Work,” Harvard Business Review, 
(March-April), 164- 70. 

———, W. Earl Sasser Jr., and Leonard A. Schlesinger (2003), The Value Profit Chain: 

Treat Employees Like Customers and Customers Like Employees. N.Y.: The Free Press`. 

Hoffman, K. Douglas and Thomas N. Ingram (1991), “Creating Customer-Oriented 

Employees: The Case in Home Health Care,” Journal of Health Care Marketing, 11 (2), 
24- 32. 

34 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Hogan, John E., Katherine N. Lemon, and Roland T. Rust (2002), “Customer Equity 

Management: Charting New Directions for the Future of Marketing,” Journal of Service 
Research, 5 (1), 4-12; 

Homburg, Christian and Annette Giering (2001), “Personal Characteristics as Moderators of 
the Relationship Between Customer Satisfaction and Loyalty – An Empirical Analysis,” 
Psychology and Marketing, 18 (1), 43-66. 

———, Wayne D. Hoyer, and Martin Fassnacht (2002), “Service Orientation of a Retailer’s 
Business Strategy: Dimensions, Antecedents, and Performance Outcomes,” Journal of 
Marketing, 66 (October), 86-101. 

———, Nicole Koschate, and Wayne D. Hoyer (2005), “Do Satisfied Customers Really Pay 
More? A Study of the Relationship Between Customer Satisfaction and Willingness to 
Pay,” Journal of Marketing, 69 (April), 84- 96. 

——— and Ruth M. Stock (2004), “The Link Between Salespeoples’ Job Satisfaction and 

Customer Orientation in a Business-to-Business Context: A Dyadic Analysis,” Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 32 (2), 144-58. 

Horowitz, Allen S. (2005), “Don’t Overdeliver,” Computerworld, 22/08/2005, p. 38. 

Houston, Franklin S. (1986), “The Marketing Concept: What It Is and What It Is Not”, 

Journal of Marketing, 50 (2), 81-87. 

James, Lawrence R. (1982), “Aggregation Bias in Estimates of Perceptual Agreement,” 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 67 (2), 219-29. 

Jaworski, Bernard J. and Ajay K. Kohli (1993), “Market Orientation: Antecedents and 

Consequences,” Journal of Marketing, 57 (July), 53-70. 

Kamakura, Wagner A., Vikas Mittal, Frenando de Rosa, and José A. Mazzon (2002), 

“Assessing the Service-Profit Chain,” Marketing Science, 21 (3), 294-317. 

Kleinbaum,  David  G.,  Lawrence  L.  Kupper,  Keith  E.  Muller,  and  Azhar  Nizam  (1998), 
Applied  Regression  Analysis  and  Other  Multivariate  Methods,  Pacific  Grove,  CA: 
Duxbury Press. 

Kohli, Ajay K. and Bernard J. Jaworski (1990), “Market Orientation: the Construct, Research 

Propositions, and Managerial Implications,” Journal of Marketing, 54 (April), 1-18. 

Kordupleski, Raymond E., Roland T. Rust, and Anthony J. Zahorik (1993), “Why Improving 
Quality Doesn’t Improve Quality (Or Whatever Happened to Marketing?).” California 
Management Review, 35 (Spring), 82- 95. 

35 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Kozlowski, Steve W. J. and Katherine J. Klein (2000), “A Multilevel Approach to Theory and 
Research, in Organizations: Contextual, Temporal, and Emergent Processes,” in Multilevel 
Theory, Research and Methods in Organizations, Foundations Extensions, and New 
Directions, Katherine J. Klein, and Steve W. J. Kozlowski, eds. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass, 3-90. 

Krishna, Aradhna (1991), “Effect of Dealing Patterns of Consumer Perceptions of Deal 

Frequency and Willingness to Pay,” Journal of Marketing Research, 28 (November), 393- 
404. 

Kumar, V. and Morris George (2007), “Measuring and Maximizing Customer Equity: A 
Critical Analysis,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35 (2), 157-171. 

Liao, Hui and Aichia Chuang (2004), “A Multilevel Investigation of Factors Influencing 
Employee Service Performance and Customer Outcomes,” Academy of Management 
Journal, 47 (1), 41-58. 

Locke, Edwin A. (1976), “The Nature and Causes of Job Satisfaction,” in Handbook of 

Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Marvin Dunnette, ed. Chicago: Rand Mcnally, 
1297- 1350. 

Loveman, Gary W. (1998), “Employee Satisfaction, Customer Loyalty, and Financial 

Performance,” Journal of Service Research, 1 (1), 18- 31. 

Mael, Fred and Blake E. Ashforth (1992), “Alumni and Their Alma Mater: A Partial Test of 
the Reformulated Model of Organizational Identification,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 13 (2), 103-23. 

——— and ——— (1995), “Loyal From Day One: Biodata, Organizational Identification, 

and Turnover Among Newcomers,” Personnel Psychology, 48 (2), 309-33. 

Maxham, James G., Richard G. Netemeyer, and Donald R. Lichtenstein (2007), “The Retail 

Value Chain: Linking Employee Perceptions to Employee Performance, Customer 
Evaluations, and Store Performance,” Marketing Science, (forthcoming). 

Miller, Vernon D., Mike Allen, Mary K. Casey, and John R. Johnson (2000), “Reconsidering 
the Organizational Identification Questionnaire,” Management Communication Quarterly, 
13, 626–658. 

Mittal, Vikas, Pankaj Kumar, and Michael Tsiros (1999), “Attribute Level Performance, 
Satisfaction, and Behavioral Intentions,” Journal of Marketing, 63 (April), 88-101. 

Mooradian, Todd A. and James M. Oliver (1997), “‘I Can’t Get No Satisfaction’: The Impact 
of Personality and Emotion on Postpurchase Processes,” Psychology and Marketing, 14 
(4), 379–393. 

Morgan,  Robert  M.  and  Shelby  D.  Hunt  (1994),  “The  Commitment–Trust  Theory  of 

Relationship Marketing,” Journal of Marketing, 58 (3), 20–38. 

36 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Muthén, Linda K. and Bengt O. Muthén (2006), Mplus User’s Guide, (4th ed.), Los Angeles: 

Muthén and Muthén, available at: http://www.statmodel.com. 

Nelson, Eugene C., Robin L. Rose, Roland T. Rust, Anthony J. Zahorik, Robin L. Rose, paula 
Batalden, and Beth Ann Siemanski. (1992), ”Do Patient Perceptions of Quality Relate to 
Hospital Financial Performance?” Journal of Health Care Marketing, 12 (December), 6- 
13. 

Oliver, Richard L. (1980), “A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Consequences of 
Satisfaction Decisions,” Journal of Marketing Research, 17 (November), 460-69. 

——— (1997), Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on the Consumer, New York: 

Irwin/McGraw-Hill. 

——— and Wayne S. DeSarbo (1988), “Response Determinants in Satisfaction Judgments,” 

Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (4), 495-507. 

———, Roland T. Rust, and Sajeev Varki (1997), “Customer Delight: Foundations, Findings, 

and Managerial Insight,” Journal of Retailing, 73 (3), 311-36. 

Oliver, Richard L. and John E. Swan (1989a), “Consumer Perceptions of Interpersonal Equity 
and Satisfaction in Transactions: A Filed Survey Approach,” Journal of Marketing, 53 
(April), 21-35. 

_________and _________ (1989b), “Equity and Disconfirmation Perceptions as Influences 
on Merchant and Product Satisfaction,” Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 
372-83. 

Payne, Stephanie C. and Sheila S. Webber (2006), “Effects of Service Provider Attitudes and 

Employment Status on Citizenship Behaviors and Customers' Attitudes and Loyalty 
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 91 (2), 365-78. 

Pettijohn, Charles E., Linda S. Pettijohn, and A. J. Taylor (2002), “The Influence of 

Salesperson Skill, Motivation, and Training on the Practice of Customer-Oriented Selling,” 
Psychology and Marketing, 19 (9), 743- 58. 

Pratt, Michael G. (1998), “To Be or not to Be? Central Questions in Organizational 

Identification,” In Identity in Organizations: Building Theory Through Conversations, D. 
A. Whetten and P. C. Godfrey, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 171-207. 

Raudenbush, Stephen W. and Anthony S. Bryk (2002), Hierarchical Linear Models: 

Applications and Data Analysis Methods, second edition, Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications. 

Reed II, Americus (2002), “Social Identity as a Useful Perspective for Self-Concept-Based 

Consumer Research,” Psychology and Marketing, 19 (3), 235- 66. 

37 

 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Reichheld, Frederick F. (1996), The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden Force Behind Growth, 

Boston:  Harvard Business School Press. 

——— and Earl W. Sasser (1990), “Zero Defections: Quality Comes to Services,” Harvard 

Business Review, 68 (5), 105-11. 

Reinartz, Werner J. and V. Kumar (1999), “Store-, Market-, and Consumer-Characteristics: 

The Drivers of Store Performance,” Marketing Letters, 10 (1), 5-22. 

Riketta, Michael (2002), “Attitudinal Organizational Commitment and Job Performance: A 

Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23 (3), 257-66. 

——— (2005), “Organizational Identification: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Vocational 

Behavior, 66 (2), 358-84. 

——— and Rolf van Dick (2005), “Foci of Attachment in Organizations: A Meta-Analytic 

Comparison of the Strength and Correlates of Workgroup versus Organizational 
Identification and Commitment,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, 67 (3), 490-510. 

Rucci, Anthony J., Steven P. Kirn, and Richard T. Quinn (1998), “The Employee-Customer-

Profit Chain at Sears,” Harvard Business Review, 76 (1), 82-97. 

——— and Richard L. Oliver (2000), “Should We Delight the Customer?” Journal of the 

Academy of Marketing Science, 28 (1), 86-94. 

Rust, Roland T., Katherine Lemon, and Valarie A. Zeithaml (2004), “Return on Marketing: 
Using Customer Equity to Focus Marketing Strategy,” Journal of Marketing, 68 (1), 109-
124. 

———, Chol Lee, and Ernest Valente Jr. (1995), “Comparing Covariance Structure Models: 
A General Methodology,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12 (4), 279-
291. 

———, Christine Moorman, and Peter R. Dickson (2002), “Getting Return on Quality: 
Revenue Expansion, Cost Reduction, or Both?” Journal of Marketing, 66 (4), 7–24. 

——— and Richard L. Oliver (2000), “Should We Delight the Customer?” Journal of the 

Academy of Marketing Science, 28 (1), 86-94. 

——— and Anthony J. Zahorik (1993), “Customer Satisfaction, Customer Retention, and 

Market Share,” Journal of Retailing, 69 (Summer), 193-215. 

———, ____________, and Timothy L. Keiningham (1995), “Return on Quality (ROQ): 

Making Service Quality Financially Accountable,” Journal of Marketing, 59 (April), 58-
70. 

38 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Schlesinger, Leonard A. and James L. Heskett (1991a), “Breaking the Cycle of Failure in 

Services,” Sloan Management Review, 32 (Spring), 17- 28. 

______ and ________ (1991b), “The Service-Driven Company,” Harvard Business Review, 

69 (September-October), 71- 81. 

________ and Jeffrey Zornitsky (1991), “Job Satisfaction, Service Capability, and Customer 

Satisfaction: An Examination of Linkages and Management Implications,” Human 
Resource Planning, 14, 141- 9. 

Schneider, Benjamin (1991), “Service Quality and Profits: Can You Have Your Cake and Eat 

It Too?” Human Resource Planning, 14 (2), 151- 57. 

_________, and David E. Bowen (1985), ”Employee and Customer Perceptions of Service in 

Banks: Replication and Extension,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 423- 33. 

_________, Mark G. Ehrhart, David M. Mayer, Jessica L. Saltz, and Kathryn Niles-Jolly 

(2005), “Understanding Organization-Customer Links in Service Settings,” Academy of 
Management Journal, 48 (6), 1017-32. 

_________, Paul J. hanges, D.Brent Smith, and Amy Nicole Salvaggio (2003), “Which 

Comes First: Employee Attitudes or Organizational Financial and Market Performance?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88 (5), 836- 51. 

_________, John Jay Parkington, and Virginia M. Buxton (1980), “Employee and Customer 
Perceptions of Service in Banks,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 25 (June), 252- 67. 

———, Susan S. White, and Michelle C. Paul (1998), “Linking Service Climate and 

Customer Perceptions of Service Quality: Test of a Causal Model,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 83 (2), 150-63. 

Shrout, Patrick E. and Joseph L. Fleiss (1979), “Intraclass correlations: Uses in Assessing 

Rater Reliability,” Psychological Bulletin, 86 (2), 420-28. 

Siguaw, Judy A., Gene Brown, and Robert E. Widing (1994), “The Influence of the Market 
Orientation of the Firm on Sales Force Behavior and Attitudes,” Journal of Marketing 
Research, 31 (February), 106-16. 

Snipes, Robin L., Sharon L. Oswald, Michael LaTour, and Achilles A. Armenakis (2005), 
“The Effects of Specific Job Satisfaction Facets on Customer Perceptions of Service 
Quality: An Employee-Level Analysis,” Journal of Business Research, 58 (10), 1330-39. 

Stock, Ruth M. and Wayne D. Hoyer (2005), “An Attitude-Behavior Model of Salespeople's 
Customer Orientation,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33 (4), 536-52. 

39 

 
 
Homburg / Wieseke / Hoyer 
Social Identity and the Service Profit Chain 

Srivastava, Rajenda K., Tasaddug A. Shervani, and Liam Fahey (1998), “Market-Based 
Assets and Shareholder Value: A Framework for Analysis,” Journal of Marketing, 62 
(January), 2-18. 

Szymanski, David M. and David H. Henard (2001), “Customer Satisfaction: A Meta-Analysis 
of the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 29 (1), 16-35. 

Tajfel, Henri (1981), Human Groups and Social Categories, Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press. 

——— and John C. Turner (1986), “The Social Identity Theory of Inter-Group Behavior,” in 

Psychology of Intergroup Relations, Stephen Worchel and William G. Austin, eds. 
Chigago: Nelson-Hall., 7-24.  

Thomas, Raymond W., Geoffrey N. Soutar, and Maria M. Ryan (2001), “The Selling 

Orientation-Customer Orientation (S.O.C.O.) Scale: A Proposed Short Form,” Journal of 
Personal Selling and Sales Management, 21 (1), 63-69. 

Turner, John C., Michael A. Hogg, Penelope J. Oakes, Stephen D. Reicher, and Margaret S. 
Wetherell (1987), “Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory,” 
American Journal of Sociology, 94 (6), 1514-16. 

van Dick, Rolf (2004), “My job is My Castle: Identification in Organizational Contexts,” 

International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 19, 171-203. 

van Knippenberg, Daan (2000), “Work Motivation and Performance: A Social Identity 

Perspective,” Applied Psychology: An International Review, 49 (3), 357-71. 

——— and Michael A. Hogg (2003), “A Social Identity Model of Leadership Effectiveness 

in Organizations,” Research in Organizational Behavior, 25, 245-97. 

———, Nathalie Lossie, and Henk Wilke (1994), “In-Group Prototypicality and Persuasion: 
Determinants of Heuristic and Systematic Message Processing,” British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 33 (3), 289-300. 

——— and Ed Sleebos (2006), “Organizational Identification versus Organizational 
Commitment: Self-Definition, Social Exchange, and Job Attitudes,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 27 (5), 571-584. 

Zeithaml, Valarie A., Leonard L. Berry, and A. Parasuraman, A. (1996), “The Behavioral 

Consequences of Service Quality,” Journal of Marketing, 60 (2), 31-46. 

40