This article was downloaded by: [New York University]
On: 21 April 2015, At: 19:41
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer
House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Advertising
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujoa20

Brand Equity, Brand Preference, and Purchase
Intent
Cathy J. Cobb-Walgren , Cynthia A. Ruble & Naveen Donthu
Published online: 31 May 2013.

To cite this article: Cathy J. Cobb-Walgren , Cynthia A. Ruble & Naveen Donthu (1995) Brand Equity, Brand
Preference, and Purchase Intent, Journal of Advertising, 24:3, 25-40, DOI: 10.1080/00913367.1995.10673481

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1995.10673481

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”)
contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability
for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions
and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of
the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of
information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands,
costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in
any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Brand Equity, Brand Preference, and Purchase Intent

Cathy J. Cobb-Walgren, Cynthia A. Ruble and Naveen Donthu

The issue of brand equity has emerged as one of the most critical areas for marketing management in the
1990s. Despite strong interest in the subject, however, there is little empirical evidence of how brand value is
created and what its precise effects are. This study explores some of the consequences of brand equity. In
particular, the authors examine the effect of brand equity on consumer preferences and purchase intentions.
For comparative purposes, two sets of brands are tested, one from a service category characterized by fairly
high financial and functional risk (hotels), and one from a generally lower risk product category (household
cleansers). Each set includes two brands that are objectively similar (based on Consumer Reports ratings),
but they have invested markedly different levels ofadvertising spending over the past decade. Across both
categories, the brand with the higher advertising budget yielded substantially higher levels of brand equity.
In tum, the brand with the higher equity in each category generated significantly greater preferences and
purchase intentions.

Cathy J. Cobb-Walgren (Ph.D.,
University of Texas) is Associate
Professor of Marketing at Georgia
State University.
Cynthia A. Ruble (M.B.A., Georgia
State University) is Vice President,
Director of Account Planning at
Tucker Wayne/Luckie and Co.
Naveen Donthu (Ph.D., University
of Texas) is Associate Professor of
Marketing at Georgia State Univer 
sity.

Journal of Advertising,
Volume XXIV, Number 3
Fall 1995

Introduction

Factories rust away,
packages become obsolete,
products lose their relevance.
But great brands live forever.

-Backer Spielvogel Bates

The cost of bringing a new brand to market is approximately $100 million
(Ourusoff 1992), with a 50 percent probability of failure (Crawford 1993).
Thus, it is not surprising that companies seeking growth opportunities may
prefer to acquire existing brands. Consider the large number of corporate
mergers and leveraged buyouts that have occurred in recent years. In 1985,
Philip Morris paid $5.6 billion for General Foods. Three years later, the
cigarette giant acquired the assets of Kraft for nearly $13 billion-six times
book value (Morgenson 1991). Grand Metropolitan reportedly paid almost
$6 billion for Pillsbury in 1989 (Marcom 1989). In each case, the purchase
price reflected far more than the factories or the physical product produced
therein. These corporate mergers were also about the acquisition of intan 
gible assets-namely, brands.

To the consumer on Main Street, the terms "product" and "brand" are
often used interchangeably. But Wall Street and Madison Avenue know the
difference. A product is "something that offers a functional benefit" (Farquhar
1989, p. 24). A brand, on the other hand, is "a name, symbol, design, or mark
that enhances the value of a product beyond its functional value" (Farquhar
1989, p. 24). Consider the case of the Quaker Oats brand. In 1991, the retail
price of Quaker Oats oatmeal was 3,000 percent higher than the price of its
basic ingredient, despite the fact that oats are essentially a commodity
product, the wholesale price of which decreased 33 percent between 1980
and 1990 (Morgenson 1991).

Why are businesses and consumers alike willing to pay so much for brand
names? Stated simply, brand names add value. The added value that a

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 26

Journal of Advertising

brand name gives to a product is now commonly re 
ferred to as "brand equity" (Aaker 1991).

Brand equity can be discussed from the perspective
of the investor, the manufacturer, the retailer, or the
consumer. Clearly, brand names add value to each of
these groups. Investors have a financial motivation
for extracting the value of a brand name from the
value of a firm's other assets. Manufacturers and
retailers, on the other hand, are motivated more by
the strategic implications of brand equity (Keller
1993). To the manufacturer, brand equity affords a
differential advantage that enables the firm to gener 
ate greater volume and greater margins. Brand eq 
uity provides a strong platform for introducing new
products and insulates the brand against competitive
attacks. From the perspective of the trade, brand
equity contributes to the overall image of the retail
outlet. It builds store traffic, ensures consistent vol 
ume, and reduces risk in allocating shelf space.

None of this is meaningful, however, if the brand
has no meaning to the consumer. In other words,
there is value to the investor, the manufacturer, and
the retailer only if there is value to the consumer
(Farquhar 1989; Crimmins 1992). Thus, it is impor 
tant to understand how brand value is created in the
mind of the consumer and how it translates into choice
behavior.

The purpose of the present study is twofold: 1) to
measure the equity of brands which vary along se 
lected criteria; and 2) to investigate the impact of
brand equity on brand preferences and purchase in 
tentions. The study examines the equity of both prod 
ucts and services, since the existing work on brand
equity has focused almost exclusively on products
and has failed to adequately consider service indus 
tries (Smith 1991). In addition, we include categories
which differ in functional and financial risk, since
these factors may influence brand equity (Landor As 
sociates 1990). Most importantly, we include brands
which are highly similar on physical attributes (as
rated by Consumer Reports), but which vary signifi 
cantly in the level of advertising support. Our reason 
ing is that advertising is the primary mechanism for
creating psychological differentiation among brands
and for enhancing brand equity (Ryan 1991; Aaker
and Biel 1993). The specific brands under investiga 
tion include Holiday Inn and Howard Johnson for the
hotel category and Soft Scrub and Bon Ami for the
household cleanser category.

Literature Review

Since the term "brand equity" emerged in the 1980s,
there has been a burgeoning interest in the subject
among marketing academicians and practitioners. As
evidence, a 1991 survey of Marketing Science Insti 
tute members ranked brand equity the number one
issue facing marketing management (Aaker 1991).
Researchers have focused primarily on defining and
measuring the concept and, to a lesser extent, under 
standing its causes and effects. This literature review
will address both the measurement and management
of brand equity.

Measurement of Brand Equity

Much of the writing on brand equity has been con 
cerned with definitional issues. As Crimmins (1992)
observed, accurate measurement of brand equity must
precede effective equity management. It is difficult to
manage "added value" without knowing the actual
value that a brand name adds to a product.

A number of alternative methods have been sug 
gested for measuring brand equity. The techniques
tend to be either financial or consumer-related. Among
the financial measures, Simon and Sullivan (1993)
used movements in stock prices to capture the dy 
namic nature of brand equity, on the theory that the
stock market reflects future prospects for brands by
adjusting the price of firms.

Mahajan, Rao and Srivastava (1991) used the po 
tential value of brands to an acquiring firm as an
indicator of brand equity. Another financial measure
(applicable only when launching a new product) is
based on brand replacement, or the requirements for
funds to establish a new brand, coupled with the
probability of success (see Simon and Sullivan 1993).
One of the most publicized financial methods is
used by Financial World in its annual listing of world 
wide brand valuation (Ourusoff 1993). FW's formula
calculates net brand-related profits, then assigns a
multiple based on brand strength (defined as a com 
bination of leadership, stability, trading environment,
internationality, ongoing direction, communication
support, and legal protection).

Within the marketing literature, operationalizations
of brand equity usually fall
into two groups: those
involving consumer perceptions (e.g., awareness,
brand associations, perceived quality) and those in 
volving consumer behavior (e.g., brand loyalty, will-

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

ingness to pay a high price). Among the perceptual
measures, one technique uses consumer preference
ratings for a branded product versus an unbranded
equivalent (see Aaker 1991). Another approach, used
by several authors, treats brand equity as brand name
importance, since the name of a brand is often its core
indicator (Louviere and Johnson 1988; Yovovich 1988;
Sharkey 1989; MacLachlan and Mulhern 1991).

Keller (1993, p. 2) offered the following perceptual
definition: "the differential effect of brand knowledge
on consumer response to the marketing of the brand."
Brand knowledge was decomposed into brand aware 
ness (recall and recognition) and brand image (a com 
bination of the favorability, strength, and uniqueness
of brand associations).

Among the methods relying more on consumer be 
havior, Kamakura and Russell (1993) used scanner
data to come up with three measures of brand equity.
Their first measure-perceived value-was defined
as the value of the brand which cannot be explained
by price and promotion. Their second measure-brand
dominance ratio-provided an objective value of the
brand's ability to compete on price. Their third mea 
sure-intangible value-was operationalized as the
utility perceived for the brand minus objective utility
measurements.

Aaker (1991) is one of the few authors to incorpo 
rate both attitudinal and behavioral dimensions in
his definition. He suggested using a brand-earnings
multiplier that is based on a weighted average of the
brand on five key components of brand equity (aware 
ness, associations, perceived quality, loyalty, and other
proprietary assets such as patents and trademarks).
There are some advantages to combining both con 
sumer perceptions and actions into a single market 
ing measure of brand equity. It is well documented
that attitudes alone are generally a poor predictor of
marketplace behavior. On the other hand, consumer
perceptions are clearly a precursor to behavioral
manifestions of brand equity. And, as Biel (1992, pp.
RC7-RC8) observed, "[C]onsumer behavior is, at root,
driven by perceptions of a brand. While behavioral
measures of purchase describe the existence of eq 
uity, they fail
to reveal what is in the hearts and
minds of consumers that is actually driving equity."
Despite the large number of alternatives suggested
in the literature, no single measure is ideal. Accord 
ing to Lipman (1989), there is not even agreement on
the relative strengths and weaknesses of each. Fi 
nancial theorists, such as Simon and Sullivan, argue
that the best techniques for measuring brand equity
rely on objective, market-based data which allow com-

27

parisons over time and across firms. To them, the use
of consumer attitudes and preferences is flawed due
to their inherent subjectivity. Many marketers ar 
gue, on the other hand, that while brands do have
value to various constituencies, it is the consumer
who first determines brand equity (Farquhar 1989;
Crimmins 1992). The present study relies on a con 
sumer-based, perceptual measure of brand equity.

Antecedents and Consequences of
Brand Equity

How exactly is brand value created? There is broad 
based agreement that one of the major contributors
to brand equity is advertising (Aaker and BieI1993).
According to Prentice (as cited in Ryan 1991, p. 19):
The consumer's perception of brand value comes
from many sources, but essentially it is based on
ideas-rational or emotional-that set the brand
apart from competitive brands. What kinds of mar 
keting activities implant these ideas about a brand's
uniqueness in the mind?....Advertising is the
most common.

Advertising can influence brand equity a number of
ways. It can create awareness of the brand and in 
crease the probability that the brand is included in
the consumer's evoked set. It can contribute to brand
associations which, when stored in accessible memory,
translate into "nonconscious but reliable behavioral
predispositions" (Krishnan and Chakravarti 1993, p.
214). Advertising can affect the perceived quality of a
brand, and it can influence usage experience. No pub 
lished studies to date have examined all of the com 
ponents of brand equity as they relate to advertising.
But a few studies have looked at isolated aspects of
brand equity.

Stigler (1961) found that advertising which pro 
vides information about objective attributes such as
price and physical traits will influence brand associa 
tions. Light (1990) reported a correlation between
advertising spending and perceived quality, but not
between promotional weight and the perception of
quality. Nelson (1974) demonstrated that heavy ad 
vertising can improve perceived quality for experi 
ence goods, which by definition are difficult to evalu 
ate prior to purchase. Most of the information content
of such advertising, Nelson suggested, is carried in
the brand name. In a series of experiments, Kirmani
and Wright (1989) found that the perceived expense
of a brand's advertising campaign can influence con 
sumers' expectations of product quality.

Advertising can make positive brand evaluations

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 28

Journal of Advertising

and attitudes readily accessible in memory (Farquhar
1989). This is crucial to the development of brand
equity because, as Herr and Fazio (1992) noted, fa 
vorable brand attitudes will only guide perceptions
and behavior ifthose attitudes can be instantly evoked.
Advertising also influences behavioral manifesta 
tions of brand equity. There is a long history of re 
search on the relationship between advertising and
sales. The ongoing PIMS project has confirmed a cor 
relation between share of market and share of voice.
On average, market leaders spend 20 percent more of
their budgets on advertising than do their nearest
competitors (Kim 1990). Prentice (as cited in Ryan
1991) compared the effects of consumer franchise 
building (CFB) activities (primarily image advertis 
ing) versus non-CFB activities (such as price promo 
tions) on market performance. He found that CFB
activities had an impact on sales for about four years,
while the effect of non-CFB tactics lasted for one year
or less. Johnson (1984) looked at the relationship
between advertising spending and brand loyalty. For
those brands that suffered a decline in brand loyalty
over time, one of the major contributing factors was a
lack of advertising support.

It should be noted that in these studies, brand eq 
uity was not measured directly, but rather inferred,
under the assumption that strong brand value trans 
lates into market share and profitability. But as Biel
(1993) has observed, "While strong brands often have
high market shares, market share alone does not
distinguish them from other brands." Biel recom 
mended that researchers focus more on the percep 
tual components of brand equity (especially brand
image) and how they relate to consumer preferences.
For purposes of this project, we adapt the familiar
hierarchy of effects model as a framework for study 
ing various antecedents and consequences of brand
equity from the perspective of the individual con 
sumer. We suggest that consumers form perceptions
about the physical and psychological features of a
brand from various information sources. Their per 
ceptions of the physical product could come from ob 
jective sources such as Consumer Reports, or from
more subjective sources such as advertising or per 
sonal experience. Psychological distinctions, on the
other hand, come primarily through advertising. (For
many product/service categories, where actual differ 
ences between brands are minimal, psychological dif 
ferentiation through advertising is the primary con 
tributor to perceptions.) These perceptions, in turn,
contribute to the meaning or value that the brand
adds to the consumer-i.e., brand equity. Brand eq-

uity then influences consumer preferences and pur 
chase intentions, and ultimately brand choice. Figure
1 is a pictorial representation ofthese ideas and pro 
vides a guide for this investigation.

In summary, the importance of measuring and man 
aging brand equity cannot be fully appreciated until
we understand not only how equity is formed but also
how it affects attitudes and behavior. Managers clearly
need to be convinced of brand equity's impact on the
bottom line. This research is a step in that direction.

Method

Two studies were conducted using essentially the
same research design, but employing different prod 
uct/service categories and different samples.

Selection of Categories and Brands

Three criteria were applied to the selection of cat 
egories. First, the study included both products and
services, for comparative purposes. There are funda 
mental differences between goods and services which
may have implications for brand equity. For example,
services are less standardized and are composed
largely of abstract, experience attributes, the values
of which must be inferred by the consumer. Brand
names, in this case, may be relied upon heavily for
making such inferences. Unfortunately, very little
empirical evidence exists on the equity of services
(Smith 1991). One exception is the work of Landor
Associates (1990), which listed two service organiza 
tions-Disney and NBC-among the top 10 most pow 
erful brands in the U.S.

Second, the categories varied in functional and fi 
nancial risk. Risk is one component of involvement
which Landor Associates (1990) cited as a contributor
to brand equity.

Third, the categories included pairs of brands that
were highly similar on objective product attributes,
but had dramatically different levels of advertising
support. To make this determination, we consulted
Consumer Reports, which rates brands across a wide
range of industries, and Leading National Advertis 
ers (LNA), which lists advertising expenditures by
brand. Based on this secondary research, Holiday
Inn and Howard Johnson were selected for the hotel
category, and Soft Scrub and Bon Ami were selected
for the household cleanser category.

Tables 1 and 2 present the respective brand ratings
from Consumer Reports. As indicated, the pairs of
brands yielded virtually identical scores on typical

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

29

Figure 1
Antecedents and Consequences of Brand Equity

Advertising and
Other
Information
Sources

Psychological
Features

Physical
Features

Perce ptio ns I ..<F---..,.....-----J

~ w _

.

I
I
I
I
: Brand Equity:
t---~r----..J

\1

Regression
Analysis

\V
Purchase
Intentions

Conjoint
Analysis

\1

Preferences

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - -:>

Choice

evaluative criteria. However, the brand pairs were
supported by dramatically different levels of adver 
tising spending between 1980 and 1990. According to
LNA data, Holiday Inn spent $10.5 million in 1980;
Howard Johnson spent $600,000. In 1990, Holiday
Inn's advertising budget was $26.2 million, while
Howard Johnson's budget was $4.1 million. In the

cleanser category, Soft Scrub spent $4.4 million on
advertising during 1980; Bon Ami spent $400,000. In
1990, the respective figures were $7.4 million and
$100,000. Thus, during the 10-year period, Holiday
Inn spent from 6 to 17 times more on advertising
than did Howard Johnson. Soft Scrub spent between
11 and 74 times more than Bon Ami on advertising. It

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 30

Journal of Advertising

Table 1
Consumer Reports Ratings of Hotels

Criterion

Overall Satisfaction Index

Cleanliness

Size of Room

Bed Comfort

Climate Control

Noise

Amenities (Linen & Toiletries)

Staff (Helpfulness & Efficiency)

Food Quality

Swimming Pool

Locations

Typical Locales

Brand

Holiday Inn

Howard Johnson

73'

3"

3

3

3

3

3

3

2

3

74

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

2

3

East
Midwest
South
West

East
Midwest
South

Central City
Highway
Resort

Central City
Highway
Resort

Index of 100 indicates complete satisfaction. Differences of
less than 4 points between brands are not meaningful.
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 = worse and 5 = better.
Source: Consumer Reports, September 1990.

was expected that these differences in ad spending
would affect consumer perceptions of the brands and,
ultimately, their brand equities.

Other factors, of course, could account for the dif 
ferences in ad budgets. In the hotel category, for ex 
ample, the different budgets could be attributable to
the number of properties owned and operated by each

hotel chain. Holiday Inn has 1,365 properties, com 
pared to 435 for Howard Johnson. Therefore, we ad 
justed the ad spending ratio according to number of
properties. Holiday Inn still spent from 2 to 5 times
more than Howard Johnson.

In the case of household cleansers, the different ad
budgets could reflect differences in distribution and

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

81

Table 2
Consumer Reports Ratings of Cleansers

Criterion

Overall Cleaning Ability

Abrasiveness

Price

Size In Ounces

Cost Per Use

Stains Removed Easily

Type

Mars Surfaces If Left Unwiped?

Contains Bleach?

Strongly Alkaline?

Brand

Soft Scrub

Bon Ami

2"

Slight

$1.11

13 oz.

$0.04

Tea
Aluminum
Copper
Steel

Liquid

No

No

No

2

Slight

$0.80

14 oz.

$0.03

Tea
Aluminum
Copper
Steel

Liquid

No

No

No

On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 = worse and 5

better,

Source: Consumer Reports, January 1990.

product availability. Unfortunately, no national fig 
ures on cleanser distribution were available to the
authors. Thus, we conducted a survey of 50 super 
markets in the surrounding metro area weighted by
the stores' respective market shares. According to this
informal survey, 90 percent of the local supermarkets
carried Soft Scrub, while only 60 percent carried Bon
Ami. Adjusting for product distribution, therefore, we
found that the ad budget ratio was still 7 to 49 times
greater for Soft Scrub than for Bon Ami.

Operationalization of Brand Equity

Brand equity can be measured in relative or abso-

lute terms. From the firm's perspective, absolute mea 
sures are probably more useful. Managers have an
interest in maximizing their brand's equity. Thus,
they need the ability to determine benchmarks and
objectives for individual brands, which can then be
contrasted against competitive offerings and indus 
try norms.

However, when comparing a very limited number
of brand equity scores (as in the present study), abso 
lute measures are virtually meaningless. Further 
more, not all operationalizations allow the calcula 
tion of an absolute score. Therefore, this investiga 
tion relied on a relative measure.

The study employed the perceptual components of

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 32

Journal of Advertising

Aaker's (1991) definition of brand equity, as advo 
cated by Keller (1993). Recall that Aaker identified
the following perceptual components: awareness (both
brand and advertising), brand associations, and per 
ceived quality. These dimensions were examined in 
dividually and then were combined to come up with
an equity score for each brand. (In his book, Aaker
[1991] recommends using a weighted average of the
various components, but he does not say how to weight
them. More than likely, the weighting scheme would
vary from brand to brand. Given the lack of clarifica 
tion, we chose to treat the components equally by
using a simple average.)

Data Analysis

The first step in the data analysis was to verify the
different levels of brand equity for the brands under
investigation. The next step was to measure the ef 
fect of brand equity on consumer preferences, using
the conjoint procedure. Conjoint analysis is a multi 
variate technique which determines the relative im 
portance of a product's multidimensional attributes
(Green and Wind 1975). We were not interested so
much in the respondent's preference for predetermined
attribute combinations (which is a common applica 
tion of the conjoint technique) as we were interested
in which brand yielded the higher preference/utility.
Conjoint analysis also allowed us to measure the im 
portance of brand name relative to other brand at 
tributes. As Aaker (1991, p. 187) noted:

The name is the basic core indicator of the brand,
the basis for both awareness and communication
efforts. Often even more important is the fact
that it can generate associations which serve to
describe the brand-what it is and does. In other
words, the name can actually form the essence of
the brand concept.

To determine the attributes included in the con 
joint analysis, a pretest was conducted among a sepa 
rate sample of 28 users of cleansers and 45 users of
hotels. In the pretest, subjects were asked to rank the
attributes listed in Consumer Reports in order of
determinancy, or importance as decision criteria, when
choosing a brand. Because only a few attributes can
be used in conjoint analysis (typically four to six), it
was critical that they be both important and action 
able (Churchill 1991). The top four attributes were
included in the investigation, with brand name serv 
ing as the fifth attribute. Attribute levels were cho 
sen to reflect industry practice. The scenarios were
created using a fractional factorial design (Bretton-

Clark 1992).

The final step in the data analysis was to measure
the impact of brand equity on brand usage intentions
using multiple regression analysis. Again, we assumed
that brand equity differences would be manifested in
the brand name. The dependent variable in this analy 
sis was intent to purchase the brand, measured on a
5-point scale. Respondents provided purchase inten 
tions for the two brands in the respective product
category. They also rated both brands on a number of
evaluative criteria. For the hotel study, the indepen 
dent variables were: brand name (dummy coded as
l=Holiday Inn, O=HowardJohnson), price, room qual 
ity, cleanliness, staff quality, and food quality. For
the cleanser study, the independent variables were:
brand name (dummy coded as l=Soft Scrub, O=Bon
Ami), price, abrasiveness, stain removal ability, ef 
fectiveness on various surfaces, and overall cleaning
ability. All independent variables except brand name
were measured on a 7-point scale.

A pure between-subjects design was used for the
regression. Respondents in each study were split into
two groups. For group one, we used only their evalua 
tions of the first brand in the respective category. For
group two, we used only their evaluations of the sec 
ond brand. Because the subjects were in two groups,
we were able to create a dummy variable that repre 
sented the brand each subject evaluated.

In summary, the data analysis utilized both a
decompositional model (conjoint analysis), where re 
spondents considered attributes simultaneously in the
form of a profile, and a compositional model (regres 
sion analysis) in which respondents evaluated each
attribute separately.

Sampling Procedure

The data for both studies were collected from users
of the respective product or service category. Respon 
dents were drawn on a voluntary basis from graduate
a
and undergraduate business courses at
nontraditional commuter campus, where the average
age of students is 27, and the vast majority work
either full- or part-time. Students who expressed in 
frequent or no usage were asked not to participate in
the project.

The hotel survey was administered to 90 evening
MBA students, most of whom work full-time and,
thus, are more likely to be familiar with hotels due to
work-related travel. The hotel sample was 60 percent
male, 65 percent single, and 89 percent white. The
average age was 29. {According to data from Simmons

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

Market Research Bureau, or SMRB, the largest per 
centage of hotel users is 25-34).

The cleanser sample consisted of 92 users, broken
down as follows: 59 percent were female, 72 percent
were single, and 84 percent were white. The aver 
age age was 25. (According to SMRB, the largest
percentage of users of scouring cleansers is 25-34.)

Research Instrument

The research instrument was divided into two
parts, corresponding to the two purposes of the
study: 1) measurement of brand equity, using the
perceptual components of Aaker's (1991) definition;
and 2) measurement of brand preferences and us 
age intentions.

Part I. The first question on the survey measured
unaided awareness of brands in the respective prod 
uct/service category. Respondents were asked to list
as many brands as they could, from which were
recorded: top-of-mind awareness of the brands un 
der investigation and total brand mentions. This
question was administered separately from the rest
of the survey to ensure unbiased responses. Aided
brand awareness and degree of brand familiarity
were then measured.

The next set of questions elicited brand associa 
tions. Respondents were asked to list all descriptive
words, thoughts, characteristics, symbols, or im 
ages that came to mind when the brand was men 
tioned. From this question, four variables were cre 
ated: total associations, total positive associations,
total neutral and total negative associations. Two
trained researchers coded the responses. Using the
procedure advocated by Perreault and Leigh (1989),
interjudge reliability was calculated to be .90, with
a lower confidence limit for reliability of .82.

Advertising awareness was measured next. Re 
spondents were asked if they had ever seen any
advertising for the respective brand. (It was de 
cided not to put any time constraints on advertising
exposure, since such a question would be difficult to
answer and impossible to verify.) A follow-up ques 
tion for subjects who reported advertising aware 
ness asked for a description of what the advertising
said or showed. Perceived quality was asked last in
this section.

Part II. This section of the survey began with the
conjoint questions. Respondents were asked to as 
sume they were making a decision among brands in
the respective category. They were then given 18
scenarios consisting of various combinations of five

83

attributes, with instructions to evaluate each combina 
tion on a 7-point semantic differential scale. The sce 
narios were presented in story form, with the attributes
randomized within scenarios. To minimize a position
bias, the order of presentation of scenarios was varied
on three different forms of the survey.

The next set of questions served as input into the
multiple regression analysis. Respondents were asked
to rate five brands in the category (including the test
brands) across various dimensions using a 7-point scale
(from very bad to very good). In the hotel study, the
dimensions were: price, room quality, cleanliness, staff
quality, and food quality. In the cleanser study, the
dimensions were: price, abrasiveness, stain removal
ability, effectiveness on various surfaces, and overall
cleaning ability. The instructions stressed that we were
interested in perceptions and/or experiences (since per 
ceptions about a brand can come from sources other
than personal experience). Responses to these ques 
tions served the added purpose of helping us to verify
that the sample's perceptions of brands matched the
Consumer Reports ratings. In the final section, cat 
egory and brand usage intentions were measured, along
with a few simple demographic questions.

Results

Hotel Study

In the first study, we compared the equities of two
hotel brands: Holiday Inn and Howard Johnson. As
stated earlier, brand equity was measured using the
perceptual components of Aaker's (1991) definition. The
top portion of Table 3 presents the results. As indi 
cated, Holiday Inn's brand equity was significantly
greater than that of Howard Johnson. Holiday Inn was
mentioned 8.5 times more than Howard Johnson in the
unaided brand awareness task. (Interestingly, on an
aided basis, both brands achieved almost perfect brand
awareness scores. What this demonstrates is that Holi 
day Inn occupies the coveted location in the consumer's
consideration set known as "top-of-mind." The Howard
Johnson name is less readily accessible, but it is there
in the consumer's memory, nonetheless.)

Eighty-seven percent of respondents stated that they
had at some time seen advertising for Holiday Inn,
compared to 56 percent for Howard Johnson. Thus,
Holiday Inn had 55 percent more self-reported adver 
tising awareness. The overall perceived quality of Holi 
day Inn was 1.74 times higher than that of Howard
Johnson.

Holiday Inn had 4.75 times more positive associa-

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 34

Journal of Advertising

Ine
o
'iii
c::
ID
E
is

In-..ID

~

ra
e:t
Cl
c::
"iii
('I)::)
.!!~
.Q :::J
ra C"
I-LIJ
"CIe
I!

m..ID

Ine
ra
.!!
u
"CIe
as
~

::J:

••Ul
c
c
';;
ell
'u

C
Ul
Ul
c:(

"C
e

ell..m

CIl
>.;;
ell
Cl
CIl
Z

iii.....:::J

CIl
Z

CIl

>:E
Ulo
0.

iii...o

I-

"C.

CIl >> ...
'Qj ::
u ell
:::J
..
CIlOa..

ClUl
c:: Ul
:~ ~
t::
CIl
..> ra
CIl
"C 3:
c:(c:(

"C
c:: Ul
ell Ul
.. CIlm c::
"C CIl
:a
al
:E 3:
~c:(
::::>

"C
e

ell..m

.gCl

... >
(J 0
oS..
rao.u

(Y)
a

....

N
a

-=:t
0

....

o
-=:t

a
N

en
....

a
....

-=:t
a

10
M

c.o
M

LO
....

....
a

co
(Y)

LO
....

00
00
LO N

-;Ro
c.o
10

"*
N
c.o

"*

(Y)

'::Ro
LO
00

"*a....

c
a
Ul
c
..c
a-,
"0
...
ca
3:
a
I

c
c
>
ca
"C
"0
I

Ul
al
+oJa
I

.c
:::Ju 'E
en «
.t::
c::
a
a
en
CD

Ul...

al
Ul
C
ca
al
U

tions than its competitor, while Howard Johnson
had 3.66 times as many associations that were
negative. By assigning a weight of +1 to positive
associations, 0 to neutral ones, and -1 to negative
associations, we determined that Holiday Inn gen 
erated a net of 8.41 more favorable thoughts,
words, symbols, and images than did Howard
Johnson, on average,

Looking at the specific brand associations made
about the two hotels yields additional insight.
Among the positive associations made about Holi 
day Inn were the following: reputation (updated
image, good reputation, famous, distinctive, per 
vasive); consistency (uniform standards, no sur 
prises); service (excellent, caring, hospitable, ca 
ters to customer needs); value (economical, good
price); and rooms (clean, tasteful, comfortable,
homey). Neutral associations about Holiday Inn
included: colors (green, orange, yellow, white);
logo (star, arrow, lights); many price mentions
(mid-priced, moderate); locations (near cities, air 
ports, interstates); and specific features (such as
restaurant, bar, pool) presented in a non-evalua 
tive manner. Holiday Inn also had some negative
lack of amenities (bland,
associations, such as:
boring, no mints on pillow, homogenized); noisy;
rooms (Sears-type decorating).

including:

Howard Johnson's strengths, based on its posi 
tive associations, appeared to be: value (reason 
able price, affordable); good restaurant; good lo 
cations; convenient (quick in and out); safe; and
comfortable. Most of Howard Johnson's associa 
category
tions were neutral,
(motorlodge, roadside inn, chain, outside en 
trance); colors (famous orange and turquoise); logo
(triangular roof, HoJo name); many food men 
tions (ice cream, clams, diner, waitresses in plaid,
Shoney-type restaurant); price (moderate, mid 
priced); and locations. Among the negative asso 
ciations for Howard Johnson were: reputation (not
spectacular, old, probably wouldn't use); rooms
(minimum environment, gaudy colors, velvet, plas 
tic, not renovated, not well maintained, boring,
bland decor); cleanliness (stale, dark, dusty); and
restaurant (truckstop, bland, greasy, cheap food).
Combining the various ratios (8.5 for unaided
brand awareness, 1.55 for advertising awareness,
8.41 for net favorable associations, and 1.74 for
perceived quality), we arrived at a brand equity
score for Holiday Inn that was an average 5.05
times that of Howard Johnson. (It is worth noting
that treating the components of brand equity in-

Ul
al
Q)

al

al
Ul

ca...
>ca...c:
al...
al...
Ul...
al
.c
E
:::J
Z

C 

"C
a
a
Cl
>...
al
>

"f"'-

"C
C
ca
"C
ca
.c
>...
al
>
II
....
Q)...
Q)
..c
3:
r 
a

+oJ

.... a

al
ca
(J
Ul
ca
c:
o

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

35

dividually or combining them into an overall brand
equity score will not change the results, since the
hotel which was higher overall in terms of equity was
also higher on each individual dimension.)

Conjoint analysis was used next to examine the
impact of brand equity on brand preferences. Table 4
presents the attributes included in the conjoint de 
sign, along with the attribute levels.

Results of the hotel conjoint analysis are shown in
the top portion of Table 4. As indicated, brand name
was fourth in feature importance, behind price, bed
size and presence of a pool. Of greater interest for our
purposes, the preference/utility for Holiday Inn (the
brand with the higher equity) was 9.75 times greater
than it was for Howard Johnson.

As a last step, regression analysis was used to in 
vestigate the association between brand equity and
purchase intention. According to the results shown in
Table 5, the coefficient for the dummy variable "hotel
brand name- was 1.8. This variable was set to zero for
Howard Johnson and set to one for Holiday Inn. Hence,
the coefficient may be interpreted as the increment in
purchase intention when choosing Holiday Inn over
Howard Johnson. Stated alternatively, brand usage
intention went up by 1.8 (on a 5-point scale) when
switching from Howard Johnson to Holiday Inn.
Clearly, the brand which had the higher equity also
generated the higher purchase intention.

Overall, the results of Study 1 provide fairly con 
vincing evidence of the effect of brand equity on brand
preferences and usage intentions.

Cleanser Study

For comparative purposes, in Study 2 we examined
a product category that is generally considered low in
financial and functional risk-household cleansers.
Again, the first step was to verify the different levels
of brand equity for the two brands. The bottom por 
tion of Table 3 presents the cleanser brand equity
results using Aaker's definition. As the table reveals,
Soft Scrub was mentioned 13.5 times more than Bon
Ami in the unaided brand awareness task. (On an
aided basis, brand awareness increased for both
brands and the differential between the two was re 
duced somewhat.) Advertising awareness for Soft
Scrub was 20.66 times more than that of Bon Ami.
Overall perceived quality was 2.07 times greater for
Soft Scrub than for Bon Ami.

Soft Scrub had 15 times more positive associations,
while Bon Ami had twice the negative associations of
Soft Scrub. Using the weighted procedure discussed

earlier, Soft Scrub generated a net of 17 more favor 
able associations, on average. Following are some of
the characteristics, words, and symbols that were
linked to Soft Scrub. Positive associations included:
reputation (reliable, well established, safe); ease of
use (convenient, quick, easy, neat, tidy); effectiveness
(works great, hard-working, powerful, cleans well,
tough enough to clean hard surfaces); texture (leaves
no grit, soft, gentle, sensitive, creamy); smell (clean,
fresh scent); economical.

Soft Scrub also generated many neutral, non-evalu 
ative associations, particularly about product features,
such as: packaging; form; uses (use in kitchen, bath 
room, etc.); category (cleanser, disinfectant); sudsing
action; and texture. Other neutral associations in 
cluded: color (white, blue, bluish-green) and effective 
ness (kills germs, removes stains). A few respondents
mentioned competition (Dow with scrubbing bubbles).
Negative associations about Soft Scrub centered
around: packaging (hard to get out of bottle, messy
top); strong smell; texture (gritty, grainy, watery);
and effectiveness (leaves film residue, ruins clothes).
For the brand Bon Ami, positive associations (which
were few) included: friendly; reliable; secret ingredi 
ent behind success; and effectiveness (good,
hardworking, tough). Most ofthe associations tended
to be neutral: reputation (around for a long time,
older product, my grandmother used); competition
(like Comet, like Ajax); packaging (shiny label, cylin 
drical container, generic can, white/gold/red on label,
aluminum); French; antiseptic; petite; and uses (in 
dustrial, cleaning the house). Among the negative
associations were: reputation (outdated, for old la 
dies, not reliable); price (cheap); too abrasive; smell
(stinks); texture (gritty); and effectiveness (may not
work well, messy to use, no fun).

Combining the various dimensions (13.5 for un 
aided brand awareness, 20.66 for advertising aware 
ness, 17 for net favorable associations, and 2.07 for
perceived quality), the brand equity score for Soft
Scrub was an average of 13.31 times greater than
that of Bon Ami. Again, it should be noted that the
cleanser which scored higher overall in terms of brand
equity also scored higher on each individual dimen 
sion.

Table 4 presents the conjoint design and results.
From the table, it is evident that brand name had
extremely high importance. In fact, this attribute
was more important than any of the objective prod 
uct features in determining preference for household
cleansers. The preference/utility for Soft Scrub (the
brand with the higher brand equity) was 33.7 times

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 36

Journal of Advertising

Table 4
Conjoint Analysis for Hotels and Cleansers

Product
Category

Feature

Feature
Importance

Feature
Levels

Utility of
Levels

Price

27.4%

Bed Size

25.4%

Hotels

Pool

19.4%

$35
$55
$75

Double
Queen
King

Yes
No

Times Cleaned
Per Day

11.6%

Brand Name

16.2%

Once
More Than Once

Holiday Inn
Howard Johnson

Price

18.7%

Abrasiveness

21.4%

Number of
Surfaces

12.6%

Type

20.1%

Brand Name

27.2%

$0.75
$0.95
$1.15

None
Slight
Moderate

3
6

Powder
Liquid

Soft Scrub
Bon Ami

Cleansers

13.2
12.5
1.0

4.4
12.2
6.4

9.3
0.2

0.7
5.6

7.8
0.8

3.6
7.0
4.5

4.7
7.8
8.0

2.8
4.7

0.5
7.5

10.1
0.3

greater than for Bon Ami.

Finally, we used regression analysis to estimate
the effect of brand equity on brand usage intentions.
The results in Table 5 reveal that the coefficient for
brand name was 2.5,
indicating that brand usage
intention went up by 2.5 (on a 5-point scale) when
switching from Bon Ami to Soft Scrub. Again, it is

clear that the brand with the higher equity generated
the higher usage intentions.

Discussion

This study examined the effect of brand equity on
consumer preferences and purchase intentions. For

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

37

Table 5
Regression Analysis for Hotels and Cleansers

Product
Category

Independent
Variable

Parameter
Estimate

Significance
level

Overall
R-Square

Hotels

Cleansers

Price
Cleanliness
Room Quality
Staff Quality
Food Quality
Brand Name

Price
Cleaning Ability
Stain Removal Ability
Abrasiveness
Effectiveness on
Various Surfaces
Brand Name

-1.10
0.30
0.29
0.24
0.20
1.80

-0.30
0.30
0.27
0.26
0.20

2.50

.001
.01
.02
.03
.03
.0001

.01
.01
.02
.02
.03

.0001

.50

.45

comparative purposes, we included two sets of brands,
one from a service category characterized by fairly
high financial and functional risk, and one from a
generally lower risk product category. Each set con 
sisted of two brands that had invested very different
levels of advertising spending over the past 10 years
but were objectively similar in terms of physical at 
tributes. (While every attempt was made to ensure
that the brands were comparable, there were instances
when this criterion could not be satisfied. For ex 
ample, the two cleansers varied by type: liquid versus
powder. This may have influenced results.)

As predicted, across both categories, the brand with
the greater advertising budget yielded substantially
higher levels of brand equity. In tum, the brand with
the higher equity in each category generated signifi-

cantly greater preference and purchase intentions.
Our findings confirm the conventional wisdom that
advertising equals knowledge, and knowledge equals
liking. While the various relationships have been
shown by previous research in independent attempts,
we think that this is the first study to demonstrate all
of these relationships together in a brand equity frame 
work. Moreover, we demonstrated these relationships
in two very different product categories.

We cannot say definitively that advertising spend 
ing causes brand equity. Or that a lack of spending on
advertising will destroy the value of a brand. How 
ever, if a marketer chooses to stop investing in the
creation and maintenance of a brand franchise, then
that marketer must be prepared for the prospect of
losing equity over time. The problem is exacerbated if

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 38

Journal of Adverti8ing

competitors continue to invest in advertising. Adver 
tising professionals are called upon daily to "prove"
advertising's return on investment for the short term.
This study offers some suggestion of advertising re 
turn on investment over the long term. While indi 
vidual ad executions can be measured in terms of
immediate cognitive, affective, and behavioral re 
sponse, the real value of advertising can only be real 
ized in the long-term. It should be noted that in the
present study, we had access to only 10 years of ad 
vertising data. A more complete advertising history
for each brand would no doubt yield even greater
insights, since it takes years of advertising spending
to create brand equity.

One of most interesting implications for advertis 
ing strategy is that products which are lower in risk
and involvement may depend even more heavily on
differences created through advertising than prod 
ucts at the other end of the spectrum. The difference
in brand preference for high versus low equity brands
was significantly greater for cleansers than for ho 
tels.

It is also noteworthy that brand name had greater
feature importance for cleansers than for hotels.
Again, it could be that for high involvement products,
consumers consider a wide range of features, with
brand name being one of many attributes evaluated.
For low involvement products where fewer features
are likely to be evaluated, a brand name might serve
as a "halo" through which consumers can make a
quick assessment of the brand.

We expected brand name to have greater feature
importance for services than for products, given the
intangible, abstract nature of services and the fact
that the name of a brand might serve as reassurance
in the evaluation process. Our results did not bear
this out. This finding should be viewed with caution,
however, since the products and services used in the
study were not at the same level of involvement.

Another notable finding concerns the relative im 
portance of price in determining preferences. In the
case of cleansers (where you might expect price to be
determinant), brand name had significantly greater
feature importance than did price. This would sug 
gest caution in the rush to shift spending from adver 
tising to promotion. As the saying goes, "Promotion
builds volume; advertising builds value." And while
price cuts can be met by the competition, the mean 
ing of a brand created through advertising is less
susceptible to encroachment by competitors.

Looking more closely at the relationship between
advertising spending and brand associations, a sig-

nificant finding emerged. We would expect an in 
crease in advertising to contribute to an increase in
total associations. This was true with cleansers. But
for hotels, Howard Johnson had almost as many total
associations as did Holiday Inn. It was more the mix
of associations that varied so much in the hotel cat 
egory. Most of Howard Johnson's associations were
neutral or negative. Certainly, one of the strengths of
advertising is that it allows the sponsor to control the
message, and thus create positive associations. The
question is worth considering: If Howard Johnson
increased its ad budget, would its positive associa 
tions go up?

A related issue concerns the content of advertising.
In this study, we looked at advertising in terms of
sheer dollar volume. But undoubtedly, the nature
and quality of advertising content play a role in the
perceptual components of brand equity and may in 
fluence behavioral manifestations.

Other variables besides advertising could, of course,
account for the differences in brand equity scores.
This is a limitation of the study. While we tried to
control for some of the variables (such as distribu 
tion), there was no way to control every conceivable
dimension, especially in a field investigation. For ex 
ample, we did not take into account the use of sales
promotion tools such as couponing and price discounts.
As another example, it could be argued that age dif 
ferences in the cleanser brands might account for the
findings. (Holiday Inn and Howard Johnson were
founded at about the same time--1952 and 1954,
respectively. So this was not a variable in the hotel
category.) In other words, a demographically older
sample might have generated stronger associations
for the older brand, Bon Ami. However, one could just
as easily argue that an older brand has had more
time to establish brand equity and, thus, should have
an advantage over a newer brand.

An additional limitation of this project concerns the
use of a convenience sample made up of students.
This was not viewed as an overwhelming problem
since the students were users of the respective cat 
egories. However, it could be argued that the overall
sample in each case was not the primary target for
the product category or the individual brands. We do
not know for certain who the targets are for the re 
spective brands, but we can determine the profiles of
current brand and category users. Using a combina 
tion of SMRB and MRI data, we were able to confirm
that our sample fits fairly closely with the profile of
category users. In addition, we compared the user
profiles for each pair of brands. The differences were

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 Fall 1995

nominal. Howard Johnson users were slightly more
likely to be black, older, live in the mid-Atlantic, and
have less college education. Soft Scrub users were
slightly more likely to be single, employed, have higher
income and live in the suburbs.

In conclusion, the measurement and management
of brand equity have become top priority marketing
issues in recent years, as evidenced by the growing
literature on the subject. Most articles automatically
assume that brand equity has an impact on a brand's
performance, ergo brands should do everything fea 
sible to increase their equity. However, it does not
make sense economically to invest a firm's scarce
resources on strategies to add value ifthe value doesn't
translate into preferences and purchase behavior.
Firms need empirical evidence of the consequences of
brand equity. The present study demonstrated that
brand equity increases both consumer preferences
and purchase intentions. Future studies should ex 
amine more closely the antecedents of brand equity,
particularly the role that advertising plays in adding
value to the brand and in helping "great brands live
forever."

References

Aaker, David A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity, New York: Free

Press.

- - - - - and Alexander L. Biel (1993), Brand Equity and
Advertising, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Backer, Spielvogel, Bates (1991), "A Paradox? A Paradox! A Most

Ingenious Paradox!" Currents, 2 (Summer), 1-7.

Biel, Alexander L. (1991), "Coping with Recession: Why Budget 
cutting May Not Be the Answer: keynote address to the
Third Advertising Research Foundation Advertising and Pro 
motion Workshop, February 6.

- - - - - (1992), "How Brand Image Drives Brand Equity:
Journal of Advertising Research, 6 (November/December),
RC6-RC12.

Bretton-Clark (1992), Conjoint Analyzer, New York: Bretton-Clark.
Churchill, Gilbert A. (1991), Marketing Research, Chicago: Dryden

Press.

Crawford, Merle (1993), New Products Manngement, Homewood,

IL: Irwin.

Crimmins, James C. (1992), "Better Measurement and Manage 
ment of Brand Value; Journal of Advertising Research, 32
(July/August), 11-19.

Farquhar, Peter H. (1989), "Managing Brand Equity; Marketing

Research, 1 (September), 24-33.

Green, Paul E. and Yoram Wind (1975), "New Way to Measure
Consumers' Judgments; Harvard Business Review, 53 (July/
August),107-117.

Herr Paul M. and Russel H. Fazio (1992), "The Attitude-to-Behav 
ior Process: Implications for Consumer Behavior; in Adver 
tising Exposure, Memory, and Choice, Andrew A. Mitchell,
ed., Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Johnson, Tod (1984), "The Myth of Declining Brand Loyalty," Jour 
nal of Advertising Research, 24 (February/March), 9-17.

39

Kamakura, Wagner and Gary Russell (1993), "Measuring Brand
Value With Scanner Data," International Journal ofResearch
in Marketing, 10 (March), 9-22.

Keller, Kevin Lane (1993), "Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Man 
aging Customer-Based Brand Equity," Journal of Marketing,
57 (January), 1-22.

Kim, Peter (1990), "A Perspective on Brands: Journal of Con 

sumer Marketing, 7 (Fall), 63-67.

Kirmani, Anna and Peter Wright (1989), "Money Talks: Perceived
Advertising Expense and Expected Product Quality; Journal
of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 344-353.

Krishnan, H. Shanker and Dipankar Chakravarti (1993), "Variet 
ies of Brand Memory Induced by Advertising: Determinants,
Measures, and Relationships," in Brand Equity and Advertis 
ing, David A. Aaker and Alexander L. Biel, eds., Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Landor Associates (1990), "1990 Summary Presentation-The
Landor ImagePower Survey" as cited in It Works! How Invest 
ment Spending in Advertising Pays Off, Bernard Ryan, New
York: American Association of Advertising Agencies, 1991.

Light, Larry (1990), "How Advertising and Promotion Help to Build
Brand Assets; speech before the Second Annual Advertising
Research Foundation Advertising and Promotion Workshop,
February 22-23.

Lipman, Joanne (1989), "British Value Brand Names-Literally;

Wall Street Journal, 122 (February 9), 86.

Louviere, Jordan and Richard Johnson (1988), "Measuring Brand
Image with Conjoint AnIaysis and Choice Models; in Defin 
ing, Measuring and Managing Brand Equity: A Conference
Summary, Report No. 88-104, Lance Leuthesser, ed., Cam 
bridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 20-22.

MacLachlan, Douglas L. and Michael G. Mulhern (1991), "Measur 
ing Brand Equity With Conjoint Analysis; paper presented
at Sawtooth Software Conference, Sun Valley, ID, January
28-30.

Mahajan, Vijay, Vithala Rao, and Rajendra Srivastava (1990),
"Development, Testing, and Validation of Brand Equity Un 
der Conditions of Acquisition and Divestment; in Managing
Brand Equity: A Conference Summary, Report No. 91-110,
Eliot Maltz, ed., Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Insti 
tute, 14-15.

Marcom, John (1989), "We've got a Serious Problem; Forbes, 144

(December 25), 48-53.

Morgenson, Gretchen (1991), "The Trend Is Not Their Friend:

Forbes, 146 (September 16), 114-119.

Nelson, Phillip (1974), "Advertising as Information; Journal of

Political Economy, 82 (July/August), 729-754.

Ourusoff, Alexandra (1992), "What's In a Name?" Financial World,

161 (September I), 32-46.

-----(1993), "Who Said Brands Are Dead?" Branduieek,

34 (August 9), 20-33.

Perreault, William D. and Laurence E. Leigh (1989), "Reliability of
Nominal Data Based on Qualitative Judgments," Journal of
Marketing Research, 26 (May), 135-148.

Prentice, Robert M. (1991), "A Breakthrough That Reveals Why
Most Promotions Cost 7 times as Much as Advertising," as
cited in It Works! How Investment Spending in Advertising
Pays Off, Bernard Ryan, New York: American Association of
Advertising Agencies, 1991.

Ryan, Bernard (1991), It Works! How Investment Spending in Ad 
vertising Pays Off, New York: American Association of Adver 
tising Agencies.

Sharkey, Betsy (1989), "The People's Choice: Adweek's Marketing

Week, 30 (November 27), 6-10.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015 40

Journal of Advertising

Simon, Carol J. and Mary W. Sullivan (1993), "The Measurement
and Detenninants of Brand Equity: A Financial Approach:
Marketing Science, 12 (Winter), 28-52.

Smith, J. Walker (1991), "Thinking About Brand Equity and the
Analysis of Customer Transactions," in Managing Brand Eq 
uity: A Conference Summary, Report No. 91-110, Eliot Maltz,
ed., Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 17-18.

Stigler, George (1961), "The Economics of Information," Journal of
Political Economy (reprinted in The Organization ofIndustry,
Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1968).

Yovovich, B.G. (1988), "What Is Your Brand Really Worth?"

Adweek's Marketing Week, 29 (August 8), 18-20.

Downloaded by [New York University] at 19:41 21 April 2015