.  1989. Vcd.  14. Ho.  1.20-^39.

Social  Identity  Theory
and  the  Organization

BLAKE E. ASHFORTH
Concordia  University
FREDMAEL
Wayne  State  University

It is argued  that  (a) social  identification  is  a perception  of  oneness
with a  group  of persons;  (b) social identification  sfems  from  (he ccrt-
egorization  of  individuals,  the  distinctiveness  and  prestige  of  ihe
group,  the  salience  of  outgroups,  and  the  factors  that  traditionally
are  associc'ed  with  group  formation;  and  (c) social  identification
leads  to activities  that  are  congruent  with  the  identity,  support  for
institutions that embody  the identity,  stereotypical perceptions  of self
and  others,  and  outcomes  that  traditionally  are  associated  with
group  formation,  and  it reinforces  the  antecedents  of  identification.
This perspective  is applied  to organizational  socialization,  role con-
flict, and  intergroup  relations. 

: . . . . . . ••  ..-,;:

,;, 

: 

Organizational  identification  has  long  been
recognized as a critical construct in the literature
on  organizational  behavior,  affecting  both  the
satisfaction  of  the  individual  and  the  effective-
ness  of  the  organization  (Brown,  1969;  Hall,
Schneider,  & Nygren,  1970; Lee,  1971; O'Reilly &
Chatman,  1986; Patchen,  1970;  Rotondi,  1975).
However,  as  discussed  below,  theoretical  and
empirical  work  has  often  confused  organiza-
tional identification  wilh related  constructs such
as  organizational  commitment  and  intemaliza-
tion  and  with  affect  and  behaviors,  which  are
more appropriately  seen  as antecedents  and/or
consequences  of  identification.

Social  identity  theory  (SIT) can  restore  some
coherence  to organizational  identification,  and
it can  suggest  fruitful  applications  to  organiza-
tional behavior.  SIT offers a  social-psychological
perspective,  developed  principally  by  Henri
Tajfel(1978,  1981;Taifel  &Tumer,  1985)andlohn
Tumer  (1975,  1982.  1984,  1985). Following  a  re-

view  of  the  literature  on  SIT,  the  antecedents
and  consequences  of social  identification  in or-
ganizations  are  discussed.  This  perspective  is
then applied  to three domains of  organizational
behavior:  socialization,  role  conflict,  and  inter-
group  relations.

Social  Identity Theory

According to SIT, people tend to classify  them-
selves and  others into various social categories,
such  as  organizational  membership,  religious
affiliation,  gender,  and  age  cohort  (Tajfel  &
Tumer,  1985). As these  examples  suggest,  peo-
ple may be classified  in various categories,  and
different  individuals may utilize different  catego-
rization  schemas.  Categories  are  defined  by
prototypical  characteristics  abstracted  from  the
members  (Turner,  1985).  Social  classiiication
serves  two  functions.  First,  it  cognitively  seg-

20

ments and orders  the social environment,  pro-
viding the individual with a systematic means of
<iefining others. A person is assigned  the proto-
typical  characteristics  of  the category  to which
he or she is classified.  As suggested  by the lit-
erature  on  stereotypes,  however,  such  assign-
ments are not necessarily  reliable (e.g.,  Hamil-
ton, 1981).

Second,  social classification  enables the indi-
vidual to locate  or define  him- or herseif  in the
social  environment.  According  to SIT, the self-
concept  is comprised  of a  personal  identity en-
compassing  idiosyncratic  characteristics  (e.g.,
bodily  attributes,  abilities,  psychological  traits,
interests) and a social identity encompassing sa-
lient group  classifications.  Social  identification,
therefore,  is the perception  of oneness  with  or
belongingness  to some  human  aggregate.  For
example,  a  woman  may define  herself  in terms
of the group(s)  with which  she classifies  herself
(I am  a  Canadian;  1 am  a  woman).  She per-
ceives herself  as an actual or symbolic  member
of the group(s), and she perceives the fate of the
group(s) as her own.  As such,  social  identifica-
tion  provides  a  partial  answer  to the question.
Who am I? (Stiyker & Serpe,  1982; Tumer,  1982).
Note that  the definition  of others and the self
are largely  "relational and comparative"  (Tajfel
& Tumer,  1985, p.  15); they define  oneself  rela-
tive to individuals in other categories. The cate-
gory of young  is meaningful  only in relation to
the category of old. It should be noted,  however,
that  social  identification  is  not an  all-or-none
phenomenon.  Although many social categories
are indeed categorical (e.g., Canadian,  female,
a  member  of XY2 Co.). the extent to which the
individual  identifies  with  each  category  is
clearly a  matter of degree. Further, such identi-
ties tend to be viewed positively inasmuch as the
individual  vests  more  of  his  or  her  self-
oonceptions in valued  personas (Adler & Adler,
1987;  Schneider,  HoU, & Nygren,  1971). Thus,
bckail (1978) found  that  people  working  at me-
nial jobs in a  bank  often  distanced  themselves
their  implied  Identity  (e.g..  This is only  a

stopgap job; I'm trying  to save  enough  to start
my own business).

The major  focus  of both  SIT and the  present
paper  is tQ understand  the implications  of  the
second  function  of  classification,  that  of  social
identification.

Social Identiliccrtion and Group  Identification

Social  identification  appears  to  derive  from
the  venerable  concept  of  group  identification
(Tolman,  1943). (Indeed,  we will use social  and
group identification  interchangeably.) The liter-
ature on group identification  suggests four  prin-
ciples that are relevant  to our discussion.  First,
identification  is viewed  as a  perceptual  cogni-
tive construct  that  is not necessi^rily  associated
with  any specific  behctviors  or affective  states.
To identify,  an individual need not expend  effort
toward  the group's goals; rather,  an  individual
need  only  perceive  him- or  herself  as  psycho-
logically intertwined  with the fate ot the group.
Behavior and affect are viewed only as potential
antecedents  or  consequences  (Foote,  1951;
Gould,  1975). As noted  below,  this  conceptual-
ization  distinguishes  identification  from  related
concepts  such  as  effort  on  behalf  of  the  group
(behavior)  and  loyalty  (affect).  However,  our
view does contrast  with some  literature on SIT,
which includes affective  and evaluative  dimen-
sions  in the conceptualization  of  identity  (e.g.,
Tajfel,  1978).

Second,  social/group  identification  is seen  as
personally experiencing  the successes and  fail-
ures  of the group  (Foote,  1951; Tolman,  1943).
Often,  identification  is maintained  in  situations
involving  great  loss or suffering  (Brown,  1986),
missed  potential benefits  (Tajfel,  1982), task  fail-
ure  (Tumer,  1981),  and  even-expected  failure
(Gammons,  1986).

Third,  although  not clearly  addressed  in the
literature, social identification  is distinguishable
from  intemalization  (Hogg  & Tumer.  1987) (cf.
Kelman,  1961; O'Reilly  & Chatman,  1986).
Whereas  identification  refers  to seli  in terms of
social categories (I am), intemalization  refers  to I

m

the  incorporation  of  values,  attitudes,  and  so
forth  within  the  self  as  guiding  principles  (I
believe).  Although  certain  values  and  attitudes
typically  are  associated  with  members  of  a
cfiven  social  category,  acceptance  of  the  cate-
gory  as  a  definition  of  self  does  not  necessarily
mean  acceptance  of those values and  attitudes.
An individual  may define  herself  in terms of the
organizcrtion she works for, yet she can  disagree
with  the  prevailing  values,  strategy,  system  of
authority,  and  so  on  (cf.  "young  Turks," Mintz-
berg,  1983,  p.  210;  "counterculture,"  Martin &
Siehl,  1983, p. 52).

Finally, identification  with a group is similar to
identification  with  a  person  (e.g.,  one's  father,
football  hero)  or  a  reciprocal  role  relationship
(e.g.,  husband-wife,  doctor-patient)  inasmuch
as one pxartly defines  oneself  in terms of a  social
referent.  To  be  sure,  the  various  literatures
reach  this  conclusion  from  different  directions.
Whereas identification  with a group is argued  to
be  predicated  on  the  desire  for  self-definition,
identification  with an  individual—referred  to as
"classical  identification"  (Kelman,  1961, p. 63)—
is argued  to be  predicated  on  the  desire  to ap-
pease, emulate, or vicariously gain the qualities
of the other (e.g.,  Bandura  & Walters,  1963; Kets
de  Vries  & Miller,  1984).  Kelman  (1961),  for  ex-
ample, argued  that in classical identification  the
individual  "attempts  to be  like or  actually  to  be
the other  person"  (p.  63). Nevertheless,  the ele-
ment  of self-definition  suggests  that  these  forms
of identification  are complementary.  Indeed,  we
will suggest that organizations often seek to gen-
eralize  identification  with  an  individual  to iden-
tification  with the organization  through  the  rou-
tinization  of  charisma.

Social  Identification  and the  Organization

The  individual's  organization  may  provide
one answer  to the  question,  Who am  I? Hence,
we  argue  that  organizational  identification  is  a
specific  form  of social  identification.  This search
for  identity  calls  to  mind  a  family  of  existential
motives  often  alluded  to in  the  literature  on  or-

ganizational  behavior,  including  searches io\
meaning,  connectedness,  empowerment,  and
immortality  (e.g.,  Denhardt,  1987;  Fox,  198(5]
Katz  & Kahn,  1978). To the  extent  the  organiza-t
tion,  as  a  social  category,  is seen  to embody  ol
even  reify  characteristics  perceived  to be proto-i
typical  of  its  members,  it  may  well  fulfill  sucb
motives for the individual.  At the very  least, SITi
maintains  that  the  individual  identifies  with so-
cial  categories  partly  to  enhance  self-esteenfl
(Hogg  & Tumer,  1985; Tajfel,  1978). This  is  un-
derstandable  in view of the relational  and com-J
parative  nature  of social  identities.  Through so-
cial  identification  and  comparison,  the  individ-J
ual  is  argued  to  vicariously  partake  in  thej
successes  and  status  of the  group: Indeed,  pos-
itive and  negative intergroup comparisons have<
been  found  to affect  a  member's  self-esteem  ac-
cordingly (Oakes 8c Turner,  1980; Wagner,  Lam-j
pen,  & Syllwasschy,  1986).

The  individual's  social  identity  may  be  de- i
rived  not  only  from  the  organization,  but  also'
from  his or her  work group,  department,  union,
lunch  group,  age  cohort,  fast-track  group,  and
so  on.  Albert  and  Whetten  (1985)  distingijished
between  holographic organizations in which in-
dividuals across subunits share a common iden-
tify  (or identities) and  ideographic  organizations
in  which  individuals  display  subunit-specific
identities.  General  examples  of  the  former  in-
clude  Ouchi's  (1981)  Theory  Z  organization  in
which  "management  styles  are  blended  to-
gether and  diffused  evenly throughout the entire
organization"  (Albert  &.  Whetten,  1985,  p.  271)
and  Mintzberg's  (1983) missionary  organization
in  which  members  strongly  subscribe  to a  com-
mon  set  of  values  and  beliefs.  Given  the  com-
parative  rarity  of  such  organizations,  however,
the  notion of a  single or blended  organizational
identification  is problematic in most complex or-
ganizations.  Thus,  as  discussed  below,  the  or-
ganizationally  situated  social  identity  may,  in
fact,  be comprised of more or less disparate  and
loosely coupled  identities. This parallels work in
various  social  ^omains  which  indicates  that  in-

22

'dividuals  often  retain  multiple  identities  (Allen,
Wilder,  & Atkinson,  1983; Hoetler,  1985; Thoits,
•1983).

Unfortunately,  despite  the  longevity  of  the
social/group  identification  construct,  little  re-
search  has  been  conducted  on  identification
with  organizations,  as  defined  here.  Conven-
'tional  research  on  organizational  identification
has  not  distinguished  identification  from  inter-
nalization or cognition from behavior and  affect.
For example. Hall et al. (1970) defined  organiza-
tional identification  as "the process by which the
goals  of  the  organization  and  those of  the  indi-
vidual  become  increasingly  integrated  and
congruent"  (pp.  176-177),  and  Patchen  (1970)
defined  it as shared characteristics,  loyalty,  and
solidarity.  The  lone  exception  is  a  study  by
O'Reilly  and  Chatman  (1986) that  distinguished
among compliance,  identification,  and  intemal-
ization.  However,  following  Kelman's  (1961)
lead,  they  defined  identification  as  "involve-
ment  based  on  a  desire  for  affiliation"  (p. 493),
rather than as perceived oneness with the orga-
nization.

A  particular  problem  in  this  area  is  the  fre-
quent  confusion  between  organizational  identi-
fication  and  organizational  commitment.  Some
theorists equate identification  with  commitment,
while others view the former  as a  component of
the  latter  (see Wiener,  1982). The authors  of  the
Organizational  Commitment  Ouestionnaire
(OCO)  (Mowday,  Steers,  &  Porter,  1979,  p.
226)—the most frequently  used measure of com-
mitment  during  the  last  decade  (Reichers,
1985)—defined  organizational  commitment  as
the relative strength of an  individual's  identifica-
tion  with  and  involvement  in  a  particular
organization." In their view, commitment  is char-
acterized  by  a  person's  (a)  belief  in  and  accep-
tance  of  the  organization's  goals  and  values,  (b)
^'villingness to exert effort  on behalf  of the organi-
zation,  and  (c) desire  to  maintain  membership.
This formulation  includes  intemalization,  behav-
ioral intentions, and affect,  but not identification  as
presently defined.  Further, although  identification

is  defined  as-  organization-specific,~intemaliza-
tion and  commitment  may  not be. An  organiza-
tion's goals and  values may  be  shared  by other
organizatioiTS.  Commitment  scales  consistently
feature  generalized  usage  of  the  terms  goals
and  values,  as  in the OCQ  item,  "I find  that my
values  and  the  organization's  values  are
similar" (Mowday  et  al.,  1979,  p.  228).  Respon-
dents are  not asked  to limit  responses to  values
that  are  specific  to their  organization,  if  indeed
they could.  Thus,  an  individual  can  score  high
on commitment not because he or she  perceives
a  shared  destiny  with  the  organization  but  be-
cause  the  organization  is  a  convenient  vehicle
for  personal  career  goals.  If  cmother  organiza-
tion proved  more  convenient,  Svcch  an  individ-
ual could  transfer  to it without  sacrificing  his or
her goals. For the individual who identified  with
the  organization,  however,  leaving  the  organi-
zation  necessarily  involves  some  psychic  loss
(e.g.,  Levinson,  1970).

This  argument  is  supported  by  Mael's  (1988)
study of employed business and  psychology stu-
dents. He constructed  a  6-item  measure of orga-
nizational  identification  based  on  the  present
formulation  (e.g.,  'This organization's  successes
are  my successes," p.  52), and  subjected  it  and
the  15-item OCO to confirmatory  factor  analysis.
The  two-factor  model  produced  a  x^/d/  ratio of
2.03:1  (i.e.,  328.13/188)  and  an  adjusted  good-
ness-of-fit  index  of  .825; the  single-factor  model
produced  a  ratio  of  2.46:1  (i.e.,  465.14/189)  and
an index of .780. The superior fit of the  two-factor
model suggests  that  the identification  and  com-
;
mitment  constructs  are  indeed  differentiable. 
In  summary,  the  SIT conception  of  organiza-
tional  identification  as  shared  identity  is new  to
the  organizational  behavior  literature.  To date,
the  perception  of  identification  has  been  con-
fused  with  intemalization  of  organizational
goals and values, and  with behavior and  affect.
This is most clearly  evident  in research  on orga^
nizational  commitment.  Unfortunately,  this con-
fusion  has  imp>eded application  of the  rich  find-
ings of SIT to organizations.

Antecedents  and  Consequences
of  Social  Identification
in  Organizations

AntecedentB

SIT is  contradictory  to conventional  views of
group relations because according to it in-group
favoritism  tends  io occur even  in the absence of
interdependence,
strong leadership  or member 
interaction,  or cohesion.  Laboratory  studies uti-
lizing SITs minimal group paradigm  have dem-
onstrated  that simply assigning an  individual lo
a  group  is sufficient  to generate in-group  favor-
itism  (Brewer,  1979; Tajfel,  1982).  Favoritism  is
not  dependent  on  prior perceptions  of  interper-
sonal  similarity  or  liking,  and  it  occurs  even
when  there  is no interaction  within  or  between
groups,  when  group  membership  is  anony-
mous,  and  when  there  is no  link  between  self-
interest  and  group  responses  (Tumer,  1984).
Even  explicitly  random  assignment  of  individu-
als  to  groups  has  led  to discrimination  against
out-groups  and  increased  intragroup  coopera-
tion  and  cohesion  (e.g.,  Billig  & Tajfel,  1973;
Locksley,  Ortiz,  & Hepbum,  1980).

This  led  Tumer  (1984,  p.  530) to  propose  the
existence  of a  "psychological  group,"  which  he
defined  as "a collection of people who share the
same  social  identification  or  define  themselves
in  terms  of  the  same  social  category  member-
ship." A member of a  psychological group does
not need  to interact  with or like other  members,
or be liked and accepted  by them. It is his or her
perception of being, say, a loyal patriot or sports
fan  that  is the basis for incorporation  of that sta-
tus into his or her social identity. The  individual
seems to reify  or credit the group with a psycho-
logical reality apart from his or her relationships
with its members  (Tumer,  1984).

The  SIT literature  suggests  several  foctors  of
direct  relevance  to  organizations  which  most
likely  increase  the  tendency  to  identify  with
groups.  The  first  is  the  distinctiveness  of  the
group's values and  practices in relation to those

of  comparable  groups  (Oakes  & Tumer,
Tolman,  1943).  Distinctiveness  serves  to  se
rate  "figure  from  ground,"  differentiating  tl^
group from others and  providing a  unique iden
tity.  Mael  (1988) sampled  the  alumni  of  a  rel)
gious  college  and  found  a  positive  associatioi
between the perceived  distinctiveness of the col
lege's  values  and  practices  and  identificatioj
with the college.  Distinctiveness  partly explain-
the missionary zeal often displayed  by member;
of  organizations  that  are  new  and  innovative
(e.g., Perkins,  Nieva,  & Lawler,  1983) ororgani
zations  that  pursue  unique  goals  (e.g..  Hall e
al.'s  1970 study of the  U.S. Forest Service),

Within  the  organization,  distinctiveness  in
group  values  and  practices  needs  to  be  quali-
fied  by the clarity and  impermeability  of group
domains  or boundaries.  For example,  although
it  is  likely  that  the  values  and  practices  of two
functionally  based  subunits  are  more  differenti-
ated  than  those  of  two  market-based  subunits,
suggesting  distinctiveness,  the fomner  are more
likely to be  sequentially  or reciprocally  interde-
pendent  and  physically  contiguous,  suggesting
a  blurring of distinctiveness.  This indeterminate
distinctiveness  may  account  for  the  mixed sup-
port for SIT in several  field  studies (Brown, Con-
dor,  Mathews.  Wade,  & Williams,  1986; Brown
& Williams,  1984; Oaker  & Brown,  1986; Skev-
ington,  1981).

Interestingly,  even  negatively  valued  distinc-
tions  have  been  associated  with  identification.
Negatively  regarded  groups  often  utilize  such
defense  mechanisms  as  recasting  a  negative
distinction into a positive one (Black is beautiful),
minimizing  or  bolstering  a  negative  distinction
(We're  not  popular  because  we  avoid  playing
politics),  or  changing  the  out-group  with  which
the  in-group  is  compared  (Lemaine,  Kdstersz-
tein,  &  Personnaz,  1978; Skevington,  1981; Wag-
ner  et  a l,  1986)  (cf,  social  creativity,  Tajfel  &
Tumer,  1985). And  the stronger  the threat to the
group,  the  stronger  the  defensive  bias  (van
Knippenberg,  1984).  Such  machinations  might
partly  explain  a  person's  often  fierce  identifica-

'tion  with  countercultures  (e.g.,  Martin  & Siehl,
1983)  or  disaffected  groups  in  organizations
(e.g., lackaU,  1978).

A  second  and  related  factor  that  Increases
identification  is the prestige ol the group (Chat-
man,  Bell, & Staw,  1986; March & Simon,  1958).
This  is  based  on  the  earlier  argument  that,
through  intergroup  comparison,  social  identifi-
cation affects  self-esteem.  Mael (1988) found  that
perceived organizational prestige was related to
organizational  identification  among  samples oi
working  university  students  and  religious  col-
lege alunnni- Individuals often  cognitively (il not
publicly) identify  themselves with a winner. This
accounts in part for the bandwagon  effect  often
witnessed  in organizations,  where popular sup-
pori  for  an  individual  or  idea  suddenly  gains
momentum and escalates, thus creating a rising
star.  Desires  for  positive  identifications  effec-
tively create  champions,  converting  "the slight-
est  sign  o{  plurality  into  an  overwhelming
majority"  (Schelling,  1957, p. 32).

Third,  identification  is likely  to be  associated
with the salience  of the out-groupls) (AUen et al.,
1983; Tumer,  1981). Awareness of out-groups re-
inforces  awareness  of  one's  in-group.  Wilder
(cited in Wilder,  1981) categorized one set of sub-
jects into two groups (in-group/out-group  condi-
tion),  allegedly  on  the  basis  of  preference  for
certain  paintings,  and  a  second  set  into  one
group  (in-group-only  condition).  Subjects  as-
sumed greater homogeneity in the in-group when
an  out-group  was  present  (in-group/out-group
condition] than  when  no specific out-group  was
salient  (in-group-only condition). Awareness of
the  out-group  underscored  the  existence  of  a
boundary  and  caused  subjects  to  assume  in-
group  homogeneity.  Similarly,  Kanter  (1977)
found  that  the  presence  of  females  in  a  male-
dominated  sales force  induced  the males lo ex-
•^agerate perceived  masculine  traits and  differ-
ences between  the sexes.

Th& well-known effects  of intergroup  compefi-
'•on  on  in-group  identification  (e.g.,  Friedkin &
1985) are  a  special  case of this princi-
^ 

ple. During competition,  group lines are  drawn
more  sharply,  values  and  norms  are  under--
scored,  qnd  we/they  differences  are  accentu-
ated  (Brown  & Ross,  1982;  van  Knippenberg,
1984)  (cf.  cognitive  differentiation  hypothesis,
Dion,  1979).  Skevington  (1980),  for  example,'
found  that when  high-status  nurses  (where sta-
tus was based  on  training)  were  led  to believe
they  would  be  merged  with  low-stcrtus  nurses,
they  increased  their  in-^roup  favoritism,  em-
phasizing  their  distinctiveness  and  superiority
over the low-status  group.

Finally,  the set of  factors  traditionally  associ-
ated  with group  formation  (irrterpersonal  inter-
action, similarity, liking, proximity, shared goals
or  threat,  common  history,  and  so  forth)  may
affect  the  extent  to  which  individuals  identify
with  a  group,  although  SIT suggests  that  they
are  not necessary  ior identification  to  occur.  It
should  be noted,  however,  that  although  these
factors facilitate crroup formation,  they also may
directly cue the psychological  grouping  of indi-
viduals since they can be used  as bases ior cat-
egorization (Hogg & Tumer,  1985; Tumer,  1984).
in  complex  organizations,  the  pervasiveness
of this set of antecedents—the  categorization of
individuals,  group distinctiveness and  prestige,
out-group  salience,  and  group  formation  fac-
tors—suggests  that group  identification  is likely
to be prevalent. Also, although  the SIT literature
indicates  that  categorization  is  sufficient  for
identification  to occur,  the pervasiveness  of ior-
mal and  informal  groups  in  organizations  sug-
gests that categorization  is seldom  the  only  fac-
tor in  identification.  Thus,  the  consequences of
identification  suggested  by  SIT,  discussed  be-
low, may well be  intensified  iiv organizations.

Consequences

The SIT literature suggests three general con-
sequences  of  relevance  to  organizations.  First,
individuals  tend  to choose  activities  congruent
with salient aspects  oi their  identities,  and  they
support  the ii^titutions  embodying  those identi-
ties. Stryker and  Seipe (1982) found  that individ-

uals  for  whom  a  religious  role  was  salient  re-
ported  spending  more  time  in that  role and  de-
riving satisfaction  from  it, and  Mael (1988) found
that  the identification  of alumni  with their  alma
mater predicted their donating to that institution,
their  recruitiing  of offspring  and  others,  their at-
tendance at functions,  and  their satisfaction with
the alma  mater.  Thus,  it is likely that  identifica-
tion with  an  organization  enhances  support  for
and  commitment  to it.

A second  and  related  consequence is that so-
cial  identification  affects  the  outcomes  conven-
tionally  associated  with  group  formation,  in-
cluding  intragroup  cohesion,  cooperation,  and
altruism,  and  positive  evaluations  of  the  group
(Tumer,  1982,  1984). It is also  reasonable  to ex-
pect that identification  would be associated with
loyalty to, and  pride  in,  the cn"oup and  its activ-
ities. However, it should be noted that, given our
discussion  of  psychological  groups,  this  affinity
need  not  be  interpersonal  or  based  on  ihterac-
tion. Dion (1973) demonstrated  that one may like
other  group  members,  despite  their  negative
personal attributes,  simply by virtue of the com-
mon membership  (cf.  personal  vs. social attrac-
tion,  Hogg  & Tumer,  1985).  In  short,  "one  may
like people as group  members  at the same time
as  one  dislikes  them  as  individual  persons"
(Tumer,  1984, p.  525).

Identification  also  may  engender  intemaliza-
tion  of,  and  adherence  to,  group  values  and
norms and homogeneity in attitudes and  behav-
ior.  Just as  the  social  classification  of others en-
genders  stereotypical  perceptions  of  them,  so
too does the classification  of oneself  and  subse-
quent  identification  engender  the  attribution of
prototypical  characteristics  to  oneself  (Turner,
1984, 1985). This self-stereotyping  amounts to de-
personalization  of  the self  (i.e.,  the  individual  is
seen  to exemplify  the  group),  and  it  increases
the perceived  similarity  with  other group  mem-
bers  and  the  likelihood  of  conformity  to  group
norms.

Finally, it is likely that social identification  will
reinforce  the  very  antecedents  of  identification,
including  the  distinctiveness  of the  group's  val-

ues  and  practices,  group  prestige,  salience'
and  competition  with out-groups,  and  the
tional causes of group formation.  As the im
ual comes  to identify  with the group,  the vali
and  practices  of  the  in-group  become  more
lient  and  perceived  as  unique  and  distini
(e.g.,  Tajfel,  1969).

Perhaps  the  greatest  contribution  that
makes to the literature on organizational be!
ior is the  recognition  that a  psychological
is  far  more  than  an  extension  of  interpe:
relationships  (Tumer,  1985): Identification  withi
collectivity  can  arise  even  in  the  absence of
terpersonal  cohesion,  similarity,  or  interactii
and  yet  have  a  powerful  impact  on  affect
behavior.  As  discussed  below,  in  crediting
collectivity  with  a  psychological  reality  bey(
its membership,  social identification  enables
individual  to  conceive  of,  and  feel  loyal  to,
organization  or  corporate  culture.  Indeed,
Tumer  (1982) claimed  that  "social  identity  is the
cognitive  mechanism  which  makes  group  be-'
haviour  possible" (p. 21).

Applying  Social  Identity  Theory
to  Organizations

The explanatory  utility of  SIT to  organizations
can  be  illustrated  by  applications  to  orgariiza-
tional  socialization,  role conflict,  and  intergroup
relations.

Organizaiional  Socialization

According  to  the  literature  on  organizationd
socialization,  organizational  newcomers  are
highly  concerned  with  building  a  situational
definition  (Katz,  1980). Newcomers,  it is arguedL,|j
are  unsure  of  their  roles  and  apprehensivOj
about  their status. Consequently,  in order to i
derstand  the organization  and  act within it,
must  leam  its policies and  logistics,  the  gener
role  expectations  and  behavioral  norms,
power  and  status  structures,  and  so  forth U
forth,  1985). 

'

However,  organizational  newcomers  alsoj

often  concerned  with  building  a  self-
nition. of which the social identity (or identi-
is likely to comprise a  large part.  For many
5, writers in the personological  tradition of
theory  have  noted  the link  between
and  the  self-concept,  suggesting
that  the  emergence  of  situational  and  self-
definitions are intertwined  (see Hogan,  1976). A
dcveioping sense of who one is complements  a
sense of where  one is and what  is expected. In
complex organizations,  the prevalence of social
categories  suggests  that  social  identities  are
Lkely to represent a  significant  component of in-
dividuals'  organizationally  situated  self-defini-
tons, and, indeed,  many  studies document  this
idea  (see  Fisher,  1986; Mortimer  & Simmons,
1978: and Van Maanen,  1976,  for examples).

Developing  Social  Identifications.  Although
JC SIT  literature  is relatively  mute  about  how
xnai identification  occurs,  the literature on or-
panizationa]  socialization  suggests  that  situa-
Uonal definitions  and  self-definitions  both
c.Tierge through symbolic  interactions  (Ashforth,
i9£5. Coe, 1965; Reichers,  1987). Symbolic inter-
holds that meaning is not a  given but
evolves from  the verbal and nonverbal  interac-
of  individuals.  For our purposes,  inferoc-
V'On  IS defined  broadly  to Include  any  symboi-
KT  transmission,  from  product  advertisements
ic  orientation  sessions.  (As the  SIT  literature
'••lev.-ed  above  makes  clear,  interaction  need
3- be mterpersonal—though  in organizations,
c. course,  it  often  is,) Through  symbolic  inter-
i2> the newcomer  begins  to  resolve  ambi-
'. lo impose an informational  framework or
•*na on organizational  experience.
i'-h  regard  to self-definitions  in  paiiicular,
»cr. Maanen  (1979) argued  that  conceptions of
•••^-  self  are  learned  by  interpreting  the  re-

of others in situated  social  interactions,
on the works of Charles Horton Cooley,
'  Herbert  Mead,  and  Herbert  Blumer,
others,  he  maintained  that  through  in-
individuals leamed  to ascribe socially
labels such as ambitious,  engineer,
mobile to themselves and others.

An  example  was  provided  by  Becker  and
Carper  (1956). They  interviewed  graduate  stu-
dents  in  physiology,  most  of  whom  initially
viewed physiology as a stopgap pending accep-
tance  into  medical  school.  Becker  and  Carper
found,  however,  that  through  immersion  in the
social milieu many students grtadually assumed
the  identity  of physiologists.  Frequent  interac-
tion and soda] comparison with fellow students,
observation  of prc>fessors,  and  tutelage and re-
inforcement  by  professors  slowly  shaped  stu-
dents'  interests,  skills,  self-conceptions,  and
their  understanding  of the  paradigms,  values,
norms, and occupational  choices  in the field.

Tliis perspective on social  identificgtion  in or-
ganizations suggests at least three implications.
First,  consistent  with  our  earlier  discussion,  it
suggests that the often-noted  effect  oforganiza-
tional  socialization  on the intemalization  of or-
ganizational  values and beliefs  is comprised in
part oi an indirect effect via identification; that is,
socialization effects  identification,  which in tum
effects  intemalization.  As  noted,  through  self-
stereotyping  the  individual  typically  adopts
those  characteristics  perceived  as  prototypical
of  the groupffl  with  which  he  or  she  identifies.
Albert and Whetten  (1985) argued  that an orga-
nization  has an  identity  to the extent  there  is a
shared understanding of the central,  distinctive,
and enduring  character or essence  of the orga-
nization  among  its members.  This  identity may
be reflected  in shared values and beliefs, a mis-
sion,  the  structures  and  processes,  organiza-
tional climate, and so on. The more salient, sta-
ble, and intemally consistent the character of an
organization  (or  In  organizational  terms,  the
stronger the culture), the greater this intemaliza-
tion {Ashforth,  1985).

However,  socialization also has a  direct  effect
on  intemalization,  as  suggested  by  the  argu-
ment that one may intemalize an  organization's
culture  without  necessarily  identifying  with the
organization,  and  vice  versa.  The relative im-
portance of the direct  (socialization  —*•  intemal-
ization) and  irvlirect  (socialization  -*  identifica-
tion  —*'  intemalization)  effects  most  likely  vary

across  organizcrtions,  subunits,  and  roles.  Van
Maanen  (1978)  distinguished  between  investi-
ture processes that ratify  the newcomer's incom-
ing  identity  and  divestiture  processes  that  sup-
plant  the  incoming  identity  with  a  new  organi-
zationally situated  identity. Total and  quasi-total
institutions  such  as  prisons,  military  and  reli-
crious  organizations,  professional  schools,  and
organizational  clans provide prime examples of
divestiture.  In order  to reconstruct  the  newcom-
er's  social  identity,  such  organizations  ohen  re-
move  symbols  of  newcomer's  previous  identi-
ties;  restrict  or  isolate  newcomers  from  extemal
contact;  disparage  newcomer's  status,  knowl-
edge,  and  ability;  impose  new  identification
symbols; rigidly prescribe and  proscribe  behav-
ior and  punish  infractions; and  reward  assump-
tion  of  the  new  identity  (Fisher,  1986;  Goffman,
1961;  Van  Maanen,  1976,  1978).  In  such  cases
intemalization of organizational values  depends
largely  on  the  extent  of  identification  with  the
organization,  subunit,  or role. Indeed,  the more
the  organization's  identity,  goals,  values,  and
individual  role  requirements  deviate  from  the
societal  mainstream,  the  greater  the  need  for
organizationaUy  situated  identification.

A  second  implication  of  the  social  identifica-
tion perspective stems from  the notion of reifica-
tion.  The  existing  organizational  behavior  liter-
ature does not adequately  explain  how an indi-
vidual  can  identify  with,  or  feel  loyal  and  com-
mitted  to,  an  organization  per  se.  The  implicit
assumption  is that regard  for individuals simply
generalizes  to the  group,  that  interpersonal  re-
lationships  somehow  are  cognitively  aggregated
to  create  an  individual-organization  relationship
(Tumer,  1984).  We  reverse  this  logic  and  argue
that  identification  with  a  group  can  arise  quite
separately from  interpersonal  interaction  end co-
hesion.  In perceiving  the  social  category  as  psy-
chologically  real—as  embodying  characteristics
thought prototypical of its members—the  individ-
ual  can  identify  with  the category  per  se  (I am  a
Marine).  Thus,  identification  provides  a  mecha-
nism  whereby  an  individual  can  continue  to

believe in the integrity of his or her  organizati<i
despite  wrongdoing  by  senior  management  p
can  feel loyal to his or her depxirtment despite i
^
complete  changeover  of personnel. 
Third,  the  social  identification  perspective
also  helps  to  explain  the  growing  interest  i|
symbolic  management  (Pfeffer,  1981) and char<
ismatic  or  transformational  leadership  (Bass
1985).  To the  extent  that  social  identification  I
recognized by managers to relate to such critica
variables  as  organizational  commitment  am
satisfaction,  managers  have a  vested interest ii
managing  symbolic  interactions.  Although  the
coherence of a group's or organization's identity
is  problematic,  we  believe  that symbolic  man-
agement  is designed  to  impxirt  this  identity,  o!
at  least  management's  representation  of  it.
Through  the  manipulation  of  symbols  such  as
traditions, myths, metaphors,  rituals, sagas, he-
roes,  and  physical  setting,  management  ccm
make  the  individual's  membership  salient  and
can  provide  compelling  images  of  what  the
group or organizcrtion  represents  (Pondy,  Frost,.
Morgan,  & Dandridge,  1983).

Interestingly,  Martin,  Feldman,  Hatch,  and
Sitkin  (1983)  noted  that  organizational  cultures
"carry  a  claim  to uniqueness—that  one  institu-
tion  is  unlike  any  other"  (p.  438).  We  contend
that  it  is  precisely  because  identification  is
group-specific 
that  organizations  make  such
claims. It is tacitly understood  by managers  that
a  positive and  distinctive organizational  identity
attracts  the  recognition,  support,  and  loyalty of
not  only  organizational  members  but  other  key
constitutents (e.g.,  shareholders,  customers,  job
seekers),  and  it  is  this  search  for  a  distinctive
identity  that  induces  organizations  to  locus  so
intensely  on  advertising,  names  and  logos,  jar-
gon,  leaders  and  mascots,  and  so  forth.

This  hnk  between  symbolism  and  identifica-
tion  sheds  light  on  the  widespread  interest  in
charismatic  leaders.  Because  charismatic  lead-
ers are  particularly  adept  at manipulating  sym-
bols (Bass,  1985), they are  likely to engender  so-
cial and/or  classical  identification,  that  is,  iden-

28

location  with  the  organization,  the  leader,  or
both. Where the identification is classical, it may
t>e generalized  to the organization  through  the
routinization  of charisma  (Gerth  & Mills,  1946).
Trice and  Beyer  (1986) contrasted  the develop-
tnent  of  two  sociol  movement  organizations
founded  by  charismatic  individuals;  Alcoholics
Anonymous  (AA) and  the National  Council on
Alcoholism  (NCA).  The  charisma  of  the AA's
founder  was routinized  through  an  administra-
tive  structure,  rites  and  ceremonies,  oral  and
written tradition, and so forth,  whereas the cha-
risma  of the  NCA's  founder  was poorly  routin-
ized. The result,  concluded  Trice and Beyer,  is
that the NCA has experienced  greater  difficulty
maintaining  the support of iis members and do-
nors.

Identification  and  ihe  Subunit.  It  should  be
noted,  however,  that the newcomer's  emerging
situationai  definitions  and  self-definitions  are
apt to be  largely subunit-specific.  First,  task in-
terdependencies  and  interp>ersonal  proximity
are  greater  in the individual's  immediate  work
group, suggesting a  greater  need  for, and ease
of, interaction.  Second,  given that people  prefer
to compare  their  emerging  beliefs  with  similar
others (cf.  social  comparison  theory,  Festinger,
19M) and that  interpersonal  and task  differenti-
ation are greater between,  than within, subunits
(Lawrence  & Lorsch,  1967),  it is likely  that  the
newcomer  will look hrst to his or her workgroup
peers. Third, given Interdependence,  proximity,
and  similarity,  the  subunit  may be  viewed  by
members  as a  psychological  group,  thus  facili-
tating  social  influence.  According  to  Turner
(1985;  Hogg  & Turner,  1987),  the  self-stereo-
typing  occasioned  by  psychological  grouping
causes one to expect  attitudinal and  perceptual
agreement  with group  members,  such  that dis-
agreement  triggers  doubt  and,  in  turn,  at-
titudinal/perceptual change. Thus, the newcom-
^rs  F>erceptions  gravitate  toward  those  of  the
group. Finally,  given  the importance of the sit-
uatjonal  definition  to job performance  and the
centrality  of  the  social  'identity  to  the  self-

7 

—"JT"

concept,  it  is likely  that  a  normative  structure
will emerge to regulate and mcdntcan these con-
ceptions.  This  is  consistent  with  Sampson's
(1978)  proposition  that  people  attempt  to man-  •
age  their  lives  in order  to establish  a  sense of
continuity in their identity (identity mastery). The  -
upshot is that immediate groups often  are more
salient "than a more abstract,  complex,  second-
ary  organization"  (Brown,  1969, p.  353).

Organizational  socialization,  then,  can  be
seen  under the SIT perspective as an attempt to
symbolically manage newcomers' self-, ii not sit-
uational,  definitions  by defining  the  organiza-
tion or subunit in terms of distinctive and endur-
ing central  properties. IdentificoBon  with the or-
ganization  provides  (a) a  mechanism  whereby
the  individual  can  reify  the  organization  and
feel  loyal and committed to it per se (i.e.,  apart
from  its  members)  and  (b) an  indirect  path
through  wh^ch  socialization  may  increase  the
intemalization  of organizational values and be-
liefs.

Role  Conilict

Given  the number  of groups  to which  an in-
dividual  might belong,  his or her social  identity
is likely  to consist  of an  ama\gam  of identities,
identities  that  could  impose  inconsistent  de-
mands  upon  that  person.  Further,  these  de-
mands  also may conflict  with  those  of the indi-
vidual's personal  identity (Cheek & Briggs, 1982;
Leary,  Wheeler,  &  Jenkins,  1986). Note that  it is
not the identities per se that conflict, but the val-
ues,  beliefs,  norms,  and  demands  inherent  in
the identities.

In  organizations,  conflicts-between  work-
group,  departmental,  divisional,  and  organiza-
tional  roles  are  somewhat  constrained  by the
nested  character  of these roles; that  is, each hi-
erarchical  level  encompasses  the  fonner  such
that  the  roles  are  connected  in  a  means-end
chain  (March  & Simon,  1958). Accordingly,  the
values and lyehavioral prescriptions  inherent tn
the  organizational  role  tend  to be  a  more ab-

stract and  generalized  version of those  inherent
in  the  workgroup  role.  Nevertheless,  even
nested  identities can  be somewhat  at odds with
one  another  {Rotondi,  1975; Tumer,  1985; Van
Maanen,  1976).  In  the  course  of  assuming  a
given  identity  (e.g.,  department),  the group  be-
comes  more  salient  and  both  intragroup  differ-
ences and intergroup similarities are cognitively
minimized,  thus  rendering  both  lower  order
(e.g.,  workgroup) and  higher  order  (e.g.,  orga-
nization)  identifications  less  likely.  Also,  given
the association between identification  and  inter-
nalization,  a  lack  of  congruence  between  the
goals or expectations of nested  groups  may  im-
pede  joint  identification.  Not surprisingly,  then.
Brown  (1969) found  that  task  interdependencies
and  the  cohesion  of  the  individual's  functional
unit  were  negatively  related  to  organizational
identification  or  intemalization.

We  speculate  that  the  inherent  conflict  be-
tween  organizationally  situated  identities  typi-
cally is not resolved by integrating the  disparate
identities.  First,  given  the  breadth  of  possible
identities,  integration  would  most  likely  prove
cognitively  taxing.  Second,  given  the  often
unique  and  context-specific  demands  of  an
identity,  integration  would  be  likely  to compro-
mise  the  utility of  each  identity  to  its  particular
setting. Instead,  it is maintained  that conflict  be-
tween identities tends to be cognitively  resolved
by ordering,  separating,  or buffering  the identi-
ties.  Suggestions  of  such  processes  abound.
First,  the individual might define  him- or herself
in terms of his or her  most salient  social  identity
(I am a salesman) or personal attribute (I want to
get  ahead);  he  or  she  also  might  develop  a  hi-
erarchy  of  prepotency  so  that  conflicts  are  re-
solved  by deferring  to the most subjectively  im-
portant or valued identity (Stryker & Serpe,  1982;
Thoits,  1983). Adler  and  Adler  (1987)  described
how varsity basketball players resolved the con-
flict  between  their  athletic  and  academic  roles
by defining  themselves  as athletes  first  and  stu-
dents second and by reducing their  involvement
in academics  accordingly.  Second,  the  individ-

ual  might  defer  to the  identity  that  experience^
the  greatest  environmental  press  and  might
minimize,  deny,  or  rationalize  the  conflict  (IfT
hadn't  bribed  the  official,  I would  have  lost  the
contract). This is akin  to Janis and  Mann's (197y!(i
notion  of  defensive  avoidance.  Third,  the  indi-
vidual  might  cognitively  decouple  the  identities
so  that  conflicts  simply  are  not  perceived  (cf.j
value  separation,  Steinbruner,  1974).  Laurent
(1978) discussed  how  managers  often  are  reluc^
tant  to  inform  subordinates  about  critical  mat-
ters,  yet  as  subordinates,  they  complain  about*
the  failure  of  their  own  managers  to  inform
them.  Finally,  the  individual  might  comply  se-
quentially  with  conflicting  identities  so  that  the'
inconsistencies  need  not  be  resolved  for  any
given  action  (cf.  sequenfiaJ  attention.  Cyert  &I
March,  1963). An example is provided by Morton
Thiokol,  the  manufacturer  of  the  faulty  solid
rocket  booster  that  led  to  the  1986 crash  of  the
space  shuttle  ChallengeT.  A senior  engineer  of
the  company  heljDed  reverse  a  decision  not  to
launch  the  Challenger  when  he  was  asked  to
"take  off  his  engineering  hat  and  put  on  his
management  hat"  (Presidential  Commission,
cited in Vaughan,  1986, p. 23).

Related  to  this  idea,  Thoits  (1983)  suggested
that  the  benefits  of  holding  multiple  roles  (role
accumulation),  including  resource  accumula-
tion,  justification  for  failure  to meet  certain  role
expectations,  and  supjjort  against  role failure or
loss,  are  more  likely  to  accrue  if  identities  re-
main segregated:  "The actor's  resources  will  be
valuable  to  others  who  do  not  share  those  re- j
sources  themselves,  the  legitimacy  of  excuses
cannot  be  checked,  and  the  consequences  of  ,
role failure or loss can  be contained more within
one sphere  of activities" (p.  184).

To the extent this argument  is valid, it suggests
that one's identity is an  amalgam  of loosely cou-
pled  identities  and  that  "the  popular  notion  of
the self-concept  as  a  unified,  consistent,  or  per-
ceptually  'whole' psychological  structure  is pos-
sibly  ill-conceiv^"  (Gergen,  1968,  p.  306). This
is consistent  with  evidence  from  SIT that  partic-

80

social  identities  are <rued  or  activated  by
relevant  settings  (Tumer,  1982,  1985) (cf.  situa-
tionalidentity,  Goffman,  1959; subiden(i(y, HaH,
ig71; hard  vs. soft identity. Van Maanen,  1976).
ji^ost  individuals  slide  fairly  easily  from  one
identity  to  another.  Conflict  is  perceived  only
when the disparities are mode  salient  (Greene,
ig78). Thus, in SIT role conflict  is endemic to so-
cial  functioning,  but  for  the  most  part  remains
latent:  Only  when  individuals  are  forced  to si-
multaneously don different  hats does their facil-
ity  for  cognitively  managing  conflict  break
down.

The argument also suggests that when an  in-
dividual compartmentalizes  identities, he or she
may  fail  to  integrate  the  values,  attitudes,
norms, and lessons inherent in the various iden-
tities. This  in  tum  suggests  the  likelihood  of (a)
double-standards and apparent hypocrisy (illus-
trated  by  Laurent's,  1978,  observation)  and  (b)
selective  forgetting.  For  example,  in  assuming
the identity of foreman,  one may eventually for-
get the values that were appropriate to the prior
identity  of  worker  that  now  contradict  the  de-
mands  of  the  new  identity  (e.g.,  Lieberman,
1956}; that is, one unleams tendencies that inter-
fere with the ability to embrace the new,  valued
identity.  Perhaps,  then,  wisdom  is  little  more
than the ability  to remember  the lessons of pre-
vious identities,  and  integrity is the ability to in-
tegrate and  abide  by  them.

Istergroup  Relations

For  pedagogical  purposes,  we  assume  an
ideographic  organization,  that  is,  one  com-
prised  of  subunits  in  which  members  of  each
share  a  social  identity  specific  to their  subunit.
T^s  assumption  allows  us to speak of a  shared
subunit  or  group  identity,  even  though  in com-
plex organizations  the  degree  and  ioci of  con-
sensus remains  problematic.

Given  this  assumption,  SIT  suggests  that
iJch  intezgroup  conilict  stems  from  the  very
that  groups  exist,  thus  providing  a  fairly
Pessimistic view  of Intergroup  harmony  (Tajfel.

1982). More specifically,  in SITTf ffi argued  that
(a) given  tKe relational and  comparative  nature
of  social  Identifications,  social  identities  are
maintained  primarily  by  Intergroup  compari-
sons  and "(b) given  the  desire  to  enhance  seli-
esteem,  groups  seeJc  positive  differences  be-
tween themselves and  reference  groups  (Tajfel,
1978,  1981; Snaith,  1983). Experimental  and  field'
research  do  suggest  that  groups  are  willing  to
sacrifice large monetary gains that do not estab-
lish  a  positive  difference  between  groups  for
smaller  gains  that  do  (Brewer  & Silver,  1978;
Brown,  1978; Tumer,  Brown, & Tajfel  1979), that
in-group  members  adopt  more  extreme  posi-
tions  after  comparison  with  an  out-group  than
with  fellow  in-group memberi-^Reid,  1983),  and
that members prefer and  selectively recall  infor-
mation  that  suggests  intergrouS.  differences
rather  than  similarities (Wilder,  cited  in WUder,
1981; wader  & Allen,  1978). This  suggests  that
groups  have  a  vested  interest  in  perceiving  or
even  provoking  greater  differentiation  than  ex-
ists and disparaging  the reference  group on  this
basis  (ci.  sociai  vs.  instrumental  competition.
Tumer,  1975). Further,  this tendency  is  exacer-
bated  t-y contingencies  that  make  the  in-group
per  se salient  (Tumer,  1981; WUder,  1981), such
as  a  threat  to the  group's  domain  or  resources
(Brown  & Ross.  1982; Brown  et  al.,  1986) or,  in
Tajfel's (1978) terms, where the group's identity is
insecure.

The tendency  toward  subunit  identification  in
organizations,  discussed  above,  suggests  that
subunits  tend  io be  the  primary  iocus  of  Inter-
group conflict.  This tendency  is exacerbated  by
competition  between  subunits  for  scarce  re-
sources and  by reward and communication sys-
tems that  typically  focus  on  subunit  functioning
and  performance  (Friedkin  •&  Simpson,  1985;
March  & Simon,  1958). As noted,  however,  field
research  regarding  the  relationship  between
subunit  differentiation  and  identification  has
been  inconclusive  because  it  has  confounded
the  basis  of  subunit  formation  (functional  vs.
market) and  extent of interdependence  (pooled.

sequential,  reciprocal).  Further,  Brown  and
Williams  (1984) suggested  that  individuals who
regard  their group identity as synonymous with
their organizational identity are unlikely to view
other  groups negatively.  lust as a  strong  group
identity unifies group members, so too should  a
strong  organizational  identity  unify  organiza-
tional  members.  This  is consistent  with  experi-
mental  research  (Kramer  & Brewer,  1984) and
the  earlier  discussion  of  holographic  organiza-
tions.

However,  where the organizational identity is
not strong and groups are clearly  differentiated
and  bounded,  the tendency  toward  biased in-
tergroup comparisons  suggests several  effects.
Effects  of  Biased  Intergroup  Comparisons.
First, the fn-group may develop negative stereo-
types  of the out-group  and  deindividuate  and
depersonalize  its members  (Horwitz  & Rabbie,
1982; Wilder,  1981). Hewstone, Jaspars, ^and Lal-
Ijee  (1982)  studied  British  schoolboys  from  pri-
vate and state secondary schools because of the
history of conflict between the two systems. They
found  that  the groups  differed  in  their  percep-
tions of themselves and each other, and that out-
group  perceptions  were  generally  negative.
What's  more,  these  perceptions  included  self-
serving  (or  group-serving)  implicit  theories of
why  the groups  differed  and attribution  biases
that  rationalized  the  successes  and  failures of
each  group  (cf.  social  attribution.  Deschamps,
1983).

This suggests a second effect  of in-group bias:
It justifies  maintaining  social distance and sub-
ordinating  the  out-group  (Smith,  1983; Sunar,
1978). The in-group is seen as deserving  its suc-
cesses  and  not  its  failures,  while  the  opposite
obtains  for  the  out-group.  Thus,  Perrow  (1970)
found  that  members  of  functional  subunits
across  12 industrial  firms were less likely to crit-
icize the performance of their own unit and more
likely  to advocate  that  their  unit  receive  addi-
tional power than were members from any other
subunit  fn  their  particular  organization.  Simi-
larly,  Bates  and  White  (1961)  sampled  board

members,  administrators,  doctors,  and
from  13 hospitals and found  that each  group tn
lieved  it should  have  more  authority  than
other  groups were  willing  to allow,  and Brow
et al. (1986) found  that  members  of five  depaj
ments  in  an  industrial  organization  tended t
rate  their  own department  as  contributing th
most to the company.

Third,  given  symbolic  interactionism,  the de

sire  for  positive  group  differentiation,  and
stereotyping  of  self,  in-group,  and  out-group
emerging biases may soon become a contagio
(Turner,  1984) that  can  be  easily  mobilize
against  the out-group.  In-group  members  ofte
come to share pejorative  perceptions of the ou
group  and  experience  the  real  or  imagine
slights  against  other  members  as  their  own
Thus,  major  confbcts  often  cause  an  organiza
tion  to polarize  into  rival  camps,  where,  if ai
individual  is not on  one side,  he  or she is
lieved to be on the other  side (Mintzberg, 1983
in the above study of hospitals. Bates and Whi
(1961) found  that  where  two groups  disagreed
on  which  should  have  greater  authority  over a
particular  issue,  respondents  from  each  group
rated  the amount  of  authority  their  own group
should  have  higher  than  for issues  which  werej
nof in dispute, and gave the iowes( rating to the!
group with which they disagreed. The initial dis-,
agreement  had polarized  each  group's percep-
tion of the situation.

Finally,  such  competition  exacerbates  the
above  tendencies  because  it  threatens  the
group  and  its  identity.  Thus,  as  Horwitz  and
Rabbie  (1982)  noted,  "Both  experimental  and
naturalistic  observations  suggest  that  hostility
erupts  more  readily  between  [groups] than be-
tween  individuals"  (p. 269). In-group  and out-
group  relations  may be marked  by competition
and  hostility even  in the absence  of "objective"
sources  of  conflict  (e.g.,  scarce  resources). In-
deed,  Tumer (1978) found  the more  comparable
the  out-group,  the  greater  the  in-group  bias.
Hence, organizational  subunits may claim to be
positively  differentiated  precisely  because  they

are not.  This contrasts sharply  with the conven-
tional  view  that  group  conflict  reflects  competi-
t]on over  rewards extemal  to the intergroup sit-
uation  (cf.  realistic  group  conflict theory,  Cam-
pbeU,  1965; Tajfel  & Tumer,  1985).

Qualifications 

to  Intergroup  Comparisons.
The  dynamics  of  intergroup  comparison,  how-
ever,  need  to be  qualified  by the  relative status
of the groups. The identity of a low-status group
is implicitly  threatened  by  a  high-status  group,
hence  the  defensive  biases  in  differentiation
noted  earlier.  A high-status group,  however,  is
less  likely  to  feel  threatened  and,  thus,  less  in
need  of  positive  affirmation  (Tajfel,  1982;  van
Knippenberg,  1984). Accordingly,  while  a  low-
status group  (such as a  noncritical staff  function
or cadre  of  middle  managers)  may  go  to great
lengths  to  differentiate  itself  from  a  high-status
comparison  group  (such  as  a  critical  line  func-
tion  or  senior  management),  the  latter  may  be
relatively unconcemed about such  comparisons
and  form  no  strong  impression  about  the  low-
status group. This indifference  of the high-status
group  is,  perhaps,  the  greatest  threat  to  the
identity of the low-status group because the lat-
(er's identity remains socially  unvalidated.

Although  the  previous  discussion  suggests
that  subunits  engage  endlessly  in  invidious
comparisons,  three  streams  of  research  on SIT
suggest  othervrise.  First,  just  as  individuals  se-
lect similar others for social comparison,  groups
also  restrict  their  comparisons  to similar,  proxi-
mal,  or  salient  out-groups  (Tajfel  & Turner,
1985). Thus, the purchasing  department  may be
relatively  unconcemed  with  the  machinations
of.  say,  the  shipping  or  human  resources  de-
partments-

Second,  van  Knippenberg  (1984)  maintained
that  individuals  are  capable  of  making  social
comparisons  on  muJ(ipie  dimensions,  and  that
niutual appreciation  is possible where individu-
ais are  supjerior  on complementary  or  different
:}  dimensions.  The  individuals  validate  each  oth-
er's relative superiority. Analogously, a  field ex-
periment  by  Mummendey  pnd  Schreiber  (1984)

involving polibcaJ parties found that in-group fo-
voritism was strong on dimensions regarded  as
important to the in-group, but that ou(-group fa-
voritism existed on dimensions  regarded  as  un-
important  to  the  in-group  but  important  to  the
out-group. It is quite conceivable that  differenti-
ated subunits would acknowledge one another's
differential  expertise  without  necessarily  com-
promising positive  differentiation.

Finally,  research  on experimental  and  ethnic
groups  indicates  that  groups  are  less  likely  to
evidence ethnocentrlsm and  defensive  biases if
differences  in  the  distribution  of  scarce  re-
sources  or  the  outcomes  of  sociai  comparisons
are  viewed  by  the  subordinate  ^ o up  as legiti-
mate  or institutionalized (Caddick;  1982; Tajfel &
Tumer,  1985). Indeed,  in  such  cases*ihe  group
may  intemalize  the  wider  social  evaluation  of
themselves  as  inferior  and  less  deserving.  By
accident or design, systems of authority and ex-
pertise  in  organizations  (Mintzberg,  1983)  often
serve  precisely  this  legitimating  function,  sug-
gesting  some stability in intergroup  relations.

In summary,  SIT argues that in the absence  ol
a  st'-ong  organizational  identity,  the  desire  for
favorable  intergroup  comparisons  generates
much conflict between differentiated  and  clearly
bounded  subunits.  This  is  especially  so  if  a
group's status is low or insecure.  However,  this
conflict  may  be  mitigated  to  the  extent  that
groups compare themselves on different  dimen-
sions  or  view  the  outcomes  of  comparisons  as
legitimate or  institutionalized.

Implications for  Research

Given  the paucity of research  on  SIT In orga-
nizations,  a  research  agenda  'might  focus  on
three  objectives.  First,  in  view  of  the  frequent
confusion  of  organizational  identification  with
such  related  constructs as  commitment,  loyalty,
and  intemalization,  the discriminability  of iden-
tification  should  be  established.  Mael's  (1988)
confirmatory  factor  analysis  of  the  Organiza-
tional  Ck)mmifment  Questionnaire  and  his  new

measure  of  organizational  identification  offer  a
promising  start.  However,  given  the  argument
that  individuals  often  have  multiple  (and  con-
flicting)  identities  within  the  organization,  re-
search  should  focus  on  salient  subgroups  as
well  as  the organizcrtion  per se. Indeed,  insofar
as  identification  facilitates  commitment and  the
like,  researchers  should  consider  investigating
commitment  itself at the subgroup level. Recent
work  on  duaJ  and  multiple  commitments  is in-
structive in  this regard  (e.g.,  Reichers,  1986).

A second  focus of research  might be the pro-
posed  antecedents  and  consequences  of  social
identification.  Although experimental and cross-
sectional  field  research  have  substantiated  the
social-psychological  premises  of  SIT,  the  dy-
namics  of  identification  have  not  been  estab-
lished.  Accordingly,  longitudinal  field  research
that  focuses  on  a  variety  of  newly  created  sub-
units or organizations or on organizational new-
comers  is  strongly  recommended.  Such  a  de-
sign  would  help to explore (a) how the anteced-
ents interact  to influence  identification,  (b) what
antecedents  (if any) are  necessary  or  sufficient,
(c) the sequencing  and  timing of effects,  and (d)
if threshold  conditions exist.

Finally, although the applications of SIT to or-
ganizational  behavior  were  not  intended  to  be
exhaustive,  they do suggest several  specific  av-
enues  for field  research.  For one.  the role of or-
ganizational  socialization  can  be  assessed  by
structured  observation  of  the  interplay  among
symbolic  interactions,  symbolic  management,
and  the  emergence  of  social  identities.  Of  par-
ticular  interest  are  the  posited  effects  that  iden-
tification  has on a  person's intemalization  of or-
ganizational  values and  on his or her  reification
of  the  organization.  Also  important  are  the
mechanisms  by  which  identification  with  lead-
ers  becomes  generalized  to  the  organization.
For another, the disjointed resolution of role con-
flicts can  be  evaluated  by verbal  protocol anal-
ysis of conflict-laden  decisions  made  over time.
Of  interest  here  are  the  factors  associated  with
selecting a means of resolution, the possibility of

stable styles of resolution,  the effects  of  differen
means,  and,  more  generally,  the  degree  tc
which  various  identities  are  cognitively
grated,  the relative salience and  priority of
ious identities across organizations, subunits, hi,
erarchical levels, and individuals, and the inter-
action among role change, identity change, and
selective forgetting.  Finally,  the roles that social
identification and  comparison processes have in
intergroup conflict can  be gauged  by analyzing
relevant  within-  and  between-group  interac
tions. Research is particularly scarce on the fac-
tors that affect  the perception of group insecurity
(and.  hence,  the  desire  for  pxssitive  differentia-
tion),  the  selection  of  reference  groups,  the di
mensions  for  intergroup  comparison,  and  the
perceived  legitimacy  and  institutionalization o;
the organizational  status  quo.  From  an  organi
zational  development  perspective,  research
should  focus  on  the  fairly  unique  means,  sug
gested  by  SIT,  of  reducing  dysfunctional  inter
group  conflict,  such  as  enhancing  the  salience
and  value  of  the  organizational  identity,  in-1
creasing  group  security  or  at  least  legitimating
necessary  intergroup  differences,  and  individu-
ating out-group  members.

Conclusion

According  to  social  identity  theory,  the  indi-
vidual deflnes  him- or  herself  partly  in  terms of
salient group memberships.  Identification  is the
perception  of oneness  with  or  belongingness to
a  group,  involving  direct  or  vicarious  experi-
ence of its successes and  failures.  Group identi-
fication  and  favoritism  tend  to occur even in the
absence  of  strong  leadership  or  member  inter-
dependency,  interaction,  or  cohesion.  Identi-
fication  is  associated  with  groups  that  are  dis-
tinctive, prestigious,  and  in competition with, or
at  least aware  of,  other  groups,  although  it can
be  fostered  by  even  random  assignment  to  a
group.  Identification  can  persist  tenaciously
even  when  group  affiliation  is personally  pain-
ful,  other  menlbers  are  personally  disliked,  and

34

group  faUure  is likely.  The concept  of identilica-
tion,  however,  describes  only  the  cognition  of
oneness,  nof  the  behaviors  and  affect  that  may
serve  as  antecedents  or  consequences  of  the
cognition.  Identification  induces  the  individual
to engage  in,  and  derive  satisfaction  from,  ac-
tivities congruent  with  the identity,  to view him-
OT herself  as  an  exemplar  of the  group,  and  to
reinforce  factors  conventionally  associated  with
group  formation  (e.g..  cohesion,  interaction).
This perspective,  applied  to several  domains of
organizational  behavior,  suggests  that;

1.  Organizational  socialization  can be under-
stood  in part  as an attempt to symbolically
manage  the newcomer's desire for an iden-
tity by defining  the organization  or subunil
in terms of distinctive and enduring  central
characteristics.  Identification  enables  the
newcomer to reify the organization and feel
ioyal and committed to it per se, and facili-
tates  the  intemalizatian  of  organizational
values and beliefs.

2.  Individuals  have  multiple,  loosely  coupled
identities,  and  inherent  conflicts  between
their demands are typically not resolved by
cognitively integrating the identities, but by
ordering,  separating,  ar  buffering  them.
This compartmentalization  of identities sug-
gests  the  possibility  ol  double  standards,
apparent  hypocrisy,  and  selective  forget-
ting.

3. 

in ideographic organizations,  the desire for
a  salutary  social identity predisposes  orga-
nizational  subunits to intergroup conflict on
characteristics that are mutually compared.
Thus,  intergroup conllict may arise  even in
the  absence  of  such  objective  causes  as
scarce  resources.

In summary,  the concept  of ielentiiication  has
been  neglected  in organizational  research.  The
reformulated  conception  of identification  as  per-
ceived  oneness  with a  group,  suggested  by  so-
cial identity theory,  offers  a  fresh  perspective on
a  number  of critical  organizational  issues,  only
a  few of which  have  been  explored  here.

References

Adler,  P., & Adler,  P. A.  (1987)  Role  conilict  and identity
salience: College athletics and the academic  role. Social
Science Journal. 24,  443-455.

Albert. S..  &  Whetten.  D. A. (1985) Organizcrtional  identity.
b  L. L. Cummings &  B. M. Staw (Eds.), flesearch in orpa-
nizationa! bebavioi  (Vol. 7, pp. 263-295). Greenwich, CT:
lAI Press.

Allen. V. L., Wilder. D. A., & Atbnson,  M. L (1983) Multiple
group  membership end social  identity.  In T. R. SariDin  &
K  E. Scheibe (Eds.), Sludies in social identity (pp. 92-115).
Nev,- York: Praeger.

Ashlonh.  B. E. (1985) Cbmate  lormation:  Issues and exten-
s:ons. Academy  o/ManagemenI  fleview,  10, 837-847.

Banduro.  A,, & Walters,  R. H. (1963) Social  learning and
personality development.  New York: Holt, Rjnehart & Win-
ston.

B. M. (1985) Leadership and performance  beyond ex-

peOolions.  New York: Free Press.
=5es. F. L, & White. R. F. (1961) Dilferential  percepbons of
ajthonty  in hospitals.  }ournai oi Health and Human Be-
hcn-iot.  2. 262-267.

:.  H S., & Ca^jer.  J. W. (i956) The development o(

identification with an occupation. American Journal of So-
ciology. 61, 289-298.

Billig, M., & Tajfel,  H. (1973) Social categorization and simi-
larity in intergroup behavior.  European Jouwal  of Social
Psychology. 3, 27-52.

Brewer, M. B. (1979) In-group bias in the minimal intergroup
situation:  A cognitive-motivational  analysis.  Psj^oiogi-
cal BuUetin.  86, 307-324.

Brewer. M. B.. & Silver. M. (1978) In-group bias as a function -
ol  task  charocterisUcs.  European  Journal of Social  Psy-
chology. 8, 393-400.

Brown, M, E. (1969) Identilicatjon  and some conditions of or-
ganizational  involvement.  Adminisfrative  Sdence  Quar-
terly. 14, 346-355,

Brown,  R- (1978)  Divided  we fall:  An analysis of relations
between sections ol a factory  workforce,  ln H. Tajiel (Ed.),
DUierenliaiion  between  social groups: Studies  in tbe so-
cial psychology  of iniergroup relations {pp. 395-429). Lon-
don: Academic Press.

Brown, R. Condor. S., Mathews, A., Wade. G., & Williams,
I  (1986) Explaining intergroup differentiation  in an indus-
trial  organi2a«on.  Journal of Occupational  Psychology.
59, 273-286.  *

35

Brown,  R.  ].. & Ross, G.  F. (1982) The battle for  acceptance:
An  invostigation  into the  dynamics  of  intergroup  behav-
ior.  In H. Tajiel  (Ed.), Sodai  identify  and  intergroup  rela-
tions  (pp.  155-178).  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge
UnlveTBity Press.

Brown,  R.,  & Williams,  ].  (1984)  Group  identification:  The
same  thing  to all  people? Human Relations,  37, 547-564.

Fox, A. (1980) The meaning of work. In G. Esland  & G.
man (Eds.), The politics of work and  occupcrfaons (pp.
191). Toronto: University cl Toronto Press.

Friedkin, N. E., & Simpson, M.  ]. (1985) Effects  of competlticd
on  members'  identification  with  their  subunits.  A d m l i^
(rafive  Sdence  Quarterly,  30. 377-394.

Gammons,  P. (1986, November 3) Living and  dying  with tht^

Brown,  R.  W.  (1986) Soda/psychology,  the  second  edifion.

Woe Sox. Sports  Illustrated,  pp.  22-23.

New York: Free  Press.

Caddick,  B. (1982) Perceived  illegitimacy and  intergroup  re-
lations.  In  H.  Tajfel  (Ed.),  Social  identity  and 
intergroup
relations (pp.  137-154). Cambridge, England:  Cambridge
University  Press,

Campbell,  D. T. (1965) Ethnocentric and  other altruistic  mo-
tives. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska symposium  on  motiva-
tion (Vol.  13, pp. 283-311). Lincoln: University of  Nebraska
Press,

Chatman,  I. A.,  Bell,  N. E.,  & Etaw,  B. M.  (1986) The  man-
aged  thought: The role of self-justification  and  impression
management  in organizational settings.  In H. P.  Sims, Jr.,
D. A, Gioia 8t Associates (Eds.), The thinking  organization:
Dynamics  of organizational  social cognition (pp.  191-214).
San  Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Cheek,  I. M.,  & Briggs,  S.  R.  (1982) Self-consciousness  and
aspects of idenbty. Joumal  of Research in Personality,  16,

401-408. 

V5^-t-:^'^CS;;.i.:^

Coe,  R.  M. (1965) Self-conception  and  professional  trairiing.

Nursing  flesearch,  14, 49-52-

Cyert.H.  M., &March,I.  G.  (I963)Abeh0viora;(heoryo/(he

firm.  Englewood  Cliffs.  NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Denhardt,  R.  B. (1987) Images of death and  slavery  in  orga-

nizational  life. Journal of Management.  13. 529-541.

Deschamps,  J. C. (1983) Social attribution. In I. Jaspars,  F, D.
Fincham,  & M.  Hewstone  (Eds.),  Attribution  theory  and
research:  Conceptual,  developmental  and  social  dimen-
sions  (pp.  223-240),  London: Academic  Press.

Dion. K. L. (1973) Cohesiveness as a determinant oi ingroup-
outgroup  bias. Journal o! Personality and  Sociol  Psychol-
ogy.  28,  163-171.

Dion,  K. L. (1979) Intergroup  conflict  and  intra-group  cohe-
siveness. In W.  G.  Austin  &  S. Worchel  (Eds.),  The  social
psychology  of  intergroup  relations  (pp.  211-224),  Mon-
terey,  CA: Brooks/Cole,

Festinger.  L  (1954) A theory of sodal comparison  processes.

Human  fielations.  7,  117-140.

Fisher, C.  D. (1986) Organizational socialization: An  integra-
tive  review.  In  K. M.  Rowland  & G.  K.  Ferris  (Eds,),  fle-
aearch  in personnel  and  human  resources  management
(Vol. 4. pp.  101-145). Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press.

Foote,  N.  N, (1951) Identification  as  the basis  for a  theory  ol
motivation.  American  SodoJogico/fleview,  16,  14-21.

Gergen,  K, J, (1968) Personal  consistency  and  the  presenta-

tion of sell. In C. Gordon  & K. J. Gergen  (Eds.), The sellbs*
social interaction  (Vol.  1. pp.  299-308).  New York: Wiley.

Gerth,  H. H..  & Mills, C.  W.  (Eds.) (1946) From  Max  Weber,
Essays  in sociology.  New  York: (I>xford  University  Press.

Goffcman.  E. (1959) The presentation  oi sell  in  everyday  life.
•

Garden  City.  NY: Doubleday. 

V 

Goffman.  E. (1961) AsyJums; Essays on  the social  situation ol^
mental patients  and  other Inmates. Garden  City,  NY: Dou-
bleday.

Gould,  S.  B.  (1975)  Ogar^lzaffonaJ  identification  and  com-
mitment  in  two  environments.  Unpiiblished  doctoral  dis-;
;
seriation,  Michigan  State  University,  Lansing. 

Greene,  C.  N.  (1978)  Identification  modes  of  professional*'
Relationship  with  iormalization.  role  strain,  and  alien-
ation. Academy  of Management  Joumal.  21, 486-492.

Hall,  D. T.  (1971) A theoretical  model  of  career  subidentity
development  in  organizational  settings,  OrganizafionotJ
Behavior  and  Human  Performance,  6,  50-76.

Hall,  D. T,  Schneider,  B..  & Nygren,  H. T.  (1970)  Personal
factors  in organizational  identification.  Adminisiraiive  Sci-
ence  Quarierly.  15.  176-190.

Hamilton,  D. L, (Ed.)(1981)CognitiVe processes in stereotyp-

ing  and  intergroup  behavior.  Hillsdale,  N]: Erlbaum.

Hewstone,  M,,  Jaspars,  I.,  & Lolljee,  M.  (1982) Social  repre-
sentations,  sodal attribution  and  soda]  idenbty: The inter*
group images of 'public' and  'comprehensive'  schoolboys.
European  Journal of Social  Psychology.  12. 241-269.

Hoelter,  J, W,  (1985)  A structural  theory  of  personal  consis-

tency.  Social  Psychology  Quarterly.  48,  118-129.

Hogan,  R. (1976) Personality  theory:  The  personological  tiu-

dition.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Hogg,  U  A.,  & Tumer,  I.  C,  (1985) Interpersonal  attraction,
social  identification  and  psychological  group  formation.
European  Journal of Social  Psychology.  15, 51-66.

Hogg.  M. A.,  & Tumer,  J. C.  (1987) Social  identity  and  con-
formity: A theory of referent  informational  influence.  In W,
Doise  & S.  Moscovid  (Eds.),  Current  Issues  in  European
social  psychology  fVol.  2,  pp,  139-182).  Cambridge.  En-
gland:  Cambridge  University  Press.

Horwitz,  M.,  & Rabbie,  J. M.  (1982) Individuality  and

36

bership in the inlergroup system. In H. Tajfel  (Ed.).  Social
identity  and  intergroup  relations  (pp.  241-274),  Cam-
bridge,  England: Cambridge University Press.

Jackall, R. (1978) Workers in a labyrinth: Jobs and survival in
a bank  bureaucracy.  Montdair, NJ: Allanheld,  Osmun.

}anis. 1. L.. & Mann, L  (1977) Dedsian making: A psycholog-
ical analysis  of  conflict, choice,  and  commitment.  New
York: Free Press.

Kanter, H. M. (1977)Someeffectsof  proportions on group life:
Skewed sex ratios and  responses lo token women, Amer-
ican Joumal  of Soa'ology. 82, 965-990.

Katz, D.,  & Kahn,  R  L  (1978) The social psychology  of or-

ganizations (2nd ed,). New York: Wiley.

Katz. R.  (1980) Time and  work: Toward  an  integrative per-

spective. In B. M. Staw & L  L. Cummings (Eds.), Research
in  organizational  behavior  (Vol. 2.  pp.  81-127).  Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.

Kelman.  H. C.  (1961) Processes  of  opinion  change.  Public

Opinion  Quarterly. 25, 57-78.

Kets de  Vries,  M. F. R.  & Miller,  D. (1984) The neurotic or-
ganization,- Diagnosing  and  changing  counterproductive
styles of management.  San  Fnmdsco: Jossey-Bass.

Krcmer. R.  M.. 8c Brewer, M- B. (1984) Effects of group iden-
tity  on  resource  use  in  a  simulated  commons  dilemma.
Journal  of  Personality and  Social Psychology,  46.  1044-

^ 

1 0 5 7. 

• 
Laurent. A. (1978) Managerial subordinacy: A neglected as-
pect  of organizational  hierarchies. Academy  of Manage-
ment  Rev-iew. 3. 220-230.

: * ' • • ' " ; " ;.

•"• 

' 

Lawrence,  P. R.,  & Lorsch.  J. W.  (1967) Organization and
environment:  Managing  differentiation  and  integration.
Boston: Harvard  University Press.

Leary. M  R., Wheeler,  D. S.. & Jenkins, T  B. (1986) Aspects
ol identity  and  behavioral  preference:  Studies of occupa-
tional  and  recreational  choice.  Social  Psychology  Quar-
te;Jy. 49, 11-18.

Lee.  S. M  (1971)  An  empirical  analysis  of  organizational
identiiicolion. Academy o/Management  Journal,  14,  213-

Un-,=.ne. G..  Kastereztein,  ].. &  Pereonnaz.  B. (1978) Sodal
d:fJerentiaton,  ln  H. Tajie! (Ed.), DiWerentiation  between
foaa]  groups: Studies  in  the  social psychology  of inter-
projp  relations (pp. 269-300). London: Academic Press.
•^-rison,  H.  (1970) A psychologist  diagnoses  merger  fail-
ures  Harvard Business fieWew, 48(2), 139-147.

.  S.  (1956) The effects  of changes  in  roles on the
<Kt:tudes of role occupants. Human  HeJafions, 9, 385-402.
Locksley.  A., Orltz, V., &  Hepbum,  C. (1980) Sodal ccrtego-
raauon  and  discriminatory  behavior:  Extinguishing  the

minimal  intergioup  discrimination  effect.  Journal  of  Per-
sonality an"d Soaal  Psychology,  39, 773-783.

Mael.  F.  (1988) Organizational  identification:  Construct r»-  \
definition  and  a  field  application  with  organizational  >
alumni.  Unpublished  doctoral  di^rlation.  Wayne  State
University, Detroit.

March.  I. G.,  & Simon,  H. A.  (1958)  Organizations.  New

York: Wiley.

Martin. J., Feldman, M. S., Hatch, M, J., & Sitkin, S.  B. (1983)
The uniqueness paradox in organizational stories. Admin-
istrative Sdence  Quarterly.  28, 438-453.

Martin,  J..  8t  Siehl,  C.  (1983)  Organizational  culture  and
counterculture: An uneasy  symbiosi5._Organizational Dy-
namics,  12(2). 52-64.

Mintzberg,  H.  (1983)  Power  in  and  around  organizations.

Englewood  Cliffs,  N]: Prenbce-Hall.

Moriimer, J. T,  &  Simmons. R. G. (1978) Adult sodalization.

In  R  H  Tumer.  J.  Coleman,  & R. C.  Fox (Eds.), Annual  :
review  of sociology (Vol. 4,  pp.  421-454).  Palo Alto, CA:
Annual Reviews.

Mowday,  R. T,  Steers,  R. M.,  & Porter,  L  W.  (1979)  The
measurement  of  organizational  commitmenl.  Journal of
VocaUonal Behavior.  4. 224-247.

Mummendey.  A..  & Schreiber,  H. I.  (1984)  "'Differenf  li^t 
means  "better":  Some  obvious  and  some  hidden  path-
ways to in-group favouritism.  British Joumal of Social Psy-
chology,  23. 363-368. 

Oaker  G.,  & Brown, R. (1986) Intergroup relations in a  hos- 
pitai setting: A furiher  test of social identity theory. Human
Belations. 39. 767-778.

.

j

;

Oakes  P. ]., 8t Tumer,  J. C. (1980) Social categorization  and
intergroup behavior: Does minimal intergroup discrimina-
tion make sodal  identity more posibve? European  Journal
o/SodaJ  Psychology,  10, 295-301.

Oakes.  P.,  & Tumer,  J. C.  (1986) EXstincbvenes and  the  sa-
lience  of  sodal  category  memberships:  Is there  an  auto
mabc perceptual  bias towards novelty? European Journal
ofSodai  Psychology,  16, 325-344.

O'Reaiy  C,  ID, & Chatman.  J.  (1986)'Organizabonal  com-
mitment  and  psychological  attachment:  The  elieds  of
compliance,  identification,  and  intemalizaiion  on  proso-
dal behavior. Journal o/AppliedPsychology,  71, 492-499.

Ouchi. W. G.  (1981) Theory Z. How American  business  can

meet  the Japanese  chaUenge.  New York: Avon.

Patchen  M  (1970) Participation,  achievement  and  involve-
ment on  the Jo^. Englewood  Clifis,  NJ: Prentice-HaU.

Perkins  D. N. TT, Nieva,  V, F..  & Lawler,  E. E.,  DI. (1983)
Manoging  creation: The chaUenge  of building  a new  or-
ganization.  New York: Wiley.

Perrow,  C.  (1970) Departmental  power  and  perspectives 4n

37

industrial  firms.  In  M. N.  Zald  (Ed.),  Power  in  organiza-
tions: Proceedings  of the first annual  Vanderbilt Sociology
Conteience  (pp. 59-89). Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt Univer-
sity Press.

Pfeffer,  J.  (1981) Management  as  symbolic  action;  The cre-
ation  and  maintenance  of  organizational  paradigms.  In
L. L. Cummings  & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organi-
zational  behavioT  (Vol.  3,  pp.  1-52). Greenwich,  CT: JAI
Press.

Pondy,  L. R.,  Frost,  P. J.,  Morgan,  G.,  & Dandridge,  T. C.
(Eds.)  (1983) Organizafjonai  symbolism.  Greenwich,  CT:
JAI Press.

Reichers,  A. E.  (1985) A review  and  reconceptualization  of
organizational  commitment.  Academy  oi  Management
Review,  10, 465-476.

Reichers,  A.  E.  (1986) Conllict  and  organizational  commit-

ments. Journal of Applied  Psychology,  71, 508-514.

Reichers,  A. E, (1987) An interactionist  perspective on  new-
comer  socialization  rates. Academy  of Management  Re-
view,  12, 278-287.

Reid,  F. I. M. (1983) Polarizing effects  of intergroup  compar-
isons.  European  Journal  of  Social  Psychology,  13,  103-
106.

Rotondi,  T.,  Jr.  (1975)  Organizational  identification:  Issues
and  implications.  Organjza(ionaJ  Beiiavior  and  Human
Performance,  13, 95-109.

Sampson,  E. E.  (1978) Personality  and  the  location  of iden-

tity. Journal of Personality, 46, 552-568.

Schelling, T. C. (1957) Bargaining, communication,  and lim-

ited  war.  Journal of Conflict Resolution,  1, 19-36.

Schneider,  B., Hall, D. T., & Nygren, H. T. (1971) Self-image
and  job characteristics  as  correlates  of changing  organi-
zational  identification.  Human  Relations, 24, 397-416.
Skevington,  S.  M.  (1980)  Intergroup  relations  and  social
change  within a  nursing  context.  British Journal of Social
and  Clinical Psychology,  19, 201-213.

Skevington,  S.  M.  (1981) Intergroup  relations  and  nursing.

European  Journal of Social Psychology,  11, 43-59.

Smith,  K. K.  (1983)  Social  comparison  processes  and  dy-
namic conservatism  in intergroup relations. In L. L. Cum-
mings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational be-
havior  (Vol. 5, pp.  199-233). Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press.
Steiribruner,  J. D.  (1974) The  cybernetic  theory  of  decision:
New  dimensions  of  political  analysis.  Princeton,  NJ:
Princeton  University Press.

Stryker,  S.,  & Serpe,  R. T.  (1982) Commitment,  identity  sa-
lience, and  role behavior: Theory and  research  example.
In W. Ickes & E. S. Knowles (Eds), Personality, roles, and
social behavior  (pp.  199-218). New York: Springer-Verlag.

( 

Sunar,  D. G.  (1978) Stereotypes  of  the  powerless: A 4
psychological  analysis.  Psychological  Reports,  43,  •
528.

Tajfel,  H.  (1969) Cognitive  aspects  of  prejudice.

Social Issues,  25(4), 79-97.

Tajfel,  H. (1978) The achievement  of group  differenti
H.  Tajfel  (Ed.),  Differentiation  between  social
Studies  in  the  social  psychology  of  intergroup  rek
(pp.  77-98). London: Academic  Press.

Tajfel,  H. (1981) Human  groups  and  social  categories:
ies  in  social  psychology.  Cambridge,  England:
bridge University Press.

Tajfel,  H. (1982) Instrumentality,  identity qrid r

isons. In H. Tajfel  (Ed.), Social  identity  and  intergroupn-^'
lations  (pp.  483-507).  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridgii 1'
University Press.

Tajfel,  H., & Tumer,  I. C.  (1985) The social identity theory  d
intergroup behavior.  In S. Worchel & W. G.  Austin (Eds.),
Psychology  of  intergroup  relations  (2nd  ed.,  pp.  7-24).
Chicago: Nelson-Hall.

Thoits,  P. A.  (1983)  Multiple  identities  and  psychological
well-being: A reformulation  and  test of the social isolation
hypothesis. American  Sociological  Review,  48, 174-187.
Tolman,  E. C.  (1943) Identification  and  the  post-war  world.
/ournai 0/AJbnormal  and  Sociai Psychology,  38, 141-148.
Trice,  H. M., &  Beyer,  J. M. (1986) Charisma  and  its routini-
zation  in  two  social  movement  organizations.  In  B.  M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research  in organizational
behavior  (Vol. 8, pp.  113-164). Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press.
Tumer,  I. C.  (1975)  Social  comparison  and  social  identity.
Some prospects for intergroup behaviour.  European Joui-
na! of Social Psychology,  5, 5-34. 

"'*" .

Tumer,  I. C.  (1978)  Social  comparison,  similarity  and  in-
group  favouritism.  In  H.  Tajfel  (Ed.),  Differentiation  be-
tween  social groups: Studies  in  the  social  psychology  of
intergroup  relations  (pp.  235-250).  London:  Academic
•  - - ,. 
Press. 

' • * ^ . ,. 

'-•  .  •••

Tumer,  ]. C.  (1981) The  experimental  social  psychology of
intergroup behavior.  In ]. C.  Tumer  &  H. Giles (Eds.), In-
tergroup behaviour  (pp.  66-101).  Chicago:  University of
Chicago Press.

Tumer,  I. C.  (1982) Towards  a  cognitive  redefinition  of  the
social  group.  In  H. Tajfel  (Ed.),  Social  identity  and  inter-
group  relations (pp.  15-40).  Cambridge,  England:  Cam-
bridge University Press.

Tumer,  J. C.  (1984) Social  identification  and  psychological
group formation.  In H. Tajfel  (Ed.), The social  dimension:
European developments  in social  psychology  (Vol. 2, pp-
518-538).  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University
Press.

38

'••"  „ 

1  C.  (1985)  Social  categorization  and  the  seli-
.  ^  social  cognitive  theory  of group  behavior.  In
?^LaT*'ler  (Ed.), Advances  in  group  processes  (Vol. 2.
—., 77-122). Greenwich,  CT: lAI Press.

T.. 
•  I  C,  Brown, R  J-.& Tajfel,  H. (1979) Social compar-
*""^  (jj,d  group interest  in ingroup favouritism.  European

;o;j.T,3; of Soaa; Psychology,  9,  187-204.

j-^  ppenberg.  A- F. M. (1984) Intergroup  differences  in
'^crosp  percepUons. In H. Tajfel  (Ed.), The soaal dimension:
developments  in social psychology  (Vol. 2, pp.
Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University

' ^i 

V-  Maanen.  J. (1976) Breaking in: Sodalization  to work. In
"R  Dub:n (Ed.), Handbook  of work, organization, and so-
op-}' (pp- 67-130). Chicago: Rand McNaUy.

Vc^. Maanen. J. (1978) People processing: Strategies of orga-
itr3'-=na!  socialization.  Organizational  Dynamics,  7(1),

V=-. M::anen. I- (1979) The self, the situation, and the rules of

interpaersonal  relations,  ln  W.  Bennls;4r'Van  Maanen.
E. H. Scheirt,  & F. I. Steele (Eds), Essays in  interpersonal
dynamics (pp. 43-10!).  Homewood,  IL: Dorsey Press.
Vaughan,  D.  (1986) Structural  secrecy  and  organizational
misconduct: NASA and  the space  shuttle Challenger. Pa-
per presented  at the meeting o( the Academy ol Manage-
ment,  Chicago.

Wagner,  U.,  Lampen,  L.,  & SyUwmschy,  ]. (1986) In-group
inferiority,  social  identity and  out-group devaluation  in  a
modified  minimai  group  study,  British  Journal of Social
Psychology. 25,  15-23.

Wiener,  Y. (1982) Commitment  in  organizations:  A norma'-'
tive view. Academy of Management  Review.  7. 418-428.
Wilder, D. A. (1981) Perceiving persons as a  group: Catego-
rization  and  ingroup  relatior^s.  In  D. L.  Hamilton  (Ed.),
Cognitive  processes  in  stereotyping  and  intergroup  be-
havior (pp. 213-257). Hilisdale,  N]: Erlbaum.

Wilder, D. A., & Allen. V. L. (1978) Gr^iDp naembership and
preference  for  information  about  others.  Personality  and
Soaal Psychology Bulletin,  4,  106-110. 

-

Blake Ashforih (Ph.D..  University of Toronto) is Assis-
tan(  Professor  of Management  at  Concordia  Univer-
sity.  Correspondence  regarding this article may  be
sent  to him  at the Department of Management.  Fac-
ulty  of  Commerce  and  Administration.  Concordia
University. 1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd.  W.. Montreal.
Quebec.  Canada  H3G  1M8.

Fred Mael is a doctoral  candidate in  Industrial Psy-
chology at Wayne State University.  Detroit.

The  authors  are  indebted  to  Ron  Humphrey  and
Peggy  Padgett for their helpful comments  on  earlier
drafts of  the paper.  Portions  of  the paper  were  pre-
sented  at the 1988 Midwest Academy  of  Management
meeting  in Toledo. Ohio.

39