Kevin Lane Keller

Conceptualizing, Measuring, and
Managing Customer-Based Brand
Equity
The author presents a conceptual model of brand equity from the perspective of the individual consumer.
Customer-based brand equity is defined as the differential effect of brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the brand. A brand is said to have positive (negative) customer-based brand
equity when consumers react more (less) favorably to an element of the marketing mix for the brand
than they do to the same marketing mix element when it is attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed
version of the product or service. Brand knowledge is conceptualized according to an associative network
memory model in terms of two components, brand awareness and brand image Ii.e., a set of brand
associations). Customer-based brand equity occurs when the consumer is familiar with the brand and
holds some favorable, strong, and unique brand associations in memory. Issues in building, measuring,
and managing customer-based brand equity are discussed, as well as areas for future research.

M

UCH attention has been devoted recently to the
concept of brand equity (Aaker and Biel 1992;
Leuthesser 1988; Maltz 1991). Brand equity has been
viewed from a variety of perspectives (Aaker 1991;
Farquhar 1989; Srivastava and Shocker 1991; Tauber
1988). In a general sense, brand equity is defined in
terms of the marketing effects uniquely attributable to
the brand-for example, when certain outcomes result from the marketing of a product or service because of its brand name that would not occur if the
same product or service did not have that name.
There have been two general motivations for
studying brand equity. One is a financially based motivation to estimate the value of a brand more precisely for accounting purposes (in terms of asset valuation for the balance sheet) or for merger, acquisition,
Kevin Lane Keller is Associate Professor of Marketing and Fletcher Jones
Faculty Scholar for 1992-1993, Graduate School of Business, Stanford
Univerity. This article was written while the author was Visiting Professor at the Australian Graduate School of Management, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. He thanks David Aaker, Sheri
Bridges, Deborah Macinnis, John Roberts, John Rossiter, Richard Staelin, Jennifer Aaker, and the anonymous JM reviewers for detailed, constructive comments.

Journal of Marketing
Vol. 57 (January 19931. 1-22

or divestiture purposes. Several different methods of
brand valuation have been suggested (Barwise et al.
1989; Wentz 1989). For example, Interbrand Group
has used a subjective multiplier of brand profits based
on the brand's performance along seven dimensions
(leadership, stability, market stability, internationality, trend, support, and protection); Grand Metropolitan has valued newly acquired brands by determining
the difference between the acquisition price and fixed
assets. Simon and Sullivan (1990) define brand equity
in terms of the incremental discounted future cash flows
that would result from a product having its brand name
in comparison with the proceeds that would accrue if
the same product did not have that brand name. Based
on the financial market value of the company, their
estimation technique extracts the value of brand equity from the value of a firm's other assets.
A second reason for studying brand equity arises
from a strategy-based motivation to improve marketing productivity. Given higher costs, greater competition, and flattening demand in many markets, firms
seek to increase the efficiency of their marketing expenses. As a consequence, marketers need a more
thorough understanding of consumer behavior as a ba-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 1

sis for making better strategic decisions about target
market definition and product positioning, as well as
better tactical decisions about specific marketing mix
actions. Perhaps a firm's most valuable asset for improving marketing productivity is the knowledge that
has been created about the brand in consumers' minds
from the firm's investment in previous marketing programs. Financial valuation issues have little relevance
if no underlying value for the brand has been created
or if managers do not know how to exploit that value
by developing profitable brand strategies.
The goal of this article is to assist managers and
researchers who are interested in the strategic aspects
of brand equity. Specifically, brand equity is conceptualized from the perspective of the individual consumer and a conceptual framework is provided of what
consumers know about brands and what such knowledge implies for marketing strategies. Customer-based
brand equity is defined as the differential effect of brand
knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of
the brand. That is, customer-based brand equity involves consumers' reactions to an element of the marketing mix for the brand in comparison with their reactions to the same marketing mix element attributed
to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the
product or service. Customer-based brand equity occurs when the consumer is familiar with the brand and
holds some favorable, strong, and unique brand associations in memory.
Conceptualizing brand equity from this perspective is useful because it suggests both specific guidelines for marketing strategies and tactics and areas
where research can be useful in assisting managerial
decision making. Two important points emerge from
this conceptualization. First, marketers should take a
broad view of marketing activity for a brand and recognize the various effects it has on brand knowledge,
as well as how changes in brand knowledge affect more
traditional outcome measures such as sales. Second,
marketers must realize that the long-term success of
all future marketing programs for a brand is greatly
affected by the knowledge about the brand in memory
that has been established by the firm's short-term marketing efforts. In short, because the content and structure of memory for the brand will influence the effectiveness of future brand strategies, it is critical that
managers understand how their marketing programs
affect consumer learning and thus subsequent recall
for brand-related information.
The next section provides a conceptualization of
brand knowledge by applying some basic memory notions. Brand knowledge is defined in terms of two
components, brand awareness and brand image. Brand
awareness relates to brand recall and recognition performance by consumers. Brand image refers to the set
of associations linked to the brand that consumers hold

2/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

in memory. Then the concept of customer-based brand
equity is considered in more detail by discussion of
how it can be built, measured, and managed. After
the conceptual framework is summarized, areas for
future research are identified.

Brand Knowledge
Background

A brand can be defined as "a name, term, sign, symbol, or design, or combination of them which is intended to identify the goods and services of one seller
or group of sellers and to differentiate them from those
of competitors" (Kotler 1991; p. 442). These individual brand components are here called "brand identities" and their totality "the brand." Some basic memory principles can be used to understand knowledge
about the brand and how it relates to brand equity.
The importance of knowledge in memory to consumer
decision making has been well documented (Alba,
Hutchinson, and Lynch 1991). Understanding the
content and structure of brand knowledge is important
because they influence what comes to mind when a
consumer thinks about a brand-for example, in response to marketing activity for that brand.
Most widely accepted conceptualizations of memory structure involve some type of associative model
formulation (Anderson 1983; Wyer and Srull 1989).
For example, the "associative network memory model"
views semantic memory or knowledge as consisting
of a set of nodes and links. Nodes are stored information connected by links that vary in strength. A
"spreading activation" process from node to node determines the extent of retrieval in memory (Collins
and Loftus 1975; Raaijmakers and Shiffrin 1981;
Ratcliff and McKoon 1988). A node becomes a potential source of activation for other nodes either when
external information is being encoded or when internal information is retrieved from long-term memory.
Activation can spread from this node to other linked
nodes in memory. When the activation of another node
exceeds some threshold level, the information contained in that node is recalled. Thus, the strength of
association between the activated node and all linked
nodes determines the extent of this "spreading activation" and the particular information that can be retrieved from memory. For example, in considering a
soft drink purchase, a consumer may think of Pepsi
because of its strong association with the product category. Consumer knowledge most strongly linked to
Pepsi should also then come to mind, such as perceptions of its taste, sugar and caffeine content, or
even recalled images from a recent advertising campaign or past product experiences.
Consistent with an associative network memory

model, brand knowledge is conceptualized as consisting of a brand node in memory to which a variety
of associations are linked. Given this conceptualization, the key question is, what properties do the brand
node and brand associations have? As developed here,
the relevant dimensions that distinguish brand knowledge and affect consumer response are the awareness
of the brand (in terms of brand recall and recognition)
and the favorability, strength, and uniqueness of the
brand associations in consumer memory. These dimensions are affected by other characteristics of and
relationships among the brand associations. For example, factors related to the type of brand association
(such as its level of abstraction and qualitative nature)
and the congruity among brand associations, among
others, affect the favorability, strength, and uniqueness of brand associations. To simplify the discussion, emphasis is placed on the brand name component of the brand identities, defined as "that part of a
brand which can be vocalized" (Kotler 1991, p. 442),
though other components of the brand identities (e.g.,
brand logo or symbol) are considered also.
Brand Awareness

The first dimension distinguishing brand knowledge
is brand awareness. It is related to the strength of the
brand node or trace in memory, as reflected by consumers' ability to identify the brand under different
conditions (Rossiter and Percy 1987). In other words,
how well do the brand identities serve their function?
In particular, brand name awareness relates to the
likelihood that a brand name will come to mind and
the ease with which it does so. Brand awareness consists of brand recognition and brand recall performance. Brand recognition relates to consumers' ability to confirm prior exposure to the brand when given
the brand as a cue. In other words, brand recognition
requires that consumers correctly discriminate the brand
as having been seen or heard previously. Brand recall
relates to consumers' ability to retrieve the brand when
given the product category, the needs fulfilled by the
category, or some other type of probe as a cue. In
other words, brand recall requires that consumers correctly generate the brand from memory. The relative
importance of brand recall and recognition depends on
the extent to which consumers make decisions in the
store (where they potentially may be exposed to the
brand) versus outside the store, among other factors
(Bettman 1979; Rossiter and Percy 1987). Brand recognition may be more important to the extent that
product decisions are made in the store.
Brand awareness plays an important role in consumer decision making for three major reasons. First,
it is important that consumers think of the brand when
they think about the product category. Raising brand
awareness increases the likelihood that the brand will

he a member of the consideration set (Baker et al.
1986; Nedungadi 1990), the handful of brands that
receive serious consideration for purchase. Second,
brand awareness can affect decisions about brands in
the consideration set, even if there are essentially no
other brand associations. For example, consumers have
been shown to adopt a decision rule to buy only familiar, well-established brands (Jacoby, Syzabillo, and
Busato-Schach 1977; Roselius 1971). In low involvement decision settings, a minimum level of brand
awareness may be sufficient for product choice, even
in the absence of a well-formed attitude (Bettman and
Park 1980; Hoyer and Brown 1990; Park and Lessig
1981). The elaboration likelihood model (Petty and
Cacioppo 1986) suggests that consumers may base
choices on brand awareness considerations when they
have low involvement, which could result from either
a lack of consumer motivation (i.e., consumers do not
care about the product or service) or a lack of consumer ability (i.e., consumers do not know anything
else about the brands). Finally, brand awareness affects consumer decision making by influencing the
formation and strength of brand associations in the
brand image. A necessary condition for the creation
of a brand image is that a brand node has been established in memory, and the nature of that brand node
should affect how easily different kinds of information can become attached to the brand in memory.
Brand Image

Though brand image long has been recognized as an
important concept in marketing (e.g., Gardner and Levy
1955), there is less agreement on its appropriate definition (Dobni and Zinkhan 1990). Consistent with
definitions by Herzog (1963) and Newman (1957),
among others, and an associative network memory
model of brand knowledge, brand image is defined
here as perceptions about a brand as reflected by the
brand associations held in consumer memory. Brand
associations are the other informational nodes linked
to the brand node in memory and contain the meaning
of the brand for consumers. The favorability, strength,
and uniqueness of brand associations are the dimensions distinguishing brand knowledge that play an important role in determining the differential response
that makes up brand equity, especially in high involvement decision settings. Before considering those
dimensions, it is useful to examine the different types
of brand associations that may be present in consumer
memory.

Types of brand associations. Brand associations
take different forms. One way to distinguish among
brand associations is by their level of abstraction (Alba
and Hutchinson 1987; Chattopadhyay and Alba 1988;
Johnson 1984; Russo and Johnson 1980)-that is, by

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 3

how much information is summarized or subsumed in
the association. Along this dimension, brand associations can be classified into three major categories of
increasing scope: attributes, benefits, and attitudes.
Several additional distinctions can be made within these
categories according to the qualitative nature of the
association.
Attributes are those descriptive features that characterize a product or service-what a consumer thinks
the product or service is or has and what is involved
with its purchase or consumption. Attributes can be
categorized in a variety of ways (Myers and Shocker
1981). Here, attributes are distinguished according to
how directly they relate to product or service performance. Product-related attributes are defined as the
ingredients necessary for performing the product or
service function sought by consumers. Hence, they
relate to a product's physical composition or a service's requirements. Product-related attributes vary by
product or service category. Non-product-related attributes are defined as external aspects of the product
or service that relate to its purchase or consumption.
The four main types of non-product-related attributes
are (1) price information, (2) packaging or product
appearance information, (3) user imagery (i.e., what
type of person uses the product or service), and (4)
usage imagery (i.e., where and in what types of situations the product or service is used).
Because product-related attributes are more commonly acknowledged, only non-product-related attributes are elaborated here. The price of the product or
service is considered a non-product-related attribute
because it represents a necessary step in the purchase
process but typically does not relate directly to the
product performance or service function. Price is a
particularly important attribute association because
consumers often have strong beliefs about the price
and value of a brand and may organize their product
category knowledge in terms of the price tiers of different brands (Blattberg and Wisniewski 1989). Similarly, packaging is considered part of the purchase
and consumption process but, in most cases, does not
directly relate to the necessary ingredients for product
performance. User and usage imagery attributes can
be formed directly from a consumer's own experiences and contact with brand users or indirectly through
the depiction of the target market as communicated in
brand advertising or by some other source of information (e.g., word of mouth). Associations of a typical brand user may be based on demographic factors
(e.g., sex, age, race, and income), psychographic factors (e.g., according to attitudes toward career, possessions, the environment, or political institutions),
and other factors. Associations of a typical usage situation may be based on the time of day, week, or
year, the location (inside or outside the home), or the

4 / Journal of Marketing, January 1993

type of activity (formal or informal), among other aspects. User and usage image attributes can also produce brand personality attributes. Plummer (1985) asserts that one component of brand image is the
personality or character of the brand itself. He summarizes research demonstrating that brands can be
characterized by personality descriptors such as
"youthful," "colorful," and "gentle." These types of
associations seem to arise most often as a result of
inferences about the underlying user or usage situation. Brand personality attributes may also reflect
emotions or feelings evoked by the brand.
Benefits are the personal value consumers attach
to the product or service attributes-that is, what consumers think the product or service can do for them.
Benefits can be further distinguished into three categories according to the underlying motivations to which
they relate (Park, Jaworski, and Macinnis 1986): (1)
functional benefits, (2) experiential benefits, and (3)
symbolic benefits. Functional benefits are the more
intrinsic advantages of product or service consumption and usually correspond to the product-related attributes. These benefits often are linked to fairly basic
motivations, such as physiological and safety needs
(Maslow 1970), and involve a desire for problem removal or avoidance (Fennell 1978; Rossiter and Percy
1987). Experiential benefits relate to what it feels like
to use the product or service and also usually correspond to the product-related attributes. These benefits
satisfy experiential needs such as sensory pleasure,
variety, and cognitive stimulation. Symbolic benefits
are the more extrinsic advantages of product or service consumption. They usually correspond to nonproduct-related attributes and relate to underlying needs
for social approval or personal expression and outerdirected self-esteem. Hence, consumers may value the
prestige, exclusivity, or fashionability of a brand because of how it relates to their self-concept (Solomon
1983). Symbolic benefits should be especially relevant for socially visible, "badge" products.
Brand attitudes are defined as consumers' overall
evaluations of a brand (Wilkie 1986). Brand attitudes
are important because they often form the basis for
consumer behavior (e.g., brand choice). Though different models of brand attitudes have been proposed,
one widely accepted approach is based on a multiattribute formulation in which brand attitudes are a
function of the associated attributes and benefits that
are salient for the brand. Fishbein and Ajzen (1975;
Ajzen and Fishbein 1980) proposed what has been
probably the most influential multiattribute model to
marketing (Bettman 1986). This expectancy-value
model views attitudes as a multiplicative function of
(1) the salient beliefs a consumer has about the product or service (i.e., the extent to which consumers think
the brand has certain attributes or benefits) and (2) the

evaluative judgment of those beliefs (i.e., how good
or bad it is that the brand has those attributes or benefits).
Brand attitudes can be related to beliefs about
product-related attributes and the functional and experiential benefits, consistent with work on perceived
quality (Zeithaml 1988). Brand attitudes can also be
related to beliefs about non-product-related attributes
and symbolic benefits (Rossiter and Percy 1987), consistent with the functional theory of attitudes (Katz
1960; Lutz 1991), which maintains that attitudes can
serve a "value-expressive" function by allowing individuals to express their self-concepts. Because it is
difficult to specify correctly all of the relevant attributes and benefits, researchers building multiattribute
models of consumer preference have included a general component of attitude toward the brand that is not
captured by the attribute or benefit values of the brand
(Park 1991; Srinivasan 1979). Moreover, as noted
previously, research also has shown that attitudes can
be formed by less thoughtful decision making (Chaiken
1986; Petty and Cacioppo 1986)-for example, on the
basis of simple heuristics and decision rules. If consumers lack either the motivation or ability to evaluate
the product or service, they may use signals or "extrinsic cues" (Olson and Jacoby 1972) to infer product
or service quality on the basis of what they do know
about the brand (e.g., product appearance such as color
or scent).
Thus, the different types of brand associations
making up the brand image include product-related or
non-product-related attributes; functional, experiential, or symbolic benefits; and overall brand attitudes.
These associations can vary according to their favorability, strength, and uniqueness.
Favorability of brand associations. Associations
differ according to how favorably they are evaluated.
The success of a marketing program is reflected in the
creation of favorable brand associations-that is, consumers believe the brand has attributes and benefits
that satisfy their needs and wants such that a positive
overall brand attitude is formed.
MacKenzie (1986) summarizes research evidence
suggesting that the "evaluative judgment" component
of expectancy-value models of attitude (i.e., consumer perceptions of the favorability of an attribute)
is both conceptually and empirically related to attribute importance. Specifically, attribute importance has
been equated with polarity of attribute evaluation (Ajzen
and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein and Ajzen 1975). In other
words, consumers are unlikely to view an attribute or
benefit as very good or bad if they do not also consider it to be very important. Hence, it is difficult to
create a favorable association for an unimportant attribute.

Not all associations for a brand, however, will be
relevant and valued in a purchase or consumption decision. For example, consumers often have an association in memory from the brand to the product or
package color. Though this association may facilitate
brand recognition or awareness or lead to inferences
about product quality, it may not always be considered a meaningful factor in a purchase decision.
Moreover, the evaluations of brand associations may
be situationally or context-dependent and vary according to consumers' particular goals in their purchase or consumption decisions (Day, Shocker, and
Srivastava 1979). An association may be valued in
one situation but not another (Miller and Ginter 1979).
For example, speed and efficiency of service may be
very important when a consumer is under time pressure but may have little impact when a consumer is
less hurried.
Strength of brand associations. Associations can
be characterized also by the strength of connection to
the brand node. The strength of associations depends
on how the information enters consumer memory (encoding) and how it is maintained as part of the brand
image (storage). Strength is a function of both the
amount or quantity of processing the information receives at encoding (i.e., how much a person thinks
about the information) and the nature or quality of the
processing the information receives at encoding (i.e.,
the manner in which a person thinks about the information). For example, the levels- or depth-of-processing
approach (Craik and Lockhart 1972; Craik and Tulving 1975; Lockhart, Craik, and Jacoby 1976) maintains that the more the meaning of information is attended to during encoding, the stronger the resulting
associations in memory will be. Thus, when a consumer actively thinks about and "elaborates" on the
significance of product or service information, stronger
associations are created in memory. This strength, in
tum, increases both the likelihood that information will
be accessible and the ease with which it can be recalled by "spreading activation."
Cognitive psychologists believe memory is extremely durable, so that once information becomes
stored in memory its strength of association decays
very slowly (Loftus and Loftus 1980). Though "available" and potentially retrievable in memory, information may not be "accessible" and easily retrieved
without strongly associated reminders or retrieval cues
(Tulving and Psotka 1971). Thus, the particular associations for a brand that are salient and "come to
mind" depend on the context in which the brand is
considered. The larger the number of cues linked to
a piece of information, however, the greater the likelihood that the information can be recalled (Isen 1992).
Uniqueness of brand associations. Brand associ-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 5

ations mayor may not be shared with other competing
brands. The essence of brand positioning is that the
brand has a sustainable competitive advantage or
"unique selling proposition" that gives consumers a
compelling reason for buying that particular brand
(Aaker 1982; Ries and Trout 1979; Wind 1982). These
differences may be communicated explicitly by making direct comparisons with competitors or may be
highlighted implicitly without stating a competitive
point of reference. Furthermore, they may be based
on product-related or non-product-related attributes or
functional, experiential, or image benefits.
The presence of strongly held, favorably evaluated
associations that are unique to the brand and imply
superiority over other brands is critical to a brand's
success. Yet, unless the brand has no competitors, the
brand will most likely share some associations with
other brands. Shared associations can help to establish
category membership (MacInnis and Nakamoto 1991)
and define the scope of competition with other products and services (Sujan and Bettman 1989). Research
on noncomparable alternatives (Bettman and Sujan
1987; Johnson 1984; Park and Smith 1989) suggests
that even if a brand does not face direct competition
in its product category, and thus does not share productrelated attributes with other brands, it can still share
more abstract associations and face indirect competition in a more broadly defined product category. Thus,
though a railroad may not compete directly with another railroad, it still competes indirectly with other
forms of transportation, such as airlines, cars, and
buses.
A product or service category can be characterized
also by a set of associations that include specific beliefs about any member in the category in addition to
overall attitudes toward all members in the category.
These beliefs include many of the product-related attributes for the relevant brands, as well as more descriptive attributes that do not necessarily relate to
product or service performance (e.g., the color of a
product, such as red for ketchup). Certain attributes
or benefits may be considered "prototypical" and essential to all brands in the category, and a specific
brand may be considered an "exemplar" that is most
representative of the product or service category (Cohen
and Basu 1987; Nedungadi and Hutchinson 1985; Rosch
and Mervis 1975; Ward and Loken 1986). For example, consumers might expect a running shoe to provide support and comfort, be built well enough to last
through repeated wearings, and so on, and they may
believe that Nike or some other leading brand best
represents a running shoe. Similarly, consumers might
expect a bank to offer a variety of checking and savings accounts, provide branch and electronic delivery
services, and so on, and they may consider Bank of

6/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

America or some other market leader to be the best
example of a bank.
Because the brand is linked to the product category, some product category associations may become linked to the brand, either in terms of specific
beliefs or overall attitudes. Product category attitudes
can be a particularly important determinant of consumer response. For example, if a consumer thinks
banks are basically "unfriendly" and "bad," he or she
probably will have similarly unfavorable beliefs about
and attitude toward any particular bank simply by virtue of its membership in the category. Thus, in almost
all cases, some product category associations that are
linked to the brand are shared with other brands in the
category. Note that the strength of the brand associations with the product category is an important
determinant of brand awareness (Nedungadi and
Hutchinson 1985; Ward and Loken 1986).
Competitive overlap with other brands associated
with the product category does have a downside, however, in terms of possible consumer confusion. For
example, Keller (1987) and Burke and Srull (1988)
have shown that the number of competing brands advertising in a product category can affect consumers'
ability to recall communication effects for a brand by
creating "interference" in memory. Keller (l991b) also
showed that though these interference effects can produce lower brand evaluations, they can be overcome
through the use of ad retrieval cues-that is, distinctive ad execution information that is present when a
consumer actually makes a brand evaluation (e.g., at
the point of purchase).

Interaction among characteristics of brand associations. The level of abstraction and qualitative nature of brand associations should affect their favorability, strength, and uniqueness. For example, imagerelated attributes, such as user type or usage situation,
may easily create unique associations. Abstract associations (e.g., benefits and especially attitudes), in
contrast, tend to be inherently more evaluative because of the embedded meaning they contain. Because of this evaluative nature, abstract associations
tend to be more durable and accessible in memory than
the underlying attribute information (Chattopadhyay
and Alba 1988). In fact, brand attitudes may be stored
and retrieved in memory separately from the underlying attribute information (Lynch, Mamorstein, and
Weigold 1988).
One important reason for considering brand attitudes to be a brand association is that they can vary
in strength (Farquhar 1989). Attitude strength has been
measured by the reaction time needed to evaluative
queries about the attitude object (Fazio et al. 1986).
Individuals who can evaluate an attitude object quickly
are assumed to have a highly accessible attitude. Re-

search has shown that attitudes formed from direct behavior or experience are more accessible than attitudes based on information or indirect forms of behavior
(Fazio and Zanna 1981). Highly accessible brand attitudes are more likely to be activated spontaneously
upon exposure to the brand and guide subsequent brand
choices (Berger and Mitchell 1989; Fazio, Powell, and
Williams 1989).
Figure 1 summarizes the dimensions of brand
knowledge.
Congruence of brand associations. The favorability and strength of a brand association can be affected by other brand associations in memory. Congruence is defined as the extent to which a brand
association shares content and meaning with another
brand association. The congruence of brand associations should affect (1) how easily an existing association can be recalled and (2) how easily additional
associations can become linked to the brand node in
memory. In general, information that is consistent in
meaning with existing brand associations should be
more easily learned and remembered than unrelated

information-though the unexpectedness of information inconsistent in meaning with the brand sometimes can lead to more elaborate processing and stronger
associations than even consistent information (Houston,
Childers, and Heckler 1987; Myers-Levy and Tybout
1989; Wyer and Srull 1989). That is, consumers may
have expectations as to the likelihood that a product
or service has a particular association given that it has
some other association (Bettman, John, and Scott 1986;
Sujan 1985). These expectations should affect consumers' ability to learn new brand information. For
example, if a running shoe has a brand association
with "very durable and long-lasting," presumably it
would be easier to establish an association with "all
weather" than with "stylish." As noted subsequently,
these expectations also may result in the formation of
inferred brand associations. Thus, the strength of an
association should depend on how its content relates
to the content of other associations for the brand.
The congruence among brand associations determines the "cohesiveness" of the brand image-that
is, the extent to which the brand image is characterized by associations or subsets of associations that share

FIGURE 1
Dimensions of Brand Knowledge

BRAND
AWARENESS

Non-Product-Related
BRAND

Usage Imagery

KNOWLEDGE
Types of
Brand Association
Favorability of
Brand Associations

Strength of
Brand Associations

Uniqueness Of
Brand Assoclarions

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 7

meaning. The cohesiveness of the brand image may
determine consumers' more holistic or gestalt reactions to the brand. Moreover, a "diffuse" brand image, where there is little congruence among brand associations for consumers, can present several potential
problems for marketers. First, consumers may be confused as to the meaning of the brand and, because
they do not have as much information to which new
information can be easily related, new associations may
be weaker and possibly less favorable (Heckler, Keller,
and Houston 1992). Moreover, because anyone association shares little meaning with other associations, brand associations may be more easily changed
by competitive actions. Finally, another problem with
a diffuse brand image is the greater likelihood that
consumers will discount or overlook some potentially
relevant brand associations in making brand decisions. For example, research on "part-list cuing effects" has shown that recall of information can inhibit
and lower the recall of other information from memory (Alba and Chattopadhyay 1985a,b, 1986; Hoch
1984; Keller 1991a). Hence, only some of the potentially retrievable brand associations actually may be
recalled when the brand image is not cohesive and
consistent.

Customer-Based Brand Equity
As noted, brand equity has been defined in a variety
of ways, depending on the particular purpose. Because the goal of this article is to facilitate the development of more effective marketing strategies and
tactics, the focus is on brand effects on the individual
consumer. The advantage of conceptualizing brand
equity from this perspective is that it enables managers to consider specifically how their marketing
program improves the value of their brands. Though
the eventual goal of any marketing program is to increase sales, it is first necessary to establish knowledge structures for the brand so that consumers respond favorably to marketing activity for the brand.
The preceding section provides a detailed framework
of brand knowledge. In this section, that framework
is used to consider in more detail how knowledge affects consumer response to the marketing of a brand
by defining customer-based brand equity and examining how it is built, measured, and managed.
Defining Customer-Based Brand Equity

Customer-based brand equity is defined as the differential effect of brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the brand. Three important concepts are included in the definition: "differential
effect," "brand knowledge," and "consumer response
to marketing." Differential effect is determined by
comparing consumer response to the marketing of a

8 / Journal of Marketing, January 1993

brand with the response to the same marketing of a
fictitiously named or unnamed version of the product
or service. Brand knowledge is defined in terms of
brand awareness and brand image and is conceptualized according to the characteristics and relationships
of brand associations described previously. Consumer
response to marketing is defined in terms of consumer
perceptions, preferences, and behavior arising from
marketing mix activity (e.g., brand choice, comprehension of copy points from an ad, reactions to a coupon promotion, or evaluations of a proposed brand
extension).
Thus, according to this definition, a brand is said
to have positive (negative) customer-based brand equity if consumers react more (less) favorably to the
product, price, promotion, or distribution of the brand
than they do to the same marketing mix element when
it is attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the product or service. Favorable consumer
response and positive customer-based brand equity, in
turn, can lead to enhanced revenue, lower costs, and
greater profits. Brand knowledge is central to this definition. In particular, the favorability, strength, and
uniqueness of the brand associations play a critical role
in determining the differential response. If the brand
is seen by consumers to be the same as a prototypical
version of the product or service in the category, their
response should not differ from their response to a
hypothetical product or service; if the brand has some
salient, unique associations, those responses should
differ. The actual nature of how the responses differ
depends on consumers' evaluations of these associations, as well as the particular marketing mix element
under consideration. Thus, establishing brand awareness and a "positive brand image" (i.e., favorable,
strong, and unique brand associations) in consumer
memory creates different types of customer-based brand
equity, depending on what marketing mix element is
under consideration. A brief discussion highlighting
some relevant considerations for each of these elements follows.
Fundamentally, high levels of brand awareness and
a positive brand image should increase the probability
of brand choice, as well as produce greater consumer
(and retailer) loyalty and decrease vulnerability to
competitive marketing actions. Thus, the view of brand
loyalty adopted here is that it occurs when favorable
beliefs and attitudes for the brand are manifested in
repeat buying behavior. Some of these beliefs may
reflect the objective reality of the product, in which
case no underlying customer-based brand equity may
be present, but in other cases they may reflect favorable, strong, and unique associations that go beyond
the objective reality of the product (Park 1991).
High levels of brand awareness and a positive brand
image also have specific implications for the pricing,

distribution, and promotion activities related to the
brand. First, a positive image should enable the brand
to command larger margins and have more inelastic
responses to price increases. The most important aspect of the brand image that affects consumer responses to prices is probably overall brand attitude.
Consumers with a strong, favorable brand attitude
should be more willing to pay premium prices for the
brand (Starr and Rubinson 1978). Similarly, a positive image should result in increased consumer search
(Simonson, Huber, and Payne 1988) and a willingness to seek out distribution channels for the product
or service. Finally, high levels of brand awareness and
a positive brand image can increase marketing communication effectiveness. All aspects of the brand image are relevant in determining consumer response to
advertising and promotion. For example, several authors note that advertising response and decay patterns
are a function of consumers' attitudes and behavior
toward the brand (Ray 1982; Rossiter and Percy 1987).
They maintain that consumers who are positively predisposed toward a brand may require fewer ad exposures to meet communication objectives. Similarly,
one could argue that strong attribute or benefit associations for the brand require less reinforcement through
marketing communications.
In these different ways, customer-based brand equity is enhanced by creating favorable response to
pricing, distribution, advertising, and promotion activity for the brand. Moreover, a familiar brand with
a positive brand image can also yield licensing opportunities (i.e., the brand name is used by another
firm on one of its products) and support brand extensions (i.e., a firm uses an existing brand name to introduce a new product or service), two important growth
strategies for firms in recent years. Licensing can be
a valuable source of royalty income, as evidenced by
the substantial merchandising efforts in recent years,
and typically has been employed when brand associations have strong user imagery or brand personality
attributes. A more substantial investment and risk profile for the company, however, is required with brand
extensions. Because of their potentially lasting effects
on consumer knowledge and the effectiveness of future marketing activity, brand extensions are considered in more detail in the section on managing
customer-based brand equity.
Bui/ding Customer-Based Brand Equity

Building customer-based brand equity requires the
creation of a familiar brand that has favorable, strong,
and unique brand associations. This can be done both
through the initial choice of the brand identities, such
as the brand name, logo, or symbol, and through the
integration of the brand identities into the supporting
marketing program.

Choosing brand identities. To see how the initial
choice of the brand identities can affect brand equity,
consider the choice of a brand name. A variety of criteria have been suggested for the selection of a brand
name (e.g., Aaker 1991; Kotler 1991; Robertson 1989).
They generally can be classified according to whether
they help enhance brand awareness or facilitate the
linkage of brand associations.
Alba and Hutchinson (1987) give an extensive discussion of psychological principles that can be useful
in understanding how the choice of a name affects brand
recall and recognition processes. Some criteria often
noted by other researchers are that brand names should
be simple, familiar, and distinctive, along the following lines. To enhance the likelihood of successful processing at encoding, the brand name should be easy
to comprehend, pronounce, and spell. In fact, market
researchers sometimes evaluate the "flicker perception" of brand names (i.e., how quickly a brand name
can be perceived and understood when exposed only
for an instant) to assess consumer learning of candidate brand names (Dolan 1985). To improve consumer learning of the brand, mnemonic factors (e.g.,
One-A-Day) and vivid words are often employed that
have rich evaluative or experiential imagery (Robertson
1987; but see Myers-Levy 1989). Similarly, the use
of a familiar word should be advantageous because
much information is present in memory to which the
name relates. Finally, a distinctive word is often sought
to attract attention and reduce confusion among competing brands.
These different choice criteria for a brand name
are not necessarily mutually compatible, and it may
be difficult to choose names that are simple, familiar,
and distinctive. Moreover, factors affecting the ease
with which a brand name is recalled differ from factors affecting the ease with which a brand name is
recognized. For example, past research suggests that
high frequency words (according to conventional use
in language) are easier to recall than low frequency
words, but low frequency words may be easier to recognize than high frequency words (Gregg 1976; Lynch
and Srull 1982). This finding suggests that choosing
a familiar word representing a well-known concept or
some other common object or property as a brand name
may facilitate brand recall, but that choosing a more
unusual or distinctive word may facilitate brand recognition. Deciding whether to emphasize recall or
recognition properties in choosing a brand name depends on managerial priorities concerning the extent
of consumers' in-store processing for the product, the
nature of the competitive environment, and so on.
The choice of a brand name may also affect the
favorability, strength, and uniqueness of brand associations. The suggestiveness or meaningfulness of the
brand name should affect how easily brand associa-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 9

tions are created. The brand name can be chosen to
suggest semantically (l) the product or service category or (2) important attributes or benefits within that
category. The first consideration should enhance brand
name awareness and the identification with the product category. The second consideration affords two
important benefits. First, even in the absence of any
marketing activity, the semantic meaning of a suggestive brand name may enable consumers to infer certain attributes and benefits. For example, consumers
could assume on the basis of the names alone that
Daybreak cereal is wholesome and natural, Chief
laundry detergent removes tough stains, and Diamond
toothpaste whitens and brightens teeth. Second, a
suggestive brand name may facilitate marketing activity designed to link certain associations to the brand.
Ideally, the brand name can be effectively supported
through marketing communications and a distinctive
slogan that ties together the brand name and its positioning.
Similar choice criteria apply to the other brand
identities, such the brand logo or symbol. Moreover,
another important objective is to choose the various
brand identities to be mutually reinforcing so that they
interact positively to satisfy these criteria. Nevertheless, although the judicious choice of brand identities
can contribute significantly to customer-based brand
equity, the primary input comes from supporting marketing activities for the brand and the various product,
price, advertising, promotion, and distribution decisions, as discussed next.

Developing supporting marketing programs.
Marketing programs are designed to enhance brand
awareness and establish favorable, strong, and unique
brand associations in memory so that consumers purchase the product or service. Brand awareness is related to brand familiarity. Alba and Hutchinson (1987)
define brand familiarity as the number of productrelated experiences that have been accumulated by the
consumer (through product usage, advertising, etc.).
Greater brand familiarity, through repeated exposures
to a brand, should lead to increased consumer ability
to recognize and recall the brand. Thus, the appropriate marketing strategy to increase brand awareness
and familiarity is clear from the definition-anything
that causes the consumer to "experience" or be exposed to the brand has the potential to increase familiarity and awareness. Frequent and prominent
mentions in advertising and promotion vehicles can
intrusively increase consumer exposure to the brand,
as can event or sports sponsorship, publicity, and other
activities.
Favorable, strong, and unique associations can be
created by the marketing program in a variety of wellestablished ways that are only highlighted here. The

10 / Journal of Marketing, January 1993

product or service specifications themselves are the
primary basis for the product-related attribute associations and determine a consumer's fundamental understanding of what the product or service means.
Similarly, the pricing policy for the brand directly creates associations to the relevant price tier or level for
the brand in the product category, as well as its corresponding price volatility or variance (e.g., in terms
of the frequency and magnitude of discounts).
The marketing communication efforts by the firm,
in contrast, afford a flexible means of shaping consumer perceptions of the product or service. At times,
marketers may have to translate attributes into their
corresponding benefits for consumers through advertising or other forms of communication. Marketing
communications also may be helpful in creating user
and usage imagery attributes. The strength of brand
associations from communication effects depends on
how the brand identities are integrated into the supporting marketing program-for example, the position and prominence of the brand identities in a television ad (Keller 1992). Though delaying brand
identification until the end of a television commercial
may increase attention levels during commercial exposure, resulting in many communication effects being
stored in memory (e.g., ad execution and brand claim
information, as well as affective and cognitive responses to that information), it may also produce weak
links from these effects to the brand. Finally, wordof-mouth and other social influences also play an important role, especially for user and usage imagery attributes.

Leveraging secondary associations. The definition of customer-based brand equity does not distinguish between the sources of brand beliefs (Fishbein
and Ajzen 1975)-that is, whether beliefs are created
by the marketer or by some other source of influence
such as reference groups or publicity. All that matters
is the favorability, strength, and uniqueness of brand
associations which, combined with brand awareness,
can produce differential consumer response to the
marketing of a brand. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile
to consider in greater depth how belief associations
about the attributes and benefits of the brand arise.
One way belief associations are created is on the
basis of direct experience with the product or service.
A second way is by information about the product or
service communicated by the company, other commercial sources, or word of mouth. Of the two, direct
experience may create stronger associations in memory given its inherent self-relevance (Hertel 1982).
These episodic memory traces (Tulving l 983) may be
especially important for user and usage image attribute associations. A third important way that belief
associations are created is on the basis of inferences

from some existing brand associations. That is, many
associations are assumed to exist for the brand because it is characterized by other associations. The type
and strength of inferencing are a function of the correlations perceived by consumers among attributes or
benefits (Ford and Smith 1987; Huber and McCann
1982). For example, some consumers in certain categories may infer a high level of product or service
quality from a high price, as well as infer specific
attributes or benefits such as prestige and social status. Dick, Chakravarti, and Biehal (1990) refer to these
types of inferences as based on "probabilistic consistency." They note that "evaluative consistency" inferences may also occur, as when consumers infer the
favorability of a brand attribute or benefit on the basis
of their overall brand attitude or their evaluation of
some other perceived attribute or benefit.
Another type of inferred association occurs when
the brand association itself is linked to other information in memory that is not directly related to the
product or service. Because the brand becomes identified with this other entity, consumers may infer that
the brand shares associations with that entity, thus
producing indirect or "secondary" links for the brand.
These secondary associations may lead to a transfer
of global associations such as attitude or credibility
(e.g., expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness)
or more specific attributes and benefits related to the
product or service meaning. Secondary associations
may arise from primary attribute associations related
to (l) the company, (2) the country of origin, (3) the
distribution channels, (4) a celebrity spokesperson or
endorsor of the product or service, or (5) an event.
The first three types of secondary associations involve "factual sources" for the brand (i.e., who makes
it, where it is made, and where it is purchased). This
information is almost always potentially available to
consumers, but its strength of association with the brand
depends on the emphasis it receives. First, the brand
may vary by the extent to which it is identified with
a particular company. Establishing a connection with
a company may cause existing associations for that
company to become secondary associations for the
brand (e.g., perceptions of company reputation and
credibility). The branding strategy adopted by the
company making the product or providing the service
is the most important factor affecting the strength of
the company's association with the brand. Three main
branding strategies are possible (Kotler 1991). First,
companies may choose individual brand names for
different products and services without any explicit
mention of the company (e.g., Procter & Gamble with
Tide, Bold, Dash, Cheer, Gain, Oxydol, and Duz
laundry detergents). Second, companies may choose
their name for all of their products or services (e.g.,
General Electric and Heinz). Third, companies may

choose a hybrid or sub-brand strategy whereby they
combine their company name with individual brand
names (e.g., Kellogg's Corn Flakes and Courtyard by
Marriott). The latter two types of branding strategies
should facilitate access to consumers' overall attitudes
toward the company. The sub-brand strategy offers an
additional potential benefit in that it can allow for the
creation of more specific brand beliefs.
Similarly, a brand may be associated with its
"country of origin" (i.e., the country in which the
company makes the product or provides the service)
in such a way that consumers infer specific beliefs and
evaluations (Erickson, Johansson, and Chao 1984;
Hong and Wyer 1989, 1990). For example, French
wines, German automobiles, and Japanese electronics
probably all benefit from such inferences. Finally, the
distribution channels for a product may also create
secondary associations. Consumers can form "brand"
images of retailers (Jacoby and Mazursky 1984) on
the basis of their product assortment, pricing and credit
policy, quality of service, and so on. These store images have associations that may be linked to the products they sell (e.g., prestige and exclusivity vs. bargaindriven and mass appeal). Similar types of images may
be formed for catalogs and other forms of direct marketing.
The final two types of secondary associations occur when the primary brand associations are for user
and usage situation attributes, especially when they
are for a particular person or event. Consider the case
in which advertising creates an association between a
brand and a celebrity endorser (Rossiter and Percy
1987). As a result, other associations for the celebrity
may become related to the brand. Ideally, one such
association would be a favorable attitude toward the
celebrity-for example, a well-known person could
lend credibility to product or service claims because
of his or her expertise, trustworthiness, or attractiveness. Additionally, more specific beliefs may be involved (Kahle and Homer 1985; McCracken 1989).
Thus, consumers have images of celebrity endorsors
in their minds as a result of observing the celebrities
in their own field of endeavor or as a result of media
coverage. A celebrity invariably has some personality
attribute associations, as well as possibly some productrelated attribute associations, that may become linked
to the brand. Similarly, a brand may also become associated with a particular event. Again, that event may
be characterized by a set of attribute and attitude associations in memory. When the brand becomes linked
with the event, some of these associations with the
event may become indirectly associated with the brand.
Finally, as noted previously, identification with the
product category itself can also result in inferences
producing secondary associations.
Secondary brand associations may be important if

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 11

existing brand associations are deficient in some way.
In other words, secondary associations can be leveraged to create favorable, strong, and unique associations that otherwise may not be present. Choosing to
emphasize the company or a particular person, place,
or event should be based on consumers' awareness of
that entity, as well as how the beliefs and attitudes
about the entity can become linked to the brand (see
chapter 11 of Rossiter and Percy 1987 for an excellent
discussion). Such a strategy makes sense if consumers
already have associations for the company, person,
place, or event that are congruent with desired brand
associations. For example, consider a country such as
New Zealand, which is known for having more sheep
than people. A New Zealand sweater manufacturer that
promotes its product on the basis of its New Zealand
wool presumably could more easily establish strong
and favorable brand associations because New Zealand may already mean "wool" to many people. Secondary brand associations may be risky, however, because some control of the brand image is given up.
The company, person, place, or event that makes up
the primary brand association will undoubtedly have
a host of associations of which only some smaller set
will be of interest to the marketer. Managing the transfer
process so that only the relevant secondary associations become linked to the brand may be difficult.
Moreover, these images may change over time as consumers learn more about the entity, and new associations mayor may not be advantageous for the brand.
Measuring Customer-Based Brand Equity

There are two basic approaches to measuring customerbased brand equity. The "indirect" approach attempts
to assess potential sources of customer-based brand
equity by measuring brand knowledge (i.e., brand
awareness and brand image). The "direct" approach
attempts to measure customer-based brand equity more
directly by assessing the impact of brand knowledge
on consumer response to different elements of the firm's
marketing program. The indirect and direct approaches to measuring customer-based brand equity
are complementary and should be used together. The
indirect approach is useful in identifying what aspects
of brand knowledge cause the differential response that
creates customer-based brand equity; the direct approach is useful in determining the nature of the differential response. Though detailed descriptions and
critiques of the many specific techniques behind these
two approaches are beyond the scope of this article
(see Aaker 1991 for additional discussion), it is
worthwhile to highlight them briefly.

Indirect approach. The first approach to measuring customer-based brand equity, measuring brand
knowledge, requires measuring brand awareness and

12/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

the characteristics and relationships among brand associations. Because anyone measure typically captures only a particular aspect of brand knowledge,
multiple measures must be employed to capture the
multidimensional nature of brand knowledge.
Brand awareness can be assessed effectively through
a variety of aided and unaided memory measures (see
Srull 1984 for a review) that can be applied to test
brand recall and recognition. For example, brand recognition measures may use the actual brand name or
some perceptually degraded version of the brand name
(Alba and Hutchinson 1987). Brand recall measures
may use different sets of cues, such as progressively
narrowly defined product category labels. Besides
correctness, the ease of recall and recognition performance can be assessed with more subtle measures such
as response latencies to provide a fuller picture of
memory performance with respect to the brand (Fazio
1987). Brand recall can also be coded in terms of the
order of recall to capture the extent to which the name
is "top of mind" and thus strongly associated with the
product category in memory.
There are many ways to measure the characteristics of brand associations (i.e., their type, favorability, and strength). Qualitative techniques can be employed to suggest possible associations. For example,
free association tasks can be used whereby consumers
describe what the brand means to them in an unstructured format, either individually or in small groups.
Specifically, consumers might be probed in terms of
"who, what, when, where, why, and how" types of
questions about the brand. Projective techniques (Levy
1978, 1981, 1985) such as sentence completion, picture interpretation, and brand personality descriptors
may also be useful, especially if consumers are unwilling or otherwise unable to express their feelings.
These indirect measures, however, may not adequately capture the favorability or strength of associations, and more direct measures often are necessary
to provide additional information. For example, Ajzen
and Fishbein (1980) give a detailed description of how
beliefs and evaluations of attributes and benefits can
be scaled and how attitudes can be measured through
a structured format, providing an illustrative example
in a consumer setting. As noted previously, response
time measures of attitudes have been used as a proxy
for attitude strength.
Relationships among brand associations can be
measured by two general approaches: (1) comparing
the characteristics of brand associations in some way
and (2) directly asking consumers for information relevant to the congruence, competitive overlap, or leverage for the brand associations. Congruence is the
extent to which brand associations are shared. Congruence can be assessed by comparing the pattern of
associations across consumers to determine which as-

soc rations are common or distinctive. Additionally,
consumers could be asked directly their conditional
expectations for attribute, benefit, or attitude associations (i.e., the likelihood that a product or service
has one association given that it has another).
Competitive overlap of brand associations is the
extent to which brand associations are linked to the
product category (i.e., identification) and are or are
not shared with other brands (i.e., uniqueness). Identification can be assessed by examining how consumers respond to brand recall tasks with product category or some other type of cues. Uniqueness of brand
associations can be assessed by comparing the characteristics of associations of the focal brand (i.e., their
type, favorability, and strength) with the characteristics of associations for competing brands. Additionally, consumers could be asked directly (1) how strongly
they identify the brand with the product category and
(2) what they consider to be the unique and shared
aspects of the brand. Multivariate techniques such as
multidimensional scaling also can be employed (Aaker
and Day 1986).
Leverage is the extent to which other brand associations linked to a brand association become secondary associations for the brand. Leverage can be
assessed by comparing the characteristics for the particular company, person, place, event, or product category with those characteristics for the focal brand according to their type, favorability, and strength.
Additionally, consumers could be asked directly what
inferences are made about the brand on the basis of
knowledge of the particular person, place, event,
company, or product category.

Direct approach. The second approach to measuring customer-based brand equity, directly measuring the effects of brand knowledge on consumer response to marketing for the brand, requires experiments
in which one group of consumers responds to an element of the marketing program when it is attributed
to the brand and another group of consumers responds
to that same element when it is attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the product or
service. By attributing the marketing element to an
unfamiliar or anonymous product, consumers should
interpret it with respect to their general knowledge about
the product or service, as well as prototypical product
or service specifications and price, promotion, and
distribution strategies. Comparing the responses of the
two groups thus provides an estimate of the effects
due to the specific knowledge about the brand that
goes beyond basic product or service knowledge.
The classic example of this approach is the socalled "blind" test in which consumers evaluate a
product on the basis of a description, examination, or
actual consumption experience, either with or without

brand attribution. Past research of this type has shown
that knowledge of the brand affects consumer perceptions, preferences, and choices for a product (e.g.,
Allison and Uhl 1964; Jacoby, Olson, and Haddock
1971). Blind tests could be used to examine consumer
response to other elements of the marketing mix such
as proposed pricing, promotion, and channels of distribution changes.
One important consideration with the direct approach is the experimental realism that can be achieved
when some aspect of the marketing program is attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the
product or service. Detailed concept statements can be
employed in some situations when it may be otherwise difficult for consumers to examine or experience
the marketing mix element without being aware of the
brand. Thus, concept statements may be useful in assessing customer-based brand equity when consumers
make a product choice or evaluate a change in the
product or service composition, judge a proposed brand
extension, or respond to a proposed price or distribution change. Assessing customer-based brand equity with marketing communications presents a bigger
challenge with the direct approach (e.g., consumer response to a proposed new advertising campaign). In
this case, storyboards and animatic or photomatic versions of an ad could be used rather than a finished ad
to allow for the necessary disguise of the brand. Though
this approach should work well with "informational"
ads, it probably would be less appropriate for "transformational" ads emphasizing user, usage, or some
other type of imagery, in which production values are
a critical ingredient in achieving communication goals
(Rossiter and Percy 1987).
Finally, another potentially useful approach for directly assessing customer-based brand equity is conjoint or tradeoff analysis (Green and Srinivasan 1978,
1990; Green and Wind 1975). Conjoint analysis can
be used to explore the main effects of the brand name
(i.e., differences in preference or choice for the brand)
and interaction effects between the brand name and
other marketing mix elements such as price, product
or service features, and promotion or channel choices
(i.e., differences in perceptions for the brand). For
example, Rangaswamy, Burke, and Oliva (1990) use
conjoint analysis to explore how brand names interact
with physical product features to affect the extendability of brand names to new product categories. Note
that if conjoint analysis is employed, care must be taken
that consumers do not evaluate unrealistic product
profiles or scenarios that violate their basic expectations for the product or brand (Park 1991; Srinivasan
1979).
Table 1 summarizes the different measurement alternatives for customer-based brand equity.

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 13

TABLE 1
Measurement of Brand Knowledge Constructs Related to Customer-Based Brand Equitya
Construct
Brand Avvareness
Recall
Recognition

Measure(s)

Purpose of Measure(s)

Correct identification of brand given
product category or some other type of
probe as cue
Correct discrimination of brand as having
been previously seen or heard

Brand Image
Characteristics of brand associations
Type
Free association tasks, projective
techniques, depth interviews
Favorability
Ratings of evaluations of associations
Strength

Ratings of beliefs of association

Relationships among brand associations
Uniqueness
Compare characteristics of associations
with those of competitors (indirect
measure)
Ask consumers what they consider to be
the unique aspects of the brand (direct
measure)

Capture "top-of-mind" accessibility of
brand in memory
Capture potential retrievability or
availability of brand in memory

Provide insight into nature of brand
associations
Assess key dimension producing
differential consumer response
Assess key dimension producing
differential consumer response
Provide insight into the extent to which
brand associations are not shared with
other brands; assess key dimension
producing differential consumer response

Congruence

Compare patterns of associations across
consumers (indirect measure)
Ask consumers conditional expectations
about associations (direct measure)

Provide insight into the extent to which
brand associations are shared, affecting
their favorability, strength, or uniqueness

Leverage

Compare characteristics of secondary
associations with those for a primary
brand association (indirect measure)
Ask consumers directly what inferences
they would make about the brand based
on the primary brand association (direct
measure)

Provide insight into the extent to which
brand associations to a particular person,
place, event, company, product class, etc.
are linked to other associations,
producing secondary associations for the
brand

"This table describes the indirect approach of assessing potential sources of customer-based brand equity by measuring brand
knowledge. The direct approach to measuring customer-based brand equity involves measuring the effects of brand knowledge
on consumer response to marketing-for example, by conducting experiments in which one group of consumers respond to an
element of the marketing mix when it is attributed to the brand, and another group of consumers respond to the same marketing
mix element when it is attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the product or service.

Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity

According to the definition of customer-based brand
equity, no single number or measure captures brand
equity. Rather, brand equity should be thought of as
a multidimensional concept that depends on (1) what
knowledge structures are present in the minds of consumers and (2) what actions a firm can take to capitalize on the potential offered by these knowledge
structures. Different firms may be more or less able
to maximize the potential value of brand according to
the type and nature of marketing activities that they
are able to undertake. Nevertheless, six general guidelines based on the preceding conceptual framework
are presented here to help marketers better manage
customer-based brand equity.
First, marketers should adopt a broad view of marketing decisions. Marketing activity for a brand po-

14/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

tentially can create value for the brand by improving
consumers' ability to recall or recognize the brand and/
or by creating, maintaining, or changing the favorability, strength, or uniqueness of various types of brand
associations. By influencing brand knowledge in one
or more of these different ways, marketing activity
can potentially affect sales.
Second, marketers should define the knowledge
structures that they would like to create in the minds
of consumers-that is, by specifying desired levels of
awareness and favorability, strength, and uniqueness
of product- and non-product-related attributes; functional, experiential, and symbolic benefits; and overall attitudes. In particular, marketers should decide on
the core needs and wants of consumers to be satisfied
by the brand. Marketers should also decide the extent
to which it is necessary to leverage secondary associations for the brand-that is, link the brand to the

company, product class, or particular person, place,
or event in such a way that associations with those
entities become indirect or "secondary" associations
for the brand.
Third, marketers should evaluate the increasingly
large number of tactical options available to create these
knowledge structures, especially in terms of various
marketing communication alternatives. For example,
the recent growth of "nontraditional" media, promotions, and other marketing activity (e.g., sports and
event sponsorship; in-store advertising; "rninibillboards" in transit vehicles, on parking meters, and in
other locations; and product placement in movies and
television shows) is appropriate from the perspective
of customer-based brand equity. As noted previously,
the manner in which a brand association is created
does not matter-only the resulting favorability,
strength, and uniqueness. Thus, many of these new
alternatives can offer a cost-effective means of affecting brand knowledge and thus sales, especially to
the extent that they complement more traditional marketing tactics. Regardless of which options are chosen, the entire marketing program should be coordinated to create congruent and strong brand associations.
Different marketing tactics with the same strategic
goals, if effectively integrated, can create multiple links
to core benefits or other key associations, helping to
produce a consistent and cohesive brand image. Marketers should judge the consistency and cohesiveness
of the brand image with the business definition in mind
(Levitt 1960) and how well the specific attributes and
benefits that the product or service is intended to provide to consumers satisfy their core needs and wants
(Kotler 1991; Park, Jaworski, and MacInnis 1986).
Fourth, marketers should take a long-term view of
marketing decisions. The changes in consumer
knowledge about the brand from current marketing
activity also will have an indirect effect on the success
of future marketing activities. Thus, from the perspective of customer-based brand equity in making
marketing decisions, it is important to consider how
resulting changes in brand awareness and image may
help or hurt subsequent marketing decisions. For example, the use of sales promotions involving temporary price decreases may create or strengthen a "discount" association with the brand, with implications
for customer loyalty and responses to future price
changes or non-price-oriented marketing communication efforts.
Fifth, marketers should employ tracking studies to
measure consumer knowledge structures over time to
(1) detect any changes in the different dimensions of
brand knowledge and (2) suggest how these changes
might be related to the effectiveness of different marketing mix actions. To the extent that a more precise
assessment of customer-based brand equity is useful,

marketers should also conduct controlled experiments. Consumer knowledge of competitive brands
should be similarly tracked to provide information on
their sources of customer-based brand equity. Experiments with consumer response to marketing activity
for competitive brands can also provide a useful
benchmark-for example, to determine the uniqueness of brand associations.
Finally, marketers should evaluate potential extension candidates for their viability and possible
feedback effects on core brand image. Given their potential importance to long-term brand value, brand extension decisions are considered in detail in the rest
of this section from the perspective of customer-based
brand equity and other relevant research.
Brand extensions capitalize on the brand image for
the core product or service to efficiently inform consumers and retailers about the new product or service.
Brand extensions can facilitate acceptance of the new
product or service by providing two benefits. First,
awareness for the extension may be higher because
the brand node is already present in memory. Thus,
consumers should need only to establish a connection
in memory between the existing brand node and the
new product or service extension. Second, inferred
associations for the attributes, benefits, and overall
perceived quality may be created. In other words,
consumers may form expectations for the extension
on the basis of what they already know about the core
brand. These inferences can lower the cost of the introductory campaign for the extension-for example,
by increasing advertising efficiency (Smith and Park
1992).
Keller and Aaker (1992) review relevant literature
to provide a conceptual model of how consumers use
their knowledge to evaluate a brand extension. They
maintain that extension evaluations will depend on the
salience of the core brand associations in the extension context, how relevant consumers perceive this information to be to their extension evaluations, and how
favorable inferred associations are in the extension
context. In other words, extension evaluations will
depend on what kind of information comes to mind
about the core brand in the extension context, whether
this information is seen as suggestive of the type of
product or service that the brand extension would be,
and whether this information is viewed as good or bad
in the extension context in comparison with competitors.
The salience or accessibility of the core brand associations depends on their strength in memory, as
well as the retrieval cues provided by the extension
context. Some associations may be salient when consumers evaluate some extensions but not others. The
relevance of the salient core brand associations depends, in part, on their perceived similarity to the pro-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 15

posed extension product or service (Feldman and Lynch
1988). When overall similarity is high, consumers are
more likely to base their extension evaluations on their
attitude toward the core brand (Boush and Loken 1991;
Boush et al. 1987; Herr, Farquhar, and Fazio 1990).
Overall similarity judgments could be made in different ways (Loken and Ward 1990), though researchers
typically assume that they are a function of salient
shared associations between the core brand and the
extension product category. These similarity judgments could be based on product-related attributes, as
well as non-product-related attributes such as user type
or usage situation (Bridges 1990; Park, Milberg, and
Lawson 1991). When overall similarity is not very high,
consumers are more likely to consider specific attributes and benefits involved. If relevant, the favorability of inferred attribute and benefit beliefs will depend on how they are valued in the extension context.
Though these evaluations will generally correspond to
the favorability of the core brand associations, they
can differ, and in fact be negative, even if the core
brand associations themselves are positive (Aaker and
Keller 1990). Moreover, even if positive attribute and
benefit associations for the core brand lead to inferences of positive brand extension associations, inferred negative associations may still emerge (Bridges
1990). Finally, when overall similarity is very low,
consumer evaluations also will be very low.
When multiple product or service extensions are
associated with the brand, the congruence among their
associations becomes an important determinant of the
consistency and cohesiveness of the brand image. It
is often argued that an extension can help the core
brand image by improving the favorability and strength
of associations and clarifying the business definition
and core benefits for the brand. Aaker (1991) claims
that brand extensions helped to fortify the brand images of Weight Watchers and Sunkist. Keller and Aaker
(1992) found that the successful introduction of a brand
extension improved evaluations of a core brand that
originally was perceived to be of only average quality,
although in their research setting consumers did not
have strongly held attitudes toward the core brand and
the company adopted a family branding strategy that
raised the salience of its name (and thus perceptions
of its credibility).
It has also been argued that successful brand extensions may potentially harm the core brand image
if they weaken existing associations in some way. If
a brand becomes associated with a disparate set of
products or services, product category identification
and the corresponding product associations may become less strong. For example, Pepperidge Farm,
Cadbury, and Scott Paper have been accused of
"overextending" by introducing too disparate products. Dilution effects, with potentially adverse profit

16/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

implications, may be especially likely when the existing associations for the core brand are already fairly
weak. For example, the successful introduction of the
Miller Lite beer in the U.S. may have accentuated
perceptions of the flagship Miller High Life beer as a
"less hearty" beer because that perception had already
been created in consumers' minds by its clear bottle
(in contrast to Budweiser's dark bottle). As another
example of a potential dilution effect, successful extensions for brands with an exclusivity and prestige
image that effectively broaden the target market may
produce negative feedback effects on the brand from
members of the original consumer franchise who resent the market expansion. For example, the introduction of the lower priced Cadillac Cimaron model
is thought to have led to declines in image and sales
for the entire Cadillac division (Yovovich 1988).
Though these different types of dilution effects may
occur, multiple product or service extensions may not
be as harmful to certain abstract associations such as
brand attitudes and perceived quality. In other words,
although the brand may not have the same specific
product or service meaning because of multiple extensions, consumers may still see the brand as representing a range of products or services of a certain
quality.
An unsuccessful brand extension, in contrast, can
harm the core brand image by creating undesirable associations. Such effects are most likely when there is
little difference between the original brand and the extension. For example, Sullivan (1990) conducted an
econometric analysis that showed how the perceived
"sudden acceleration" problem of Audi's 5000 model
"spilled over" and reduced demand for its 4000 and
Quattro models. Roedder John and Loken (1990) found
that perceptions of quality for a core brand in the health
and beauty aids area decreased with the hypothetical
introduction of a lower quality extension in a similar
product category (i. e., shampoo). Quality perceptions
of the core brand were unaffected, however, when the
proposed extension was in a dissimilar product category (i.e., facial tissue). Similarly, Keller and Aaker
(1992) found that unsuccessful intervening extensions
in dissimilar product categories did not affect evaluations of the core brand (also see Romeo 1990).
In summary, marketers should evaluate potential
extension candidates for their viability and their feedback effects on core brand image by (1) identifying
possible extension candidates on the basis of core brand
associations (especially with respect to brand positioning and core benefits) and overall similarity of the
extension to the brand, (2) evaluating extension candidate potential by measuring the salience, relevance,
and favorability of core brand associations in the proposed extension context and the favorability of any
inferred associations, and (3) considering the exten-

sion's potential feedback effects on the core brand image and the favorability, strength, and uniqueness of
core brand associations.

Discussion
Summary

This article introduces the concept of customer-based
brand equity, defined as the differential effect of brand
knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of
the brand. A brand is said to have positive (negative)
customer-based brand equity if consumers react more
(less) favorably to an element of the marketing mix
for the brand than 'hey do to the same marketing mix
element when it is attributed to a fictitiously named
or unnamed version of the product or service. Brand
knowledge is conceptualized according to an associative network memory model in terms of two components, brand awareness and brand image (i.e., a set
of brand associations). Brand awareness consists of
brand recognition and brand recall. Brand associations are conceptualized in terms of their characteristics by type (level of abstraction and qualitative nature), favorability, and strength, and in terms of their
relationship with other associations by congruence,
competitive overlap (identification and uniqueness),
and leverage. Customer-based brand equity occurs when
the consumer is aware of the brand and holds some
favorable, strong, and unique brand associations in
memory. The different types of customer-based brand
equity are discussed by considering the effects of these
dimensions of brand knowledge on brand loyalty and
consumer response to product, price, promotion, and
distribution strategies.
The article also explores some specific aspects of
this conceptualization by considering how customerbased brand equity is built, measured, and managed.
Building brand equity requires creating a familiar brand
name and a positive brand image-that is, favorable,
strong, and unique brand associations. Strategies to
build customer-based brand equity are discussed in
terms of both the initial choice of the brand identities
(brand name, logo, and symbol) and how the brand
identities are supported by and integrated into the
marketing program. Two basic approaches to measuring customer-based brand equity are outlined. The
indirect approach measures brand knowledge (brand
awareness and elements of brand image) to assess the
potential sources of brand equity. The direct approach
measures the effects of the brand knowledge on consumer response to elements of the marketing mix. Examples of both types of approaches are provided. Finally, six guidelines for the management of customerbased brand equity are discussed. These guidelines
emphasize the importance of taking a broad and long-

term view of marketing a brand; specifying the desired consumer knowledge structures and core benefits for a brand; considering a wide range of traditional and nontraditional advertising, promotion, and
other marketing options; coordinating the marketing
options that are chosen; conducting tracking studies
and controlled experiments; and evaluating potential
extension candidates.
Future Research Directions

In the presentation of a conceptual framework of
customer-based brand equity, several constructs and
relationships are discussed. Consequently, additional
research is necessary both to refine this framework
and to suggest other implications for marketing strategies and tactics. Undoubtedly, much previous research may be useful in this effort. Because this research was most likely conducted with a different
purpose in mind, however, additional insights may be
gained by considering it from the potentially broader
perspective of customer-based brand equity. In closing, some research priorities for building, measuring,
and managing customer-based brand equity are identified.
There are several important research questions about
how to build customer-based brand equity. First, better choice criteria should be established for the brand
identities (brand name, logo, and symbol). For example, remarkably little empirical research has systematically examined brand name considerations as
they pertain to enhancing brand awareness and building favorable, strong, and unique brand associations.
Such research should recognize the numerous tradeoffs in choice criteria by suggesting when certain
characteristics of the brand identities should be emphasized. For example, memory retrieval considerations that arise from associative strength and part-list
cueing theories in psychology imply that a meaningful, "suggestive" brand name may facilitate initial positioning, but a nonsuggestive or neutral brand name
may more effectively accommodate later repositioning. Support of this hypothesis would imply that firms
may be better off adopting more flexible branding
strategies, using more neutral brand names, if they
anticipate needing to reposition the brand later. In developing contingency-based choice criteria, it also will
be necessary to clarify the roles of various brand identities by considering more explicitly how brand names,
logos, symbols, slogans, and other trademarks can
contribute differentially to building customer-based
brand equity. This line of research could consider visual and verbal properties of these brand identities and
how they might affect brand awareness and the favorability, strength, and uniqueness of brand associations.
In terms of understanding how the supporting mar-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 17

keting program builds customer-based brand equity,
two particular research directions could be pursued.
First, factors influencing the favorability, strength, and
uniqueness of brand associations, a focus of much past
research, should continue to be explored, but along
several different lines. Are certain types of associations inherently more favorable, stronger, or unique
in memory? Which types of associations are more easily created by a particular marketing or communication mix element? Which types of associations are more
likely to influence consumer response with respect to
a particular marketing mix element? Finally, what are
the tradeoffs involved in creating favorable, strong,
and unique brand associations? For example, it was
suggested previously that benefits can be more memorable than attribute information, but attributes may
have to be communicated to persuade consumers and
create favorable benefit associations. It was also suggested above that non-product-related or image attributes, such as user type or usage situation, may create
unique associations, but under some circumstances they
may not be favorably received or strongly linked to
the brand in memory.
Second, the costs and benefits of leveraging secondary associations should be explored. For example,
how and under what conditions should a firm increase
the salience of source factors related to the brand (i.e.,
the company, country of origin, and distribution channel)? All of these source factors have their own set of
associations. How do consumers merge or combine
these associations with other brand associations? In
other words, how do these source and brand images
interact? Another important issue is when and how a
brand should attempt to become associated with a particular person or event. For example, Rossiter and Percy
(1987) offer the following criteria for choosing a presenter in advertising: (1) visibility, (2) credibility (expertise and objectivity), (3) attraction (likability and
similarity), and (4) power. These criteria could be
adapted to address when and how a brand should become identified with an event.
One important research priority is to develop valid
benchmarks for the direct approach to measuring
customer-based brand equity-that is, plausible descriptions of the relevant activity (advertising, promotion, product, pricing, etc.) with no or fictitious
brand identification. Another useful contribution would
be to design efficient and effective approaches to conducting tracking studies. This would entail considering the pros and cons of different qualitative and
quantitative approaches to measuring brand knowledge of consumers.
Several research questions are relevant for managing customer-based brand equity. What strategies
are effective in creating strong brand associations? How
can different marketing mix elements be integrated to
create strong and congruent brand associations and a
18/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

consistent and cohesive brand image? This line of research should clearly examine how traditional and
nontraditional marketing options interact. Effective
strategies for integrating marketing communications
in terms of advertising, promotion, publicity, direct
marketing, and package design are especially needed.
For example, how can advertising be coordinated across
broadcast and print media to enhance brand awareness
and strengthen brand associations? These research
studies might consider memory principles and theories of encoding and retrieval.
Also, how should the consistency and cohesiveness of a brand image be managed over consumer segments (including geographic boundaries) and over time?
A diffuse brand image with weaker and less favorable
brand associations may be particularly evident when
a brand attempts to reposition itself (e.g., switching
to a new target market) (Heckler, Keller, and Houston
1992). Are there ways in which a brand image can be
"flexible" and appeal to different consumer segments? To manage the brand image better over time,
more precise guidelines as to the "indirect" effects of
current marketing activity on the success of future
marketing activity are needed-for example, by
achieving a better understanding of how brand knowledge influences consumer response.
Finally, broader implications of customer-based
brand equity should be explored by considering aggregation issues associated with brand knowledge effects on market segments or the customer franchise as
a whole, as opposed to effects on an individual consumer. An aggregate analysis also could consider the
implication of customer-based brand equity for sales,
market share, and profits. This more extended analysis should consider aspects of the company (e. g., its
strengths and weaknesses) and the competitive nature
of its markets. Similarly, it may also be useful to incorporate some of the concepts that relate to customerbased brand equity to address other management
questions pertaining to branding-for example, to develop a financially based conceptualization of brand
equity.

Conclusions
The goal of this article is to present a conceptual
framework that would provide useful structure for
managers developing brand strategies and researchers
studying brand equity. In particular, the article builds
a theoretical foundation based on past research in consumer behavior that should be helpful in addressing
some of the new challenges in developing brand strategies that have arisen because of changes in the marketing environment (e.g., from the proliferation of
brand extensions and the growth of new, alternative
promotional and media alternatives).
Though many of the ideas expressed in this con-

ceptual framework may be familiar to managers, its
value is in integrating these various notions to provide
a more comprehensive picture of how marketers can
create value for a brand. For example, marketers may
agree that they should take a broad and long-term view
of marketing decisions for a brand, but how they should
do so may not be obvious. By recognizing that marketing activity can potentially enhance or maintain
consumers' awareness of the brand or the favorability,
strength, and uniqueness of various types of brand associations, the customer-based brand equity framework may provide the perspective that will enable

marketers to take better short-term and long-term marketing actions. Moreover, this framework may also
suggest some considerations that have been otherwise
overlooked. Thus, this broader context can help managers can make more insightful and informed brand
decisions.
For researchers, the value of the framework is in
suggesting areas where managerial guidance is needed
but academic guidelines are currently lacking. As suggested by the large number of suggested future research directions identified, much work needs to be
done.

REFERENCES
Aaker, David A. (1982), "Positioning Your Product," Business Horizons, 25 (May/June), 56-62.
(1991), Managing Brand Equity. New York: The
Free Press.
and Alexander Biel, eds. (1992), Building Strong
Brands. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
and George S. Day (1986), Marketing Research,
3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
and Kevin Lane Keller (1990), "Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions," Journal of Marketing, 54
(January), 27-41.
Ajzen, leek and Martin Fishbein (1980), Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Alba, Joseph W. and Amitava Chattopadhyay (1985a), "The
Effects of Context and Part-Category Cues on the Recall of
Competing Brands," Journal of Marketing Research, 22
(August), 340-9.
and
(1985b), "The Effects of Part-List
Cuing on Attribute Recall: Problem Framing at the Point
of Retrieval," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 12,
Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook, eds. Provo,
UT: Association for Consumer Research, 410-13.
and
(1986), "Salience Effects in Brand
Recall," Journal of Marketing Research, 23 (November),
363-9.
and J. Wesley Hutchinson (1987), "Dimensions of
Consumer Expertise," Journal of Consumer Research, 13
(March), 411-53.
--- ,
, and John G. Lynch, Jr. (1991),
"Memory and Decision Making," in Handbook of Consumer Theory and Research, Harold H. Kassarjian and
Thomas S. Robertson, eds. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1-49.
Allison, Ralph and Kenneth P. Uhl (1964), "Influences of Beer
Brand Identification on Taste Perception," Journal of Marketing Research, 2 (August), 36-9.
Anderson, John R. (1983), The Architecture of Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Baker, William, J. Wesley Hutchinson, Danny Moore, and
Prakash Nedungadi (1986), "Brand Familiarity and Advertising: Effects on the Evoked Set and Brand Preferences,"
in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 13, Richard J.
Lutz, ed. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research,
637-42.
Barwise, Patrick, Christopher Higson, Andrew Likierman, and

Paul Marsh (1989), Accounting for Brands. London: London Business School and the Institute for Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Berger, Ida E. and Andrew A. Mitchell (1989), "The Effect
of Advertising on Attitude Accessibility," Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 280-8.
Bettman, James R. (1979), An Information Processing Theory
of Consumer Choice. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Company.
(1986), "Consumer Psychology," Annual Review
of Psychology, 37, 257-89.
and C. Whan Park (1980), "Effects of Prior
Knowledge and Experience and Phase of the Choice Process on Consumer Decision Processes: A Protocol Analysis, " Journal of Consumer Research, 7 (December), 23448.
- - - - , Deborah Roedder John, and Carol A. Scott (1986),
"Covariation Assessment by Consumers," Journal of Consumer Research, 13 (December), 316-26.
and Mita Sujan (1987), "Effects of Framing on
Evaluation of Comparable and Noncomparable Alternatives
by Expert and Novice Consumers," Journal of Consumer
Research, 14 (September), 141-54.
Blattberg, Robert C. and Kenneth J. Wisniewski (1989), "PriceInduced Patterns of Competition," Marketing Science, 8
(Fall), 291-309.
Boush, David M. and Barbara Loken (1991), "A Process
Tracing Study of Brand Extension Evaluations, " Journal of
Marketing Research, 28 (February), 16-28.
- - - - , Shannon Shipp, Barbara Loken, Ezra Gencturk,
Susan Crockett, Ellen Kennedy, Betty Minshall, Dennis
Misurell, Linda Rochford, and Jon Strobel (1987), "Affect
Generalization to Similar and Dissimilar Brand Extensions," Psychology and Marketing, 4 (3),225-37.
Bridges, Sheri (1990), "A Schema Unification Model of Brand
Extensions," unpublished doctoral dissertation, Graduate
School of Business, Stanford University.
Burke, Raymond R. and Thomas K. Srull (1988), "Competitive Interference and Consumer Memory for Advertising,"
Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (June), 55-68.
Chaiken, Shelley (1986), "The Heuristic Model of Persuasion," in Social Influence: The Ontario Symposium, Vol.
4, Mark P. Zanna, E. Tory Higgins, and C. P. Herman,
eds. Hillsdale, NJ. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chattopadhyay, Amitava and Joseph W. Alba (1988), "The
Situational Importance of Recall and Inference in Con-

Customer-Based Brand Equity / 19

sumer Decision Making, ~ Journal of Consumer Research,
15 (June), 1-12.
Collins, Allan M. and Elizabeth F. Loftus (1975), "A Spreading Activation Theory of Semantic Processing, ~ Psychological Review, 82, 407-28.
Craik, Fergus I. M. and Robert S. Lockhart (1972), "Levels
of Processing: A Framework for Memory Research, ~ Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11,671-84.
and Endel Tulving (1975), "Depth of Processing
and the Retention of Words in Episodic Memory, ~ Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 104 (3), 268-94.
Cohen, Joel B. and Kanul Basu (1987), "Alternative Models
of Categorization: Towards a Contingent Processing
Framework, ~ Journal of Consumer Research, 13 (March),
455-72.
Day, George S., Allan D. Shocker, and Rajendra K. Srivastava
(1979), "Customer-Oriented Approaches to Identifying
Product-Markets," Journal of Marketing, 43 (Fall), 8-19.
Dick, Alan, Dipankar Chakravarti, and Gabriel Biehal (1990),
"Memory-Based Inferences During Consumer Choice, ~
Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (June), 82-93.
Dobni, Dawn and George M. Zinkhan (1990), "In Search of
Brand Image: A Foundation Analysis, ~ in Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 17, Marvin E. Goldberg, Gerald
Gorn, and Richard W. Pollay, eds. Provo UT: Association
for Consumer Research, 110-19.
Dolan, Carrie (1985), "Concocting Zingy New Names Starts
Turning Into a Business," Wall Street Journal.
Erickson, Gary M., Johny K. Johansson, and Paul Chao (1984),
"Image Variables in Multi-Attribute Product Evaluations:
Country-of-Origin Effects, ~ Journal of Consumer Research, 11 (September), 694-9.
Farquhar, Peter H. (1989), "Managing Brand Equity, ~ Marketing Research, 1 (September), 24-33.
Fazio, Russell H. (1987), "Category-Brand Associations and
Their Activation From Memory, ~ unpublished report, Ogilvy
Center for Research and Development, San Francisco, CA.
- - - , Martha C. Powell, and Carol J. Williams (1989),
"The Role of Attitude Accessibility in the Attitude and Behavior Process," Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 280-8.
- - - - , David M. Sanbonmatsu, Martha C. Powell, and
Frank R. Kardes (1986), "On the Automatic Activation of
Attitudes, ~ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
50 (February), 229-38.
and Mark P. Zanna (1981), "Direct Experiences
and Attitude-Behavior Consistency, ~ in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 14, Leonard Berkowitz,
ed. New York: Academic Press, Inc., 161-202.
Feldman, Jack M. and John G. Lynch, Jr. (1988), "SelfGenerated Validity and Other Effects of Measurement on
Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior," Journal of Applied Psychology, 73 (August), 421-35.
Fennell, Geraldine (1978), "Consumer's Perceptions of the
Product-Use Situation, ~ Journal of Marketing, 42 (April),
38-47.
Fishbein, Martin and leek Ajzen (1975), Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Ford, Gary T. and Ruth Ann Smith (1987), "Inferential Beliefs in Consumer Evaluations: An Assessment of Alternative Processing Strategies, ~ Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (December), 363-71.
Gardner, Burleigh B. and Sidney J. Levy (1955), "The Product and the Brand, ~ Harvard Business Review, 33 (MarchApril), 33-9.

20 / Journal of Marketing, January 1993

Green, Paul E. and V. Srinivasan (1978), "Conjoint Analysis
in Consumer Research: Issues and Outlook, ~ Journal of
Consumer Research, 5 (September), 102-23.
and
(1990), "Conjoint Analysis in Consumer Research: New Developments and Directions, ~
Journal of Marketing, 54 (October), 3-19.
and Yoram Wind (1975), "New Ways to Measure
Consumers' Judgments, ~ Harvard Business Review, 53
(July / August), 107-17.
Gregg, Vernon H. (1976), "Word Frequency, Recognition, and
Recall, ~ in Recall and Recognition, John Brown, ed. London: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Heckler, Susan, Kevin Lane Keller, and Michael J. Houston
(1992), "The Effects of Brand Repositioning on Ad Recall, ~ working paper, Karl Eller School of Management,
University of Arizona.
Herr, Paul M., Peter H. Farquhar, and Russell H. Fazio (1990),
"Extending Brand Equity to New Categories, ~ working paper, Graduate School of Business, Indiana University.
Hertel, Paula T. (1982), "Remembering Reactions and Facts:
The Influence of Subsequent Information, ~ Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
8 (6),513-29.
Herzog, H. (1963), "Behavioral Science Concepts for Analyzing the Consumer," in Marketing and the Behavioral
Sciences, Perry Bliss, ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon Inc.,
76-86.
Hoch, Stephen J. (1984), "Availability and Interference in
Predictive Judgment," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10 (October), 62962.
Hong, Sung-Tai and Robert S. Wyer (1989), "Effects of
Country-of-Origin and Product Attribute Information on
Product Evaluation: An Information Processing Perspective," Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (September), 17587.
and
(1990), "Determinants of Product
Evaluation: Effects of the Time Interval Between Knowledge of a Product's Country of Origin and Information About
Its Specific Attributes, ~ Journal ofConsumer Research, 17
(December), 277-88.
Houston, Michael J., Terry L. Childers, and Susan E. Heckler
(1987), "Picture-Word Consistency and the Elaborative
Processing of Advertisements, ~ Journal of Marketing Research, 24 (November), 359-69.
Hoyer, Wayne D. and Steven P. Brown (1990), "Effects of
Brand Awareness on Choice for a Common, Repeat-Purchase
Product," Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (September),
141-8.
Huber, Joel and John McCann (1982), "The Impact of Inferential Beliefs on Product Evaluations," Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (November), 428-41.
Isen, Alice M. (1992), "The Influence of Positive Affect on
Cognitive Organization: Some Implications for the Influence of Advertising on Decisions About Products and
Brands, ~ in Advertising Exposure, Memory, and Choice,
Andrew A. Mitchell, ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, in press.
Jacoby, Jacob and David Mazursky (1984), "Linking Brand
and Retailer Images-Do the Potential Risks Outweigh the
Potential Benefits?" Journal of Retailing, 60 (2), 105-22.
- - - , Jerry C. Olson, and Rafael A. Haddock (1971),
"Price, Brand Name, and Product Composition Characteristics as Determinants of Perceived Quality, ~ Journal of
Applied Psychology, 55 (December), 570-9.
- - - - , George J. Syzabillo, and Jacqeline Busato-Schach
(1977), "Information Acquisition Behavior in Brand Choice

Situations," Journal ofConsumer Research, 3 (4), 209-16.
Johnson, Michael D. (1984), "Consumer Choice Strategies for
Comparing Noncomparable Alternatives," Journal of Consumer Research, II (December), 741-53.
Kahle, Lynne R. and Pamela M. Homer (1985), "Physical Attractiveness of the Celebrity Endorsor: A Social Adaptation
Perspective," Journal of Consumer Research, II (4),95461.
Katz, Daniel (1960), "The Functional Approach to the Study
of Attitudes," Public Opinion Quarterly, 24 (Summer), 163204.
Keller, Kevin Lane (1987), "Memory Factors in Advertising:
The Effect of Advertising Retrieval Cues on Brand Evaluations," Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (December),
316-33.
(199Ia), "Cue Compatibility and Framing in Advertising," Journal of Marketing Research, 28 (February),
42-57.
(199Ib), "Memory and Evaluation Effects in Competitive Advertising Environments," Journal of Consumer
Research, 16 (March), 436-76.
(1992), "Memory Retrieval Factors and Advertising Effectiveness," in Advertising Exposure, Memory, and
Choice, Andrew A. Mitchell, ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, in press.
and David A. Aaker (1992), "The Effects of Sequential Introduction of Brand Extensions," Journal of
Marketing Research, 29 (February), 35-50.
Kotler, Philip H. (1991), Marketing Management: Analysis,
Planning, and Control, 8th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Leuthesser, Lance, ed. (1988), "Defining, Measuring and
Managing Brand Equity: A Conference Summary," Report
#88-104. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.
Levitt, Theodore (1960), "Marketing Myopia," Harvard Business Review, 38 (July/August), 45-56.
Levy, Sidney J. (1978), Marketing Behavior: Its Meaning for
Management. New York: AMACOM.
(1981), "Interpreting Consumer Mythology: A
Structural Approach to Consumer Behavior," Journal of
Marketing, 45 (Summer), 49-61.
(1985), "Dreams, Fairy Tales, Animals, and Cars,"
Psychology and Marketing, 2 (2), 67-81.
Lockhart, Robert S., Fergus I. M. Craik, and Larry Jacoby
(1976), "Depth of Processing, Recognition, and Recall,"
in Recall and Recognition, John Brown, ed., New York:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Loftus, Elizabeth F. and Gregory R. Loftus (1980), "On the
Permanence of Stored Information in the Human Brain,"
American Psychologist, 35 (May), 409-20.
Loken, Barbara and James Ward (1990), "Alternative Approaches to Understanding the Determinants of Typicality, " Journal ofConsumer Research, 17 (September), 11126.
Lutz, Richard J. (1991), "The Role of Attitude Theory in Marketing," in Perspectives in Consumer Behavior, 4th ed.,
Harold H. Kassarjian and Thomas S. Robertson, eds. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman and Company, 317-39.
Lynch, John G., Jr., Howard Mamorstein, and Michael Weigold
(1988), "Choices From Sets Including Remembered Brands:
Use of Recalled Attributes and Prior Overall Evaluations,"
Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (September), 169-84.
and Thomas K. Srull (1982), "Memory and Attentional Factors in Consumer Choice: Concepts and Research
Methods," Journal of Consumer Research, 9 (June), 1836.
MacInnis, Deborah J. and Kent Nakamoto (1991), "Factors

That Influence Consumers' Evaluations of Brand Extensions," working paper, Karl Eller School of Management,
University of Arizona.
MacKenzie, Scott B. (1986), "The Role of Attention in Mediating the Effect of Advertising on Attribute Importance, "
Journal of Consumer Research, 13 (September), 174-95.
Maltz, Eliot (1991), "Managing Brand Equity: A Conference
Summary," Report #91-110. Cambridge, MA: Marketing
Science Institute.
Maslow, Abraham H. (1970), Motivation and Personality, 2nd
ed. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, Inc.
McCracken, Grant (1989), "Who Is the Celebrity Endorsor?
Cultural Foundations of the Endorsement Process," Journal
of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 310-21.
Miller, K. E. and J. L. Ginter (1979), "An Investigation of
Situational Variation in Brand Choice Behavior and Attitude," Journal ofMarketing Research, 16 (February), 11123.
Myers, James H. and Allan D. Shocker (1981), "The Nature
of Product-Related Attributes," in Research in Marketing,
Vol. 5, Jagdish Sheth, ed. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Inc.,
211-36.
Myers-Levy, Joan (1989), "The Influence of a Brand Name's
Association Set Size and Word Frequency on Brand Memory," Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (September), 197207.
and Alice M. Tybout (1989), "Schema Congruity
as a Basis for Product Evaluation," Journal of Consumer
Research, 16 (June), 39-54.
Nedungadi, Prakash (1990), "Recall and Consumer Consideration Sets: Influencing Choice Without Altering Brand
Evaluations," Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (December), 263-76.
and Wesley Hutchinson (1985), "The Prototypicality of Brands: Relationships With Brand Awareness,
Preference and Usage," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 12, Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B.
Holbrook, eds. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 489-503.
Newman, Joseph W. (1957), "New Insight, New Progress for
Marketing," Harvard Business Review, 35 (NovemberDecember), 95-102.
Olson, Jerry C. and Jacob Jacoby (1972), "Cue Utilization in
the Quality Perception Process," in The Proceedings of the
Third Annual Conference of the Association for Consumer
Research, M. Venkatesan, ed. Iowa City, IA: Association
for Consumer Research, 167-79.
Park, C. Whan, Bernard J. Jaworski, and Deborah J. MacInnis
(1986), "Strategic Brand Concept-Image Management,"
Journal of Marketing, 50 (October), 621-35.
and V. Parker Lessig (1981), "Familiarity and Its
Impact on Consumer Biases and Heuristics," Journal of
Consumer Research, 8 (September), 223-30.
- - - - , Sandra Milberg, and Robert Lawson (1991),
"Evaluation of Brand Extensions: The Role of Product Level
Similarity and Brand Concept Consistency, " Journal of
Consumer Research, 18 (September), 185-93.
and Daniel C. Smith (1989), "Product-Level Choice:
A Top-Down or Bottom-Up Process?" Journal of Consumer Research, 16 (December), 289-99.
Park, Chan-Su (1991), "Estimation and Prediction of Brand
Equities Through Survey Measurement of Consumer Preference Structures," unpublished doctoral dissertation proposal, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Petty, Richard E. and John T. Cacioppo (1986), Communication and Persuasion. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Plummer, Joseph T. (1985), "How Personality Makes a Dif-

Customer-Based Brand Equity /21

ference," Journal of Advertising Research, 24 (6),27-31.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. and Richard M. Shiffrin (1981), "Search
of Associative Memory," Psychological Review, 88, 93134.
Rangaswamy, Arvind, Raymond Burke, and Terence A. Oliva
(1990), "Brand Equity and the Extendibility of Brand
Names," Working Paper No. 90-019, The Wharton School,
The University of Pennsylvania.
Ratcliff, Roger and Gail McKoon (1988), "A Retrieval Theory
of Priming in Memory," Psychological Review, 95 (3), 385408.
Ray, Michael L. (1982), Advertising and Communication
Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Ries, Al and Jack Trout (1979), Positioning: The Battle for
Your Mind. New York: McGraw Hill, Inc.
Robertson, Kim R. (1987), "Recall and Recognition Effects
of Brand Name Imagery," Psychology and Marketing, 4
(1), 3-15.
(1989), "Strategically Desirable Brand Name Characteristics," Journal of Consumer Marketing, 6 (Fall), 6171.
Roedder John, Deborah and Barbara Loken (1990), "Diluting
Brand Equity: The Impact of Brand Extensions," working
paper, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota.
Romeo, Jean B. (1990), "The Effect of Negative Information
on the Evaluation of Brand Extensions and the Family
Brand," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 18,
Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds. Provo,
UT: Association for Consumer Research, 399-406.
Rosch, Eleanor and Carolyn B. Mervis (1975), "Family Resemblances: Studies in the Internal Structure of Categories," Cognitive Psychology, 7 (October), 573-605.
Roselius, Ted (1971), "Consumer Ranking of Risk Reduction
Methods," Journal of Marketing, 35 (January), 56-61.
Rossiter, John R. and Larry Percy (1987), Advertising and
Promotion Management. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Company.
Russo, Edward J. and Eric J. Johnson (1980), "What Do Consumers Know About Familiar Products?" in Advances in
Consumer Research, Vol. 7, Jerry C. Olson, ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 417-23.
Simon, Carol J. and Mary W. Sullivan (1990), "The Measurement and Determinants of Brand Equity: A Financial
Approach," working paper, Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago.
Simonson, Itamar, Joel Huber, and John Payne (1988), "The
Relationship Between Prior Knowledge and Information
Acquisition Order," Journal of Consumer Research, 14
(March), 566-78.
Smith, Daniel C. and C. Whan Park (1992), "The Effects of
Brand Extensions on Market Share and Advertising Efficiency," Journal of Marketing Research, 29 (August), 296313.
Solomon, Michael R. (1983), "The Role of Products as Social

22/ Journal of Marketing, January 1993

Stimuli: A Symbolic Interactionism Perspective," Journal
of Consumer Research, 10 (December), 319-29.
Srinivasan, V. (1979), "Network Models for Estimating BrandSpecific Effects in Multi-Attribute Marketing Models,"
Management Science, 25 (January), 11-21.
Srivastava, Rajendra and Allan D. Shocker (1991), "Brand
Equity: A Perspective on Its Meaning and Measurement,"
working paper, Graduate School of Business, University of
Texas at Austin.
Srull, Thomas K. (1984), "Methodological Techniques for the
Study of Person Memory and Social Cognition," in Handbook of Social Cognition, Vol. 2, Robert S. Wyer and
Thomas K. Srull, eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1-72.
Starr, Martin K. and Joel R. Rubinson (1978), "A Loyalty
Group Segmentation Model for Brand Purchasing Simulation," Journal of Marketing Research, 15 (August), 37883.
Sujan, Mita (1985), "Consumer Knowledge: Effects on Evaluation Strategies Mediating Consumer Judgments," Journal of Consumer Research, 12 (June), 31-46.
and James R. Bettman (1989), "The Effects of Brand
Positioning Strategies on Consumers' Brand and Category
Perceptions: Some Insights From Schema Research, " Journal of Marketing Research, 26 (November), 454-67.
Sullivan, Mary W. (1990), "Measuring Image Spillovers in
Umbrella Branded Products," Journal of Business, 63 (July),
309-29.
Tauber, Edward M. (1988), "Brand Leverage: Strategy for
Growth in a Cost Controlled World," Journal of Advertising Research, 28 (August/September), 26-30.
Tulving, Endel (1983), Elements of Episodic Memory. London: Oxford University Press.
and Joseph Psotka (1971), "Retroactive Inhibition
in Free Recall: Inaccessibility of Information Available in
Memory Store," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 87
(1), 1-8.
Ward, James and Barbara Loken (1986), "The Quintessential
Snack Food: Measurement of Product Prototypes," in Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 13, Richard J. Lutz,
ed. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 12631.
Wentz, Laurel (1989), "WPP Considers Brand Valuation,"
Advertising Age, 24.
Wilkie, William (1986), Consumer Behavior. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wind, Yoram (1982), Product Policy: Concepts, Methods, and
Strategy. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Wyer, Robert S., Jr. and Thomas K. Srull (1989), "Person
Memory and Judgment," Psychological Review, 96 (1), 5883.
Yovovich, B. G. (1988), "What Is Your Brand Really Worth?"
Adweek's Marketing Week (August 8), 18-21.
Zeithaml, Valarie (1988), "Consumer Perceptions of Price,
Quality, and Value: A Means-End Model and Synthesis of
the Evidence," Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 2-22.
Reprint No. JM571100

