International Review on Public and Nonprofit Marketing (2021) 18:129–150
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12208-020-00262-3
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow
as impacts of donation size on purchase intention
Amel Chaabouni 1

2

& Kaouther Jridi & Fatma Bakini

3

Received: 4 March 2020 / Accepted: 7 September 2020 / Published online: 18 September 2020
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract
This research considers the impact of donation size, in relation to Cause-Related
Marketing (CRM) practices, on purchase intention. More specifically, it aims to
understand the ethical behaviour of consumers, while introducing diametrically opposed feelings, scepticism and warm glow. A quantitative study based on experimentation was conducted and online self-managed questionnaires were handed to 300
Internet users. The results of this research show that the size of the donation does not
directly contribute to the purchase intention, but it rather provokes scepticism in the
case of a highly-sized donation. The latter directly and negatively influences the warm
glow which in its turn positively affects the intention to buy non-profit products. This
research helps advertisers to convey positive, clear and unexaggerated advertising
messages about the size of the donation, to avoid consumers’ disruption, doubts and
incredulity. This research provides insights into cause-related marketing phenomenon
while simultaneously taking into account positive reactions (warm glow) and negative
reactions (scepticism) in the research cultures of the Arab world, where the research is
sporadic and unavailable.
Keywords Cause-related marketing . Non-profit product . Scepticism . Warm glow .

Donation size . African context

* Amel Chaabouni
chaabouniamel91@gmail.com

1

Applied Research in Business Relationships and Economics, Higher School of Economic and
Commercial Sciences, University of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia

2

Applied Research in Business Relationships and Economics, High Institute of Management,
University of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia

3

Applied Research in Business Relationships and Economics, High Institute of Management, Tunis,
Tunisia

130

A. Chaabouni et al.

1 Introduction
Enterprises evolve in a highly competitive environment where products are of similar
quality and price, hence the need to stand out from the competition and differentiate
themselves through consumers. This is why companies are urged to design innovative
strategies by integrating social responsibility practices, not only to attract new customers, but also to retain existing ones (Shabbir et al. 2010). In this context, causerelated marketing represents one of the modern marketing strategies used by most
companies in the Western world (Kumar and Bansal 2017).
Cause-related marketing is defined by Nelson and Vilela (2017), as a marketing tool
linking a company to a social cause within a promotional initiative with the aim of
obtaining mutual benefit. Thus, it simultaneously highlights the social responsibility
and the marketing strategy of a firm in order to achieve economic and social objectives,
thus promoting social progress, the quality of human life, well-being, security, etc.
(Kumar and Bansal 2017).
More specifically, cause-related marketing represents an alliance between a private
company and a social cause with the objective of integrating the marketing activities of
a lucrative company with the promotion of a charitable work. The effective example of
a successful cause-related marketing campaign in 1983 was that of American Express
bank which, in partnership with the Elis Island Foundation, raised more than $ 1.7
million for the restoration of the Statue of Liberty (Natarajan et al. 2016).
This practice has been increasingly used by businesses since this time, as a practical
and realistic marketing tool of for-profit businesses seeking to assist charities. Today,
most companies use cause-related marketing as a strategic tool to create a positive
brand image in the minds of consumers; which improves business sales and profits
(Kumar and Bansal 2017).
The development of this practice over the past few years has prompted researchers to
look into different facets of this subject in order to understand its different effects on
consumers. For example, special attention has been paid to the effect of cause-related
marketing campaigns on business in developed countries in the form of increased sales
and profits and in building a brand image (He et al. 2019; Woodroof et al. 2019; Müller
et al. 2014; Vanhamme et al. 2012; Shabbir et al. 2010). While other researchers have
examined the effect of cause-related marketing on consumers, more particularly their
attitudes, intentions and purchasing decisions (Lee and Johnson 2019; Santoso et al.
2015; Patel et al. 2016; Melero and Montaner 2016). This research aims to develop the
know-how about this subject by introducing into this study the concepts of warm glow
and scepticism.
Lee and Johnson (2019); Santoso et al. (2015); Patel et al. (2016); Melero and
Montaner (2016) and Howie et al. (2018) defend cause-related marketing tactics by
claiming that these campaigns are intended to make people forget certain negative
effects related to business activities. They have shown that cause-related marketing
campaigns are generally favorably perceived by consumers and offer ultimately benefits to the brand, including more favorable attitudes, increased purchase intention and
a positive feeling towards the brand (warm glow). While other researchers (BignéAlcañiz et al. 2012; Human and Terblanche 2012) claim that cause-related marketing
campaigns are carried out with the objective of diverting or preventing negative
advertising from affecting a business. Drumwright (1996) indicates the irrelevance of

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

131

cause-related marketing campaigns with the sole objective of imitating an avant-garde
competitor in this field. It generally leads to a negative feeling of scepticism.
Currently, consumers have become more suspicious of the business and the commercial (Kim and Lee 2009). According to opinion polls, De Pechpeyrou and Odou (2012)
conclude that the majority of consumers think that advertising is often misleading, as it
seeks to persuade people to buy things they do not need. On the one hand, there is a
paradox in the fact that the consumers are sceptical and on the other hand, they attribute a
utility value to advertising (Elving 2013; Huh et al. 2012). This observation suggests the
interest of studying scepticism in the cause-related marketing context.
Although scepticism has been studied in various areas of marketing (De Pechpeyrou
and Odou 2012; Elving 2013; Huh et al. 2012), the literature about it in the specific
context of cause-related marketing is limited (Kim and Lee 2009; De Pechpeyrou and
Odou 2012; Müller et al. 2014); and to our knowledge, only did the study by Mimouni
Chaabane and Parguel (2016) deal with the impact of the size of the donation on the
purchase intention vis-à-vis the associated marketing cause while simultaneously taking
into account positive reactions (warm glow) and negative reactions (scepticism).
In fact, the effect of investing in a donation is unclear. Sinčić et al. (2011) argue that
the size of the donation does not affect consumers’ purchasing intentions toward the
cause-related marketing campaign. Dahl and Lavack (1995) and Strahilevitz (1999)
state that consumers who make large donations, will be able to provide more favorable
evaluations towards the cause-related marketing campaign, which should make them
more likely to purchase. Moosmayer and Fuljahn (2010) support this idea by stating
that higher donations are generally valued more positively than smaller ones, since
small donations give the impression of exploitation by the company. On the other hand,
consumers who face a cause-related marketing offer with a substantial donation may
not believe that the company will really make a donation as much as promised. Thus,
the size of the donations could have a negative effect on sales and can especially
provoke a behavior of scepticism. Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel (2016) conclude
that large donations affect consumer scepticism which in its turn reduces the effect on
the warm glow and attitude towards the retailer. Tsiros and Irmak (2020) deduce that
consumers often react more favorably to the relatively low donation amount rather than
a high donation amount despite the importance of the latter for the cause.
Despite of its attractivity as a research topic, cause-related has been studied from the
perspective of Western countries (Hammad et al. 2014). Indeed, cause-related marketing campaigns have been launched for more than 20 years in the United States and
since 2002 in Germany (Moosmayer and Fuljahn 2010). Such research is sporadic and
unavailable in the research cultures of the Arab world. In addition, the status of Tunisia
(North Africa and a place that needs corporate social responsibility practices) makes it
an ideal context for understanding the influence of cause-related marketing campaigns
on consumers’ responses in terms of purchase intentions.
Tunisia was selected within the framework of this research as an African
developing country. It ranks 8th according to the index of the emergence in Africa
(2017). Companies in Tunisia have recently started to get involved in charitable
actions such as “Délice”, which launched in 2016 a charitable action, linking the
donation to the act of purchase which consists of buying yogurt in order to
contribute (with a determined percentage) to the restoration of schools located in
the poorest areas of the country.

132

A. Chaabouni et al.

This research tries to answer this question: what is the impact of the size of the
donation on the purchase intentions of the products of a firm that is involved in actions
of cause-related marketing? Thus, this study examines the impact of the size of the
donation on consumers’ purchase intentions, while introducing two diametrically
opposed emotions, namely scepticism and warm glow.
Thus, this research work deeply focuses on the cause-related marketing through the
following three aspects. First, the size of the donation has been recognized as an
important trigger for consumer participation in cause-related marketing campaigns.
While previous studies (e.g., Müller et al. 2014; Sinčić et al. 2011; Garretson Folse
et al. 2010) have concentrated on their positive effects, a large donation size can create
a risk of doubts regarding the commitment of companies and their motivations to carry
out social actions thus raising a negative feeling. Research works (Mimouni Chaabane
and Parguel 2016; Heidarian 2019; Tsiros and Irmak 2020) have rarely studied
scepticism despite its importance in studying consumer responses to cause-related
marketing. Large donations are expected to increase consumer scepticism and decrease
the feeling of warm glow. Second, we change the independent variable, donation size
as part of an experimental survey and then we assess the degree of scepticism based on
the variation in the size of donations. This experiment has sometimes been dealt with in
literature (Tsiros and Irmak 2020). Third, we deepen research on scepticism in the areas
of Corporate Social Responsibility activities (Marhana and Osman 2012; Singh et al.
2009), more particularly situational scepticism which is specific to the context and
content of the advertisement. Theoretical and empirical evidence on the importance of
scepticism as a sine qua non in cause-related marketing research has been provided
because consumers use scepticism as a defensive mechanism to protect themselves
from deceptive marketing practices. We will demonstrate that scepticism can backfire
and induce a weak response that can outweigh the positive effect of the warm glow.
This study first proposes a theoretical background in which deals with the donation
size in cause-related marketing campaigns and the conceptual framework in section 1.
Next, section 2 provides details of the quantitative research to 300 Internet users. Then
section 3 presents results and section 4 discusses the impact of donation size, in relation
to cause-related marketing practices, on purchase intention. Finally, conclusion explores theoretical, methodological and managerial implications of this study and
suggests directions for future research.

2 Theoretical background
2.1 Donation size in cause-related marketing campaigns
Cause-related marketing has become the most popular form of corporate social responsibility. It is the idea that a company has a duty to serve not only the financial interests of its
shareholders but also of society in general (Pearce and Robinson 2003). Varadarajan and
Menon (1988) were among the first to define cause-related marketing as the process of
formulating and implementing marketing activities which is characterized by the offer of a
firm the goal of which is to support a specific cause through the repayment of a sum of
money. This is only due when consumers get involved in generating incomes which
include exchanges that will meet both organizational and individual objectives.

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

133

Hartmann et al. (2015) define cause-related marketing as the meeting of a non-profit
charity with a commercial company for the purpose of raising funds and developing sales
while raising awareness of the for-profit partner. There is no big difference between the two
definitions, but the last definition makes it clear that cause-related marketing involves
financial as well as social and ethical benefits. In a broader context, Bergkvist and Taylor
(2016) classify cause-related marketing as a form of leveraged marketing communication,
i.e. marketing communication aimed at ensuring that the brand benefits from positively
associating consumers with another object (for example, a cause).
Despite the wide range of definitions, the central element is the beneficial relationship between a business and a cause for both parties. The main purpose of cause-related
marketing is, therefore, to help increase the company’s revenue and promote credible
causes by paying a specific amount of donation (Kim 2014).
Recent research works have studied the consequences of donation size (Table 1) by
demonstrating positive (e.g. Garretson Folse et al. 2010; Sinčić Ćorić et al. 2011;
Koschate-Fischer et al. 2012), negative (Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel 2016; Tsiros
and Irmak 2020) or insignificant (Fries et al. 2010; Human and Terblanche 2012)
effects. Although several studies incorporate moderating and / or mediating effects,
they cannot precisely explain the contradictory results.
Previous research often mentions the positive effect of donation size, Müller et al.
(2014) show that large donations improve on the one hand, the brand choice when
consumers do not face any financial trade-offs and on the other hand, the brand image
when the framing is nonmonetary. Sinčić Ćorić et al. (2011) demonstrate the positive
influence of personal relation to a cause and donation size on consumers’ purchasing
intention. In their study 1, Garretson Folse et al. (2010) show that firm donation amount
positively effected on participation intention that was fully mediated by consumer
inferences about the company. Koschate-Fischer et al. 2012state that a big donation
increases the willingness to pay among consumers, who show strong warm glow
motives and predispositions when it comes to the support of others. But a large
donation size is not always beneficial, since it can raise ambiguity about the motivations of the company thus leading to the reduction of the effectiveness of cause-related
marketing actions (Tsiros and Irmak 2020). We complete this research by demonstrating that consumers’ reactions to cause-related marketing initiatives are more negative
when the size of the donation is large and when they feel a sense of scepticism.
Table 1 summarizes recent research on the effects of donation size.
2.2 Proposal of the conceptual framework
This study attempts to contribute to the existing body of research to introduce both
concepts simultaneously: warm glow and scepticism following the use of cause-related
marketing practices in Tunisia as an Arab and developing country where studies are
relatively scarce until today. In the following, the conceptual model will be presented.
2.2.1 Effect of the size of the donation on scepticism
The size of the donation can be defined as the sum paid by a company to support an
ethical cause by buying the products of the company involved in cause-related marketing actions (Varadarajan and Menon 1988).

134

A. Chaabouni et al.

Table 1 Research on donation size in the last ten years
Studies

D o n a t i o n s i z e : D e p e n d e n t Results Mediating Moderating effects
independent variable
variable
effets

Garretson Folse
et al. (2010),
study 1

$.05, $.20, $.80, $3.20

CRM
participation
intentions

+

Fries et al. (2010) 5 vs. 15% of price

Brand choice

n.s.

Sinčić Ćorić et al. 9 items associated to
(2011)
donation size

consumers’
purchasing
intention to
buy a brand

+

Koschate-Fischer
et al. (2012)

0–40 cents

Willingness to
pay

+

Attitude toward
helping:+
Warm glow
motive: +
Cause
involvement: +
Cause organization
affinity: +

5 vs. 40 cents

Willingness to
pay

+/ n.s.

Company–cause
fit: +/n.s.

5 vs. 40 cents

Willingness to
pay

+/ n.s.

Company–cause
fit: +/n.s.

5 vs. 40 cents

Willingness to
pay

+/ n.s.

Company–cause
fit: +/n.s.

Human and
Terblanche
(2012)

$0.18 vs. $1.14

Attitude toward
cause alliance
Attitude toward
campaign
CRM
participation
intentions

n.s.

Donation recipient:
n.s.

Müller et al.
(2014)

1/2.5/5/10/20/30/40/50%
of product price

Brand choice

-

Financial
trade-off: +

Brand image

+

nonmonetary
framing: +

Mimouni
20 cents-5% of price.
Chaabane and €2–50% of price
Parguel (2015)

consumers’
perceptions
and
evaluations

-

External
firm’s
motives

n. s.

Skepticism

Das et al. (2016)

Purchase
intentions

+

concrete amount
vague/
unspecified statement

Consumer

inferences:
Firm motives
Corporate social
responsibility
Offer elaboration
Brand attitude

Product-type (more
hedonic vs. less
hedonic): +
Purchase-type
(planned
purchase versus
impulse
purchase): +

135

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...
Table 1 (continued)
Studies

D o n a t i o n s i z e : D e p e n d e n t Results Mediating Moderating effects
independent variable
variable
effets

Mimouni
€2, −50% of price
Chaabane and €1.10–30% of price.
Parguel (2016) 20 cents-5% of price

Attitude
towards the
retailer

-

Scepticism Altruism: Familiarity with
cause-related
marketing: +

Tsiros and Irmak
(2020)

Consumer
reactions to
cause-related
marketing
campaigns

+
-

Consumer
perceptions
of personal
contribution
to the cause: +

Low donation amount
(e.g., at least
$100,000)
High donation amount
(e.g., at least $10
million)

Notes: + positive effect; - negative effect; n.s no significant effect

The amount of the donation has been presented as a percentage (a% of the price);
nevertheless, a real specification in dollars (a cents given for each sold unit) becomes
more common. In 2009 for example, for each sold pink lipstick, Mirabella Beauty
donated $ 1 to Research and Treatment Center of the City of Hope (Koschate-Fischer
et al. 2012). According to Koschate-Fischer et al. (2012) donation sizes are changeable
and range from 1% of the price of the product in the P&G example to 50% of the price
in the Tommy Hilfiger campaign.
The size of the donation sparked scepticism and prompted consumers to doubt and
ask questions about the real motivations for the company’s commitment to this
philanthropic action (Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel 2016). Skarmeas and Leonidou
(2013) define scepticism as the tendency of a person to doubt, not to believe, and to ask
questions. Tsfati and Cappella (2003) find that scepticism consists of a feeling that the
announcement or the commercial is neither credible nor reliable.
Consumers have become increasingly sceptical of the messages leaked by causerelated marketing (Zhang and Hanks 2017; Singh et al. 2009). This is mainly due to the
big size of donations sometimes considered as financial scandals (Du et al. 2010; Zhang
and Hanks 2017). In fact, advertisements are based on facts; but messages sometimes
lose their credibility, causing consumers to be wary of advertising arguments; which
will end up having a negative impression on advertisers (Bae 2016). According to
Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel (2016), a significant reduction or increase in the price
leads to a feeling of doubt. Thus, the size of the donation can be a trigger for scepticism.
Hence, the following hypothesis:
H 1: The donation size positively influences the scepticism.

2.2.2 Effect of scepticism on warm glow
Consumer mistrust of sales practices may be desired to some extent. Scepticism assists
consumers defend themselves from fraud (Hammad et al. 2014). In addition, consumer
scepticism can help prevent traders from proceeding in misleading practices (De
Pechpeyrou and Odou 2012). Nevertheless, consumer scepticism can harm consumers’

136

A. Chaabouni et al.

positive emotions toward cause-related campaigns, when deepened and over generalized. As a result, consumers will derive less utility and no pride to the act of donation
(Kim and Lee 2009).
Although it offers consumers a solution to a problem by making a donation with a
regular purchase, consumers tend to perceive a cause-related marketing practice as a
beneficial cause (supporting a cause with altruistic business motives) or an exploitative
cause (abusing a cause with selfish business motives) (Heidarian 2019). This positive
mood among consumers when helping a cause is known as “warm glow”.
Kahneman and Knetsch (1992) defined warm glow as a kind of moral and pure internal
satisfaction due to the act of donation. It is the soft warmth that follows the accomplishment
of acts of kindness (Harbaugh 1998). It stems from people’s desire to participate in prosocial
activities. Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel (2016) attest that the success of a shared
promotion lies in its ability to create a soft and warm feeling in the consumer. These authors
also study the role of scepticism towards the products. They affirm that the feelings of warm
glow are influenced by scepticism. Certainly, the increase in scepticism leads to a decrease in
feelings of warm glow and vice versa. Hence, the following hypothesis:
H 2: The Scepticism negatively influences the warm glow.

2.2.3 Effect of the warm glow on purchase intention
With reference to the probabilistic approach, the intention to buy was defined as the
subjective probability of purchasing a given product or a given brand (Dussart 1983).
In 1997, Darpy defined purchase intention, based on the work of O'Shaughnessy
(1992) and Belk (1985), as being the result of a desire, or indeed a need, processed
cognitively which leads to the planning of purchase.
In cause-related marketing, the intention to buy is often stimulated by social
desirability and the need for self-esteem and moral satisfaction (Shabbir et al. 2010).
According to Qamar (2013), the contribution to the common public good triggers the
warm glow among consumers. Indeed, the warm glow generates positive emotions
which act on their attitude and influence their intention to help others.
Cause-related marketing is seen as a positive act by most consumers and induces a
positive attitude towards it and intentions to buy non-profit products (Qamar 2013; Lee
and Johnson 2019; Santoso et al. 2015; Patel et al. 2016). On the one hand, it is meant
to support the cause and provide help and on the other hand, to feel good and to have
moral satisfaction. The individual has an interest in buying the products of a firm
involved in actions of cause-related marketing.
Heidarian (2019) also finds that customers can profit from warm glow feelings
through their cause-related purchase. The warm glow turns out to be the most important
underlying process for cause-related marketing purchases. It is the good feeling of
consumers that helps and contributes to the public good and responds positively to
charitable actions. Hence, the following hypothesis:
H 3: The warm glow positively influences the purchase intention.

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

137

2.2.4 Effect of the donation size on the purchase intention
Hajjat (2003) and Moosmayer and Fuljahn (2010) state that the majority of consumers
have a favorable attitude and intention to purchase in regard to cause-related marketing
practices. They point out that the size of the donation produces a positive attitude and
triggers an intention to buy. Hence the following hypothesis:
H 4: The donation size positively influences the purchase intention.
Figure 1 summarizes these hypotheses and presents the research model.

3 Research methodology
3.1 Data collection
In order to test the hypotheses of this research, two data collection tools have been used
namely the experimentation and the questionnaire. Experimentation is one of the major
tools for collecting primary data in marketing (Evrard et al. 2009). It mobilizes both
marketing constructs and cognitive psychology concepts (Droulers and Roullet 2004). Its
objective is to identify cause relationships between phenomena (Dépelteau 2000). As a
result, the experimental method is used to validate formal models, when proofs are
necessary to support causal inferences, or when other research techniques prove to be
unable to measure the phenomenon under observation (McDermott 2002). In the context
of this research, it would not be relevant to use any other technique since the hypotheses
studied in this work require the use of an active method making it possible to dynamically
collect the responses of subjects due to the variation of certain conditions.
Before looking into the course of the experiment, it is essential to determine the
conditions of the experimental manipulation by defining on the one hand, the implementation plan and testing on the other hand, the tool to be used in the process. The
main objective of this research is to shed light on the influence of the size of the
donation on the intention to buy non-profit products. The independent variable is the
size of the donation (low, medium, high). This variable, therefore, constitutes the main
factor which itself is made up of three levels of factors. Three different versions at the
level of the donation size of societal communication are then created. In addition, the
dependent variable is the intention to purchase non-profit products. The design of three
treatments is appeared in Table 2.

Fig. 1 Research model

138

A. Chaabouni et al.

Table 2 Design of different treatments

Donation size

Low level (5%)

Meduim level (30%)

High level (50%)

Version 1

Version 2

Version 3

These different treatments have been attributed to the advertising posters which form
the experimental units of this design. The choice of posters as an advertising means has
basically been made by relying on the work of Gnepa (1993) who justifies this choice
by the fact that the printed advertisements give the respondent the possibility of
allocating more time to process the amount of information than television and radio.
The steps for choosing an advertising material are as follows:
Choice of organizations For-profit organization: the STIAL company and more specifically “Délice Danone” brand and Non-profit organization, the association “a child is
hope”. The two organizations are two real entities where each has a weight in its field.
The choice of the STIAL Company is justified by the fact that it is involved in the front
line of charitable actions. Thus, the company has just proposed the threshold of 1.5
million Tunisian dinars (equivalent to €500,000) as donations to support the state to
face of the corona virus pandemic (http://kapitalis.com/tunisie/2020/04/01/).
Creation of posters:
&
&
&

To expose the framework of the questionnaire of three posters launched on the web.
The size of the donation is the variable to use in the poster.
To create posters contain images with a text.

The first poster contains this text: « Help us offer school bags and supplies to deprived
children. By buying “Délice Danone” products, 5% of your purchases will be donated
to “a child is hope” association ».
The second poster contains this text: « Help us offer school bags and supplies to
deprived children. By buying “Délice Danone” products, 30% of your purchases will
be donated to “a child is hope” association ».
The third poster contains this text: « Help us offer school bags and supplies to
deprived children. By buying “Délice Danone” products, 50% of your purchases will
be donated to “a child is hope” association ».
We displayed three posters with the same image in different conditions in the body
of the questionnaire. The size of the donation is the variable to use in the poster.
The purpose of adding images is to get the audience emotionally involved. However,
the textual material keeps them in a more rational and more logical way of thinking. The
two organizations are two real entities, where each has an influence in its domain. Before
inserting the image in the questionnaire, a sample of professionals (5 persons) and
academicians (5 persons) was consulted to pretest the questionnaire; they approved the
use of the medium have been consulted; given the clarity of the messages and their
usefulness for the course of the survey.
In the framework of this research, the small donation is 10 cents corresponding to
5% of the price when purchasing a Délice product. In case of a large donation, the

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

139

charity promotion carries a donation of € 1 corresponding to 50% of the price of the
Délice product.
Figure 2 shows an example of the advertising poster (low donation).

3.2 Choice of the sample
The questionnaire was distributed to 300 Internet users, 61% of whom are women and
39% are men. 59% are aged between 15 and 25 years old; 25% are aged between 36
and 50 years old; and 16% are aged between 51 and 70 years old.
The authors used an online survey using Facebook social network. They chose to
send the questionnaire online because it is easy to collect quantitative data (Galan and
Vernette 2000; Hoonakker and Carayon 2009). The questionnaire has been addressed to
members of branded virtual communities created by the STIAL Company on Facebook,
these are «Yaourt Délice Tunisie », « délice danone » «OIKOS by Délice Danone ».
3.3 Content of the questionnaire
Three versions of the questionnaire were written and distributed. Each version has three
parts. In the first part, the field of research followed by a fictional mise-en-scène was
presented. In a second part, the relationships between these concepts: donation size,

Fig. 2 Example of the advertising poster (Low donation)

140

A. Chaabouni et al.

Table 3 Items/Scales of the model variables
Variables

Items

Scepticism (Mimouni Chaabane
and Parguel 2016)

- I have doubts about how effectively the money collected will be used
- I find it hard to believe that such offers are an effective solution to the
Tunisia’s educational problems
- I doubt that this promotion will help people make more responsible and
socially aware purchases
- I do not think such offers really involve people in the charitable actions
of « Délice »

Warm glow (Müller et al. 2014)

- When I purchase « Délice » products, I feel good because I do not only
spend money for myself but also for other people
-I feel comfortable if I donate for a good cause by purchasing « Délice »
products
- I am pleased that I do not only get a product by purchasing « Délice »
products, but that I also do a good deed at the same time.

Purchase intention (Ajzen 2002)

- I intend to purchase the product in the next few weeks
- I will try to buy the product in the next few weeks
- I plan to buy the product in the next few weeks

scepticism, warm glow and purchase intention were dealt with. In a third part, the data
sheet (gender, age and occupation) has been indicated.
The questionnaires were identical as far as the three parts cited above are concerned.
The only difference was in the size of the donation mentioned in each poster.
3.4 Measurement development
Variables were all measured on a Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5
(strongly agree). Table 3 presents the items of the variables; these are the scepticism,
the warm glow and purchase intention.

4 Results
4.1 Results of the Exploratory Study
Exploratory factor analysis was used to purify the measurement scales using SPSS 18.0
software. For this, two types of analysis have been adopted, namely Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Reliability Analysis (Cronbach’s alpha). Table 4 presents the
Table 4 Results of exploratory studies
Scepticism

Warm Glow

Purchase intention

KMO

0.763

0.856

0.751

Bartlett

0.000

0.000

0.000

Own values

2.564

3.534

2.610

Cronbach’s alpha

0.811

0.788

0.924

141

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

results of these analyses. Indeed, the PCA results show that the KMO (Kaiser-MeyerOlkin) test presents good factorial solutions and that the Bartlett test is significant at the
level of 5% (Significance of Bartlett = 0.000 < 0.005). In addition, Cronbach’s alpha
has high values and shows that the variables are reliable at the exploratory results.
4.2 Results of the confirmatory study
The methods of structural equations are used to test the causal links of the conceptual
model, more precisely the Partial Least Squares (PLS) method. This method is considered relevant, since the model is exploratory and predictive. Smart PLS 3.0 software
developed by Ringle et al. (2012) has been used. The analysis procedures take place in
two stages: the first consists of evaluating the measurement quality of the model with
regard to commonly accepted psychometric standards (exploratory phase), followed by
a second phase which aims to examine the structure of the model, and therefore to test
the research hypotheses (confirmatory phase).
The approach of Hair et al. (2014) has been adopted, it aims first to specify and
validate the measurement model and then to verify the structural model. In this sense,
the conceptual model includes four reflective variables, namely, the donation size, the
scepticism, the warm glow and the purchase intention. The validation criteria for the
reflective variables proposed by Hair et al. (2014), namely reliability, convergent
validity and discriminant validity, have been adopted.
Table 5 contains the indicators for measuring reliability and convergent validity.
As indicated in Table 5, the variables without exception, have recorded Cronbach’s alpha
as strictly greater than 0.7 and which vary between 0.81 and 0.92. The obtained composite
reliability indexes CR vary between 0.86 and 0.95. The reliability of these constructions is
therefore proved. Concerning the convergent validity, the AVE (Average Variance Extracted) vary between 0.63 and 0.87, which exceeds for the first ones the required threshold of
0.7 (Chin 1998); and for the second (AVE), the threshold is 0.5 (Fornell and Larcker 1981)
for all the variables. The convergent validity of the model is therefore ensured.
The discriminant validity is also evaluated according to Fornell and Larcker (1981),
by checking that the square root of the AVE for each construct exceeds the interconstruct correlations. The results in Table 6 show that the square root of the AVE for
each construct is greater than the inter-construct correlations concerning it. Discriminant validity is therefore guaranteed.
According to previous analyses and using this same software, the psychometric
specificities of the model are satisfactory. So, it is currently possible to estimate the
structural relationships between the constructs and therefore the verification of research
Table 5 Results of reliability and convergent validity
Cronbach’s alpha

Composite Reliability

AVE

Purchase intention

0.925

0.953

0.870

Scepticism

0.811

0.873

0.634

Donation size

1.000

1.000

1.000

Warm glow

0.841

0.867

0.671

142

A. Chaabouni et al.

Table 6 Results of discriminant validity
Purchase intention

Scepticism

Donation size

Purchase intention

0.933

Scepticism

−0.163

0.796

Donation size

0.013

0.140

1.000

Warm glow

0.720

−0.083

−0.003

Warm glow

0.759

hypotheses. The correlations between the constructs are estimated by examining the
standardized correlation coefficients (path-coefficients) and the statistical values Tvalues (obtained following Bootstrapping analyses which express the degree of significance of the correlations).
A correlation relationship is significant, only if the value T is greater than the
threshold of 1.96. Positive correlation coefficients which are close to 1 assume a strong
correlation link between the constructs.
Figure 3 presents the results from the confirmatory analysis following the use of the
smart PLS 3 software.
Before proceeding with the presentation and analysis of the results, it should be
noted that the various statistics available at the level of this structural model represent
the T values of the Student test. Also, these statistics make it possible to verify a priori
the significance of the relationships provided that they meet certain conditions.
Thus, according to Table 7, hypothesis 1 is confirmed at the 5% threshold: a t value
strictly greater than 1.96 and a p value less than 0.05. In this sense, the correlation
relationship between the size of the donation and scepticism is ensured with a correlation
coefficient between −1 and 1. Then, hypothesis 2 is confirmed at the 5% threshold: a
value t strictly greater than 1.96 and a p value less than 0.05. Indeed, the negative
correlation relationship between scepticism and warm glow is ensured with a correlation
coefficient between −1 and 1. Third, hypothesis 3 is confirmed at the threshold of 1%: a
value t greater than 2.58 and a p value less than 0.01. The correlation relationship
between the warm glow and the purchase intention is ensured with a correlation
coefficient between −1 and 1. Finally, hypothesis 4 is invalidated: a value t strictly less

Fig. 3 Structural model

143

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...
Table 7 Statistical tests of hypotheses
Correlation relationships

Correlation coefficients
t p Validation of
(standardized)
statistic value hypotheses

H1 Donation size ➔ Scepticism

0.030

2.219

0.040 Validated

H2 Scepticism ➔warm glow

−0.020

2.497

0.008 Validated

H3 Warm glow➔ purchase
intention

0.053

17.093 0.000 Validated

H4 Donation size ➔ purchase
intention

0.003

0.386

0.700 Invalidated

than 1.96 and a value p largely greater than 0.05. So, the size of the donation does not
directly influence the purchase intention.
In order to verify the quality of adjustment of the structural model, the authors opted
for the determination coefficient R2. This indicator allows measuring the quality of the
prediction of a linear regression. According to the results from PLS, 46.1% of the
variation in the intention to purchase is explained by the variation in the size of the
donation. To add support to the results, a one-factor analysis of variance was made,
which led to the results presented in Table 8.
In the context of this research, the one-factor ANOVA was used to support and further
explain the results of hypothesis 1 which are interested in studying the impact of the size of
the donation on scepticism. In other words, we are concerned with the size of the donation
that generates a high degree of scepticism. According to the results mentioned in Table 8 (the
p value of F = 0.29 < 0.05), it should be noted that the differences between the averages are
significant and that the size of the large donation leads to a high level of scepticism (Fig. 4).
Based on the line of averages, it can be noted that a large donation size leads to a
high degree of scepticism unlike a small or medium-sized one.

5 Discussion
The results of this research made it possible to identify the links between the different
components of the model. First, the results of the structural analysis validated hypothesis 1.
This leads to the conclusion that the size of the donation triggers scepticism in consumers.
This direct effect has also been tested by Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel (2016) and BignéTable 8 Results of the analysis of variance
ANOVA
Scepticism
Sum of Squares

Ddl

Mean square

F

Sig.

intergroup

8.427

2

4.214

3.574

0.029

intragroup

346.629

294

1.179

Total

355.056

296

144

A. Chaabouni et al.

Fig. 4 The line of averages

Alcañiz et al. (2012), indeed, a large donation stimulates scepticism in the consumers; which
will trigger in them doubts and questions related to the real motivations which pushed the
for-profit organization to engage itself in this charitable action.
We suggest that the size of the donation is a critical factor in understanding the
effectiveness of cause-related marketing in modifying consumer behavior towards the
offer. Previous research demonstrates negative or positive effects of the donation size
(large, medium, small) in a cause-related marketing campaign based on different factors.
As for the negative effect of the donation size on consumer behavior. Heidarian
(2019) has shown that a large donation has a negative impact on consumers’ response
to cause-related marketing campaigns. This is manifested when cause-related marketing advertising is perceived as selfish and socially irresponsible, rather than selfless and
responsible or when the information available in the cause-related marketing advertisement is not sufficient; Müller et al. (2014) have deduced that many questions and
doubts are revealed because of the size of the donation if the framework of the donation
is monetary (for example, the campaign indicates the amount in Euros) rather than
nonmonetary (for example, the campaign promises the supply of vaccines).
Moosmayer and Fuljahn (2010) have deduced that by targeting men, more donations
slightly increase the impact of the campaign, and therefore small donations may be
sufficient for campaigns directed for men. They concluded that the donation amount is
particularly pertinent for women and those cause-related marketing campaigns would
be more effective when they target women by promising a substantial donation.
As for the positive impact of the size of the donation on consumer behavior, Chang and
Liu (2012) argued that the effect of a high donation on the consumer attitudes towards causerelated marketing depends on the types of product-cause fit in cause-related marketing. In
fact, they argue that this effect is enhanced when consumers are more likely to choose a
hedonic product that gives a donation with a complementary-fit cause than consumers who
would rather prefer a utilitarian product with a consistent-fit cause. Singh et al. (2009) have
also emphasized on the fit between the cause and the company to strengthen the relationship

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

145

between the size of the donation and the consumers ‘perceptions of the CRM campaign
validity. The positive effect of size on the purchasing decision depends, according to Neel
et al. (2016) on the purchase-type (planned or impulse purchase contexts), while Kim and
Lee (2009) specified in this context that the consumers rather trust the cause-related
marketing ad claim when the donation size was expressed objectively than subjectively.
Haruvy and Popkowski Leszczyc (2009) emphasized that the donation amount must be well
known to bidders in order to improve willingness to pay during charity auctions. As for
Mimouni Chaabane and Parguel (2016), they found that large donations can be more
effective among selfless consumers and those less familiar with cause-related marketing
campaigns. Thus, these results which assume that the large donation size has an important
role in the success of cause-related marketing practices and the customers tend to develop a
positive attitude towards campaigns that have received large donations; are somewhat
contradictory with our results which suggest that large donation sizes seem to increase client
scepticism to a significant extent.
Second, this research has clearly confirmed the negative impact of scepticism on the
warm glow. In fact, when the consumers are exposed to a large donation size, they develop
an unfavorable attitude (high scepticism) thus reducing their feeling of pride (low warm
glow). On the other hand when the consumers are exposed to a small size of donation, they
develop a kind of moral satisfaction and a tendency of pride and usefulness (high warm
glow), since their general tendencies to doubt and not to believe in what is said is weak
(weak scepticism).
In other words, when consumers suspect the perceived usefulness of the act of
donating, moral satisfaction will decrease as a result. Therefore, the consumers participate in achieving the public good only in case they will profit from this contribution
(usefulness, pride, moral satisfaction). Indeed, if the consumer is going to suspect the
real motivations for the commitment of the company and the destination of the funds
collected; s/he will become more and more sceptical, which will have a negative impact
on the utility derived from the contribution to the common public good.
Third, the impact of the warm glow on the purchase intention is confirmed. In this
sense, the feelings of the warm glow have a positive effect on the intention to help.
Indeed, by purchasing non-profit products, the consumers will not only participate in a
charitable action, but also, will satisfy their need for self-esteem, feel proud of what they
have achieved and above all, they are going to have moral satisfaction. Also, at this level
it will be relevant to remember that no one contributes only to the public good (purchase
of non-profit products to support a cause), they must necessarily benefit from it. And so,
the consumers are going to help only in case they are going to benefit from it and use it.
Fourth, the impact of the size of the donation does not directly influence the intention to
purchase. The authors then assume that the ethical intention to purchase does not depend
directly on the size of the donation, but largely depends on two feelings: scepticism and
warm glow.

6 Conclusion
The aim of this research work is to study the impact of the size of the donation (low,
medium, high) on the level of scepticism and warm-glow, as well as the repercussions
of the latter on the purchase intention.

146

A. Chaabouni et al.

The results of the survey have enabled us to identify the links between the different
components of the model. First, it has been confirmed that large donation size provokes
scepticism. Second, the current research has made it possible to clearly affirm the
negative impact of scepticism on the warm glow. Certainly the sceptical behaviour of
the consumers manifests itself through the doubts that come in their minds, the questions
that they ask themselves all the time which negatively act on the usefulness of participation in charitable action. Third, the positive impact of the warm-glow on the purchase
intention is confirmed. In fact, buying a non-profit product will allow the consumer to
participate in charity and show support for their events, which allows them to feel proud,
useful and satisfied with what they have done. However, this research has invalidated
the last hypothesis which assumes that the size of the donation has a direct and positive
impact on the purchase intention. Therefore, the authors can conclude that the consumer
is sensitive to the size of the donation, which can upset their entire strategy and arouse in
them negative feelings which also act on their behaviour in a negative way.
This work contributes to the research about cause-related marketing, at the theoretical, methodological and managerial levels. It offers answers to a recent field of
research.
On a theoretical level, this study presents a contribution compared to previous
research, like that of Sinčić Ćorić et al. (2011) who showed that the intention to
purchase does not depend on the size of the donation. In this research, the authors
were able to show the opposite hypothesis, by introducing two variables rarely used in
marketing, namely scepticism and warm glow. This research constitutes a theoretical
support allowing grouping and clarifying the different meanings not only of warm
glow, a variable abundantly studied and used in economics but rarely in marketing, but
also of scepticism. This research allowed the extension of previous results on the effect
of large donations by regionally expanding research in the context of North Africa,
particularly Tunisia, a country in development and potentially a place that needs
corporate social responsibility initiatives.
Methodologically, this research contributes in guaranteeing the external validation
of the research. Indeed, we have created our own real posters (image and text) with two
organizations, one for profit and the other for non-profit to be as close as possible to
real conditions. These posters have been validated by professionals and academicians.
From a managerial point of view, this research helps advertisers to transmit positive,
but not exaggerated, advertising messages (the size of the donation must not be very
large) in order to avoid sceptical feelings that trigger doubts and questions about the
motives behind the campaign; which will negatively influence the purchase intention.
Therefore, the size of the donation must be clearly mentioned in the advertising
campaign so as not to disturb the consumers and activate their doubts and disbelief.
Despite these contributions, this work has some limitations. First, the use of an online
investigation and the absence of control in the experimental context. The online process
probably establishes noise because the candidates tend to be less implicated in the
survey and would not pay the same degree of attention as they would in a real experience
(face-to-face). Second, the use of the scale of Ajzen (2002) to measure purchase
intention seems to be a limit to this research, given that there are slight variations and
the three different items tackle the same problem from different angles. Third, mistrust
can be generated by the advertisers who’s deciding how the cause-related marketing
campaign is promoted (exaggerated or not) as well as the size of the donation.

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

147

Future research can explore the issues. First, this research work may be supported by
qualitative research in order to identify, in depth, the motivations and obstacles linked
to the purchase of non-profit products on the one hand; and to examine, on the other
hand, the nature of scepticism (predisposed or situational) to find out whether the size
of the donation alone generates scepticism in consumers, or there are consumers who
are sceptical by nature. Second, it can investigate the impact of the cultural characteristics of the different economies along with the people experiences in each market share
on cause-related marketing campaigns. In this way, cultural characteristics which can
provide valuable explanations on consumer behaviour and their attitude towards
charitable actions to better understand the contradictory results between the different
works. Finally, it would be interesting to study the effect of control variables or
demographic data and the moderating effect of certain variables such as the nature of
the product and the advertising framework that can further enhance and grow
relationships.

References
Ajzen, I. (2002). Perceived behavioral control, self-efficacy, locus of control, and the theory of planned
behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32(4), 665–683.
Bae M. (2016). Overcoming skepticism toward cause-related marketing claims: the role of
consumers’attributions of company motives and consumers’perceptions of company credibility, A
Dissertation, Submitted to Michigan State University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
degree of Media and Information Studies, Doctor of Philosophy.
Belk, R. W. (1985). Issues in the intention-behavior discrepancy. Research in Consumer Behavior, 1, 1–34.
Bergkvist, L., & Taylor, C. R. (2016). Leveraged marketing communications: a framework for explaining the
effects of secondary brand associations. AMS Review, Springer, Academy of Marketing Science, 6(3),
157–175.
Bigné-Alcañiz, E., Currás-Pérez, R., Ruiz-Mafé, C., & Sanz-Blas, S. (2012). Cause-related marketing
influence on consumer responses: The moderating effect of cause–brand fit. Journal of Marketing
Communications, 18(4), 265–283.
Chang, C.-T., & Liu, H.-L. (2012). Goodwill hunting? Influences of product-cause fit, product type, and
donation level in cause-related marketing. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 30(6), 634–652.
Chin, W. W. (1998). Issues and opinion on structural equation modeling. MIS Quarterly, 22(1), 7–16.
Dahl D., Lavack A. M. (1995). Cause-related marketing: Impact of size of cause related promotion on
consumer perception and participation. In David W., Stewart and Naufel J. Vilcassim (editors), 1995
AMA Winter Educators’conference : Marketing Theory and Applications, 6, 476-481.
Das, N., Guha, A., Biswas, A., & Krishnan, B. (2016). How product–cause fit and donation quantifier interact
in cause-related marketing (CRM) settings: Evidence of the cue congruency effect. Marketing Letters, 27,
295–308.
De Pechpeyrou, P., & Odou, P. (2012). Consumer skepticism and promotion effectiveness. Recherche et
Applications en Marketing., 27(2/2012), 45–69.
Dépelteau, F. (2000). Le sujet de la recherche. In Dépelteau F. La démarche d'une recherche en sciences
humaines: de la question de départ à la communication des résultats, Presses Université Laval, De Boeck
Université, 1er édition, 417 p.
Droulers O., Roullet B. (2004). Couleur du conditionnement pharmaceutique et croyances envers le
médicament. Paper presented at the 17e Journées Nationales des IAE, 2004, IAE Lyon, 1-18.
Drumwright, M. E. (1996). Company advertising with a social dimension: The role of noneconomic criteria.
The Journal of Marketing, 60, 71–87.
Du, S., Bhattacharya, C. B., & Sen, S. (2010). Maximizing business returns to corporate social responsibility
(CSR): The role of CSR communication. International Journal of Management Reviews, 12(1), 8–19.
Dussart, C. (1983). Comportement du consommateur. Montréal: Mc Graw Hill.
Elving, W. J. (2013). Scepticism and corporate social responsability communications : The influence of fit and
reputation. Journal of Marketing Communications, 19(4), 277–292.

148

A. Chaabouni et al.

Evrard, Y., Pras, B., Roux, E., Desmet, P., Dussaix, A-M., & Lilien, G. (2009). Market. fondements et
méthodes des recherches en Marketing, Management Sup, Dunod, 4 th ed., 720 p.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation modèles with unobservable variables and
measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 39–50.
Fries, A. J.,Gedenk, K., Völckner, F. (2010). Cause-related marketing: Designing successful campaigns.
Working paper University of Cologne.
Galan, J. P., & Vernette, E. (2000). Vers une 4ème génération: les études de marché « on-line». Décisions
marketing, 19, 39–52.
Garretson Folse, J. A., Niedrich, R. W., & Landreth Grau, S. (2010). Cause-related marketing: The effect of
purchase quantity and firm donation amount on consumer inferences and participation intentions. Journal
of Retailing, 86(4), 295–309.
Gnepa, T. (1993). Comparative advertising in magazines: Nature, frequency, and a test of the “underdog”
hypothesis. Journal of Advertising Research, 33(5), 70–75.
Hair, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2014). A primer on partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) (1st ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Hajjat, M. M. (2003). Effect of cause-related marketing on attitudes and purchase intentions: The moderating
role of cause involvement and donation size. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 11(1),
93–109.
Hammad, H., El-Bassiouny Pallab, N., & Mukhopadhyay, P. K. (2014). Antecedents and consequences of
consumers’ attitudinal dispositions toward cause-related marketing in Egypt. Journal of Islamic
Marketing, 5(3), 414–445.
Harbaugh, W. T. (1998). The prestige motive for making charitable transfers. The American Economic
Review, 88(2), 277–282.
Hartmann, M., Klink, J., & Simons, J. (2015). Cause related marketing in the German retail sector: Exploring
the role of consumers’ trust. Food Policy, 52, 108–114.
Haruvy, E., & Popkowski Leszczyc, P. T. L. (2009). Bidder motives in cause related auctions. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 26(4), 324–331.
He, H., Chao, M. M., & Zhu, W. (2019). Cause-related marketing and employee engagement: The roles of
admiration, implicit morality beliefs, and moral identity. Journal of Business Research, 95, 83–92.
Heidarian, E. (2019). The impact of trust propensity on consumers’ cause-related marketing purchase
intentions and the moderating role of culture and gender. Journal of International Consumer
Marketing, 31(4), 1–18.
Hoonakker, P., & Carayon, P. (2009). Questionnaire survey nonresponse: A comparison of postal mail and
internet surveys. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 25(5), 348–373.
Howie, K. M., Yan, L., Vitell, S. J., & Vorhies, D. W. (2018). Consumer participation in cause-related
marketing: An examination of effort demands and defensive denial. Journal of Business Ethics, 147(3),
147–160.
Huh, J., Delorme, D. E., & Reid, L. N. (2012). Scepticism towards DTC advertising: A comparative study of
Korean and caucasian Americans. International Journal of Advertising, 31(1), 147–168.
Human, D., & Terblanche, N. S. (2012). Who receives what? The influence of the donation magnitude and
donation recipient in cause-related marketing. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 24(2),
141–160.
Kahneman, D., & Knetsch, J. L. (1992). Valuing public goods: The purchase of moral satisfaction. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 22(1), 57–70.
Kim, J. (2014). The roles of cause involvement and cause acts in a social marketing campaign. Journal of
Global Scholars of Marketing Science, 24(4), 426–440.
Kim, Y. J., & Lee, W.-N. (2009). Overcoming consumer skepticism in cause- related marketing: The effects of
corporate social responsibility and donation size claim objectivity. Journal of Promotion Management,
15(4), 465–483.
Koschate-Fischer, N., Stefan, I., & Hoyer, W. D. (2012). Willingness to pay for cause-related marketing: The
impact of donation amount and moderating effects. Journal of Marketing Research, 49(6), 910–927.
Kumar, D., & Bansal, H. (2017). Influence of cause brand fit on consumers purchase intention. International
Journal of Research in Finance and Marketing (IJRFM), 7(1), 99–107.
Lee, J. Y., & Johnson, K. K. P. (2019). Cause-related marketing strategy types: Assessing their relative
effectiveness. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: an International Journal, 23, 239–256.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JFMM-03-2018-0032.
Marhana, M. A., & Osman, M. (2012). Effects of skepticism on consumer response toward cause-related
marketing in Malaysia. International Business Research, 5(9), 98–105.

Cause-related marketing: scepticism and warm glow as impacts of...

149

McDermott, R. (2002). Measuring the impact of communities what happens when you need to show proof that
the communities are working and are worth the investment? Knowledge Management Review, 5, 26–29.
Melero, I., & Montaner, T. (2016). Cause-related marketing: An experimental study about how the product
type and the perceived fit may influence the consumer response. European Journal of Management and
Business Economics, 25(3), 161–167.
Mimouni Chaabane, A., Parguel P. (2015). The way to hell is paved with good intentions: Does skepticism
hinder the evaluation of charity promotions? 31ème congrès de l'Association Française Marketing - AFM
2015, 1–22.
Mimouni Chaabane, A., & Parguel, P. (2016). The double-edge effect of retailers’ cause-related marketing.
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 44(6), 607–626.
Moosmayer, D., & Fuljahn, A. (2010). Consumer perceptions of cause related marketing campaigns. Journal
of Consumer Marketing, 27(6), 543–549.
Müller, S. S., Fries, A. J., & Gedenk, K. (2014). How much to give?—The effect of donation size on tactical
and strategic success in cause-related marketing. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 31(2),
178–191.
Natarajan, T., Balasubramaniam, S. A., & InbarajJublee, D. (2016). A journey of cause related marketing from
1988 to 2016. International Journal of Business and Management, 11(11), 247–263.
Neel, D., Guha, A., Biswas, A., & Krishnan, B. (2016). "How Product-Cause Fit and Donation Quantifier
Interact in Cause Related Marketing (CRM) Settings: Evidence of the Cue Congruency Effect".
Marketing Letters, 27(2), 295-308.
Nelson, M. R., & Vilela, A. M. (2017). Exploring the interactive effects of brand use and gender on causerelated marketing over time. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 22(3).
https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1580.
O'Shaughnessy, J. (1992). Explaining buyer behavior: Central concepts and philosophy of science issues.
New York: Oxford Universtiy Press, p 385.
Patel, J. D., Gadhavi, D. D., & Shukla, Y. S. (2016). Consumers’ responses to cause related marketing:
Moderating influence of cause involvement and skepticism on attitude and purchase intention.
International Review on Public end Nonprofit Marketing, 14(1), 1–18.
Pearce J. A., & Robinson R. B. (2003). Strategic Management: Formulation, Implementation, and Control.
New York: McGraw – Hill Irwin.
Qamar, N. (2013). Impact of cause related marketing on consumer purchase intention: Mediating role of
corporate image, consumers’ attitude and brand attractiveness. Middle-East Journal of Scientific
Research, 16(5), 633–643.
Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., & Straub, D. W. (2012). A critical look at the use of PLS-SEM. MIS Quarterly,
36(1), 3–14.
Santoso, S., Dharmmesta, B. S., & Purwanto, B. M. (2015). Model of consumer attitude in the activity of
cause-related marketing. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 6(4), 499.
Shabbir, S., Kaufmann, H. R., Ahmad, I., & Qureshi, I. M. (2010). Cause related marketing campaigns and
consumer purchase intentions: The mediating role of brand awareness and corporate image. African
Journal of Business Management, 4(6), 1229–1235.
Sinčić Ćorić D., Kurnoga Živadinović N., & Dropuljić M. (2011). The effects of cause and donation size of
cause-related marketing program on consumers' intention to buy, EFZG Working Papers Series 1108,
Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Zagreb, 1–14.
Singh, S., Kristensen, L., & Villasenor, E. (2009). Overcoming skepticism towards cause related claims: The
case of Norway. International Marketing Review, 26(3), 312–326.
Skarmeas, D., & Leonidou, C. N. (2013). When consumers doubt, Watchout! The role of CSR skepticism.
Journal of Business Research, 66(10), 1831–1838.
Strahilevitz, M. (1999). The effects of product type and donation magnitude on willigness to pay more for a
charity-linked brand. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 8(3), 215–241.
Tsfati, Y., & Cappella, J. N. (2003). Do people watch what they do not trust? Exploring the association
between news media skepticism and exposure. Communication Research, 30(5), 504–529.
Tsiros, M., & Irmak, C. (2020). Lowering the minimum donation amount increases consumer purchase
likelihood of products associated with cause-related marketing campaigns. Journal of Marketing
Research, forthcoming, 1–16.
Vanhamme, J., Lindgreen, A., Reast, J., & Van Popering, N. (2012). To do well by doing good: Improving
corporate image through cause-related marketing. Journal of Business Ethics, 109(3), 259–274.
Varadarajan, P. R., & Menon, A. (1988). Cause-related marketing: A coalignment of marketing strategy and
corporate philanthropy. The Journal of Marketing, 52(3), 58–74.

150

A. Chaabouni et al.

Woodroof, P., Deitz, G., & Howie, K. M. (2019). The effect of cause-related marketing on firm value: A look
at Fortune’s most admired all-stars. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 47(3), 899–918.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-019-00660-y.
Zhang, L., & Hanks, L. (2017). Consumer skepticism towards CSR messages: The joint effects of processing
fluency, individuals’ need for cognition and mood. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality
Management, 29(8), 2070–2080.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

