KEITH A. BOTNER, ARUL MISHRA, and HIMANSHU MISHRA*

In  this  article,  the  authors  propose  that  in  the  long  run,  a  nonprofit
organization  with  supportively  oriented  positioning  (e.g.,  promoting  a
cause) is likely to survive longer and achieve more donations compared
with  a  nonprofit  with  a  combative  orientation  (e.g.,  fighting  against
something). To  test  this  proposition,  the  authors  adopt  a  three-pronged
approach  that  (1)  uses  publicly  available  financial  data  from  nonprofits’
tax  filings  over  a  ten-year  period,  (2)  measures  annual  donor  pledges
from  a  field  study  with  a  registered  nonprofit  organization,  and  (3)
examines  actual  donation  behavior  of  participants  in  a  longitudinal  lab
study. Moreover, the authors test this proposition for donations of money
as well as time. They consider various theoretical mechanisms that might
cause  the  proposed  effect,  such  as  regulatory  focus  theory,  inertia  in
giving, and the preponderance of supportive charities.

Keywords: promotion  orientation,  prevention  orientation,  charitable
giving, regulatory focus theory, longitudinal analysis

What’s in a Message? The Longitudinal
Influence of a Supportive Versus
Combative Orientation on the
Performance of Nonprofits

Companies that operate in the marketplace for profit use
many different methods to persuade consumers, including
advertising, sales promotion, free trials, and more. How-
ever,  nonprofit  organizations1 face  a  unique  challenge.

1For ease of reference, hereinafter, we use the terms “charity” and “char-

itable organization” to mean nonprofit organizations.

*Keith A. Botner is a doctoral candidate (e-mail: keith.botner@business.
utah.edu), Arul Mishra is David Eccles Professor of Marketing (e-mail:
arul. mishra@business.utah.edu), and Himanshu Mishra is David Eccles
Professor  of  Marketing  (e-mail:  himanshu.mishra@business. utah. edu),
David Eccles School of Business, University of Utah. Correspondence
concerning this article should be addressed to the first author. The authors
gratefully  acknowledge  the  generous  inputs  from  Rohit  Aggarwal,
Jonathan Butner, Steven Carson, Shyam Gopinath, Abbie Griffin, William
Moore, Sangkil Moon, and Debra Scammon. The authors also extend their
gratitude to the anonymous JMR review team for their valuable feedback
throughout the review process. Finally, they thank the Urban Institute for
maintaining the repository of data in the National Center of Charitable Sta-
tistics, and they appreciate the generous field study assistance from Billy
Davis and Steve Freeman. Eric Bradlow served as associate editor for this
article.

Although they too must persuade consumers, they are often
limited in the extent to which they can afford advertise-
ments and promotion tools (Dixon 1997). Indeed, money
spent on advertisements might be perceived as reducing the
total amount going toward the cause, which raises questions
about the desirability of allocating excessive amounts to
marketing  (Ritchie,  Swami,  and  Weinberg  1999).  With
approximately two-thirds of households donating more than
$2,000 per year to one or more of the half-million charities
in the United States (Center on Philanthropy at Indiana Uni-
versity 2007), competition is fierce for the bulk of charitable
organizations facing the aforementioned challenges.

What more can charitable organizations do to persuade
people to continue donating over time? Often, an effective
tool to communicate their aims and persuade donors lies in
an organization’s name or supporting communication. This
includes a charity’s brand name, tagline, or mission state-
ment, which may signal to prospective donors the charity’s
intent. For example, “Mothers Against Drunk Driving” cap-
tures all the aims and emotions of the cause, and thus, the
name itself acts as a critical persuasion tool. In addition,
words included in the tagline (e.g., “fight,” “stop,” “pre-

© 2015, American Marketing Association
ISSN: 0022-2437 (print), 1547-7193 (electronic)

39

Journal of Marketing Research
Vol. LII (February 2015), 39–55

40

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

vent”) may evoke the nature or tone of the cause. Given that
the tone conveyed by the brand name and supporting com-
munications plays an important role in garnering contribu-
tions, how can charities use them to keep donors engaged?
Could the nature of these communications influence long-
term  revenue  generated  by  charitable  organizations  and,
thus, survival and growth? In this research, we examine the
influence of a combative versus supportive orientation of a
charity’s cause on its ability to survive and succeed. For
example,  a  nonprofit  organization  in  the  environmental
domain could frame its cause more supportively as “Citizens
for Urban Renewal” or more combatively as “Citizens Fight-
ing Urban Decay”; alternatively, it could adopt a neutral ori-
entation: “Citizenship of Urban Planning.” For ease of ref-
erence,  hereinafter  we  refer  to  these  types  of  names  as
combative, supportive, and neutral orientations, respectively.
We attempt to answer the following specific questions in
this research. First, is a supportively oriented charity more
likely to survive than a combatively oriented charity, or vice
versa?  Second,  would  a  supportive  orientation  garner
greater contributions, or vice versa? Finally, if differences
do exist on the basis of orientation, what theoretical mecha-
nisms can help explain such differences? To answer these
questions, we adopt a three-pronged approach. First, we
analyze the key financial performance measures and firm
attributes  as  submitted  by  tax-exempt  nonprofits  to  the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which includes more than
400,000 public charities spanning a ten-year period. Sec-
ond, we conduct a field study with a nonprofit organization
and examine how people’s annual pledges may vary. Third,
we conduct a controlled longitudinal lab study to provide a
converging test for the long-term effectiveness of a combat-
ive versus supportive orientation. We find that a support-
ively oriented charity exhibits greater survival and revenue
compared with a combatively oriented charity.

We examine data over the long run, which is an important
contribution of our research because the differential influ-
ence of framing has been less explored over time. In addi-
tion, to the best of our knowledge, no research has investi-
gated the differential influence of framing for charitable
organizations. Longitudinal techniques (relative to point-in-
time measurements) have been historically underutilized,
partly due to data limitations and researchers’ preferences for
a priori theory-based foundations (Dekimpe and Hanssens
2000). However, researchers have alluded to the importance
of understanding long-term effects because a point-in-time
study  may  fail  to  capture  the  temporal  influences  of
variables on outcomes. It might also be that variables that
seem influential in a point-in-time study have relatively less
influence when studied over time (Jacoby, Szybillo, and
Berning 1976). Moreover, research has shown that biases
and inconsistencies in judgments disappear in repeated tri-
als because people can learn from past behavior (Coursey,
Hovis, and Schulze 1987). Therefore, a longitudinal exami-
nation  has  benefits  relative  to  cross-sectional  studies
because it enables researchers to better understand enduring
consumer  commitment  (Morgan  and  Hunt  1994).  In  the
next section, we examine various streams of literature to
shed light on the theoretical mechanism that might be at
work in causing the proposed effect.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

If we broadly classify the charity’s name and supporting
communications as the message received by the donor, we
can begin to understand the theoretical underpinnings of our
proposed effect using previous findings in the domain of
message framing. For example, extant research has demon-
strated that contextual factors such as level of processing or
nature of the message can moderate the influence of a mes-
sage frame. However, although there is sufficient research
on message framing and its downstream influences, we find
that much of the empirical evidence is about short-term atti-
tude change and uses one-time experimental manipulations.
Thus, this extant research offers few insights on examining
a charity’s long-term survival and revenue growth. A charity
is likely to survive longer through a greater ability to garner
donations. An important factor that serves to sustain com-
mitment is the donor’s motivation. In other words, there
should  be  a  fit  between  the  motivation  espoused  by  the
charity and the motivation felt by the donor. Thus, we look
to  the  area  of  regulatory  motivations  (or  focus)  and  the
related area of goal commitment to derive predictions about
the success of combative versus supportive orientations in
the long run. However, note that we do not suggest that only
regulatory focus theory could be at work in driving the pro-
posed effect; the effect has two aspects—(1) an initial inter-
est in donating to a charity and (2) a sustained perseverance
to keep donating—and thus, many factors could be at work
in  driving  the  effect  at  different  points  in  time.  In  this
research,  we  try  to  tease  out  the  influence  of  regulatory
focus theory within our field and lab studies, and we suggest
that further research should test the influence of other possi-
ble mechanisms that could be at work. Because we examine
the role of regulatory focus theory in greater detail than
potential theories, our theoretical review is more focused on
regulatory focus theory. However, we acknowledge and dis-
cuss how other accounts might influence the effect.

In regulatory focus theory, although both promotion- and
prevention-focused strategies are goal-attainment strategies,
they are distinct in that a promotion focus involves sensitiv-
ity to positive outcomes (emphasizing advancement, attain-
ment, and accomplishment), whereas a prevention focus
involves sensitivity to negative outcomes (emphasizing cau-
tion and protection) (Pennington and Roese 2003). In other
words, success under a promotion orientation results in a
focus on the presence of positives, whereas failure under a
prevention orientation results in a focus on the presence of
negatives. Therefore, a message’s framing has the ability to
activate a promotion or prevention orientation (Pham and
Higgins 2005).2 For example, Zhou and Pham (2004) find
that a person’s evaluation of financial products framed as
“individual  stocks  in  a  trading  account”  versus  “mutual
funds in a retirement account” activate a promotion versus a
prevention orientation, respectively. Promotion and preven-
tion motivations also influence decisions by generating dif-
ferent  mindsets:  a  promotion  focus  engenders  a  more
global, top-down mindset, whereas a prevention focus pro-
motes a local, bottom-up mindset (Pham and Higgins 2005).

2Similarly, related research in goals-based choice has suggested that a
person’s motives can be elicited by simple contextual cues (Fishbach and
Dhar 2008).

What’s in a Message?

41

Applying  the  theoretical  predictions  of  regulatory  focus
theory to our research context, we propose that a support-
ively oriented charity is more likely to activate a promotion
focus, whereas a combatively oriented charity is more likely
activate a prevention focus. For example, if we consider our
initial example of two charities named “Citizens for Urban
Renewal” (which seems more aligned with an advancement
focus) versus “Citizens Fighting Urban Decay” (which seems
more related to correcting a problem), one could argue that
the former charity name espouses a promotion motivation
and thus activates (or is preferred by donors with) a promo-
tion focus, while the latter activates a prevention focus.

However, such an activation of promotion or prevention
focus may be limited to the initial exposure to name or mes-
sage. An important question is, How does regulatory motiva-
tion influence long-term behavior? We find some evidence of
the long-term influence of regulatory focus in prior research.
Specifically, Pennington and Roese (2003) test for the influ-
ence of regulatory focus on temporal decisions. They find
that because promotion-focused goals are more ongoing and
abstract,  they  are  more  likely  to  include  a  time  frame
exceeding that of prevention-focused goals (which tend to
be more immediate and concrete). Therefore, this research
would  suggest  that  people  who  are  pursuing  promotion-
focused goals are more likely to persist because they believe
that the goal is of a more ongoing nature rather than one
with a clear end. In contrast, those pursuing prevention-
focused goals expect more immediate results and perceive
the objective more concretely. They are less likely to persist
for as long. Similarly, research has reported that when a 
purchase occasion is more temporally distant, promotion-
(vs. prevention-) framed products become more appealing
(Mogliner,  Aaker,  and  Pennington  2008).  Moreover,  a
global mindset is said to result in choice highlighting—that
is, greater motivation to work toward the focal goal and
away  from  alternate  goals,  leading  to  goal-congruent
actions (Fishbach and Dhar 2008). Applying work on regu-
latory motivations—specifically, the influence of regulatory
focus on temporally framed goals—to our charity context,
one could argue that a supportive charity activates a promo-
tion  orientation  that  leads  to  greater  commitment  to  the
charity’s cause. Thus, a supportive (vs. combative) orienta-
tion would result in greater resources invested in ensuring
that the charity’s cause is achieved. In other words, donors
are more likely to persist, thereby increasing the likelihood
of greater survival of a supportively oriented charity.

Using the research on regulatory focus theory, we can
make  the  following  predictions. A  supportively  oriented
charity seems more aligned with advancement and, thus,
can be categorized as triggering a promotion focus. In con-
trast, a combatively oriented charity seems more aligned
with trying to correct a problem and, thus, can be catego-
rized as triggering a prevention focus. We can further infer
that  because  a  promotion  orientation  engenders  a  more
global mindset, which results in greater goal commitment, a
supportively oriented charity is more likely to have sus-
tained donations. Moreover, the global, top-down process-
ing  that  occurs  in  a  promotion  orientation  encourages  a
greater amount of time invested in trying to achieve the
goal. Thus, we predict that a supportive charity is likely to
have greater revenue because donors are likely to remain
committed to supporting the cause for a longer time.

Importantly, as mentioned previously, other theoretical
mechanisms could be at work in causing the predicted lon-
gitudinal influence.3 In investigating the charitable organi-
zation landscape, we find that supportively oriented chari-
ties  are  much  more  prevalent  than  combatively  framed
charities. Thus, it is quite possible that people consider sup-
portive charities more popular (because of their frequency)
and believe that such charities are more worth their sus-
tained donations. Moreover, this greater frequency could
signal to prospective donors that such charities are more
liked  by  others,  which  could  also  increase  likelihood  of
donating. That is, if supportive charities are inferred to be
more popular, the social influence of donating to a charity
considered popular among others is likely to afford greater
donor satisfaction. In addition, if a charity is perceived to be
more popular, donors may believe that its cause is more
likely  to  be  achieved  because  it  is  likely  to  attract  more
donations. Therefore, donating to a cause that is likely to
succeed seems like a more justifiable decision. Along the
same lines, because the combatively named charities appear
less frequently, people might find them to be more novel
and unfamiliar, which could lead donors to be more cau-
tious in donating to them, resulting in less revenue. The rar-
ity of the combative charities could also send out the cue
that they are not as long lasting. Finally, it is possible that
charities with a short-term focus are more likely to choose a
combative  orientation,  and  those  that  are  of  an  ongoing
nature are named supportively. To some extent, we address
this concern in our field and lab studies. In our field study,
for example, the same charity is framed with supportive or
combative messaging, and our lab study examines the same
cause with the charity name manipulated to be supportive
versus combative.

Using longitudinal charity data, a field study, and a longi-
tudinal lab study, we test these theoretical predictions for
both money and time. In addition to the theoretical mecha-
nism described in this section, we also present further theo-
retical predictions before each of our empirical investiga-
tions  that  test  different  aspects  of  the  regulatory  focus
theory that underlie our proposed effects. Moreover, we dis-
cuss other potential accounts that could be at work in caus-
ing the proposed effect.

LONGITUDINAL DATA

We first describe the longitudinal data used to test our
predictions,  which  consist  of  key  measures  as  publicly
reported for registered nonprofits. Second, we discuss the
method  used  to  categorize  each  charity’s  name  as  either
supportive or combative. Third, we compare overall sur-
vival and financial performance between the supportive and
combative orientations. This procedure enables us to test the
predictions regarding the longevity and revenue-generating
ability of the charities as a function of their supportive or
combative orientation.

Data

To empirically test our propositions, we obtained extant
data including charity performance measures that enabled
us to examine the impact of a supportive versus combative

3We gratefully acknowledge the editor’s recommendation to consider

the different potential accounts that could cause the proposed effect.

42

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

orientation on charity survival and revenue. The data con-
sisted of key financial measures and firm attributes as sub-
mitted by tax-exempt nonprofit organizations to the IRS,
which  includes  approximately  400,000  public  charities
spanning a ten-year period (2000–2009). They offer a com-
prehensive set of standardized data on tax-exempt organiza-
tions; the Urban Institute’s National Center for Charitable
Statistics (NCCS; http://nccsdataweb.urban.org) gathers the
data, which comprise descriptive and financial information
generated from applications charities have filed with the
IRS. In general, organizations that are not required to sub-
mit this information (e.g., religious organizations, organiza-
tions with less than $25,000 in gross receipts) are excluded
from the file (Urban Institute NCCS 2006). Therefore, our
data set includes nondenominational charitable organiza-
tions with revenue greater than $25,000.

The revenue measure includes dollars from all activities
conducted  in  support  of  a  charitable  organization’s  tax-
exempt purposes and is given in our model as REVENUEit,
which represents the revenue for charity i at time t. The
asset measure (ASSETit) includes such items as real estate,
pledge receivables, and inventories and provides us with an
effective measure of charity size. That is, if assets measure
the economic value of the firm’s resources, it would indicate
that greater amounts of resources are likely to be held by
larger firms. Thus, assets serve as a control measure for firm
size. The name of the charity (NAMEi) enables us to cate-
gorize it as supportive, combative, or neutral (we outline the
procedure of categorizing names in detail in the next sec-
tion). We calculated a time-varying age variable (AGEit)
from each organization’s founding date as provided in its
IRS filing. This variable provides a consistently obtained
measure of duration in the marketplace, hypothesized to
reflect a charity’s ability to generate revenue through long-
term donations. To account for differences that may exist
between charitable domains, we chose the variable of chari-
table class (CLASSi) in line with the definitive classifica-
tion system of the National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities
(which  includes  Arts  and  Culture,  Education,  Health,
Human Services, and Other). Moreover, we included the
variables of geography (STATEi) and the NCCS’s confi-
dence rating (RATINGi) for charity i’s class designation (A,
B, or C).

Before testing our hypothesis, we transformed REVE-
NUE and ASSET measures into their natural log to induce
linearity (Tabachnick and Fidell 2002). With some charities
reporting negative revenue—and with the natural log of a
number less than 1 being undefined—we rescaled by an
amount equal to the lowest reported value plus 1. It is worth
noting that the pattern of results for the non-log-transformed
values was similar to the log-transformed values. Next, we
describe the method we used for categorizing charities as
supportive or combative because such a classification was
absent from current reported measures.

Categorizing Charities as Combative Versus Supportive

Classification method. We classified charities as having a
supportive,  combative,  or  neutral  orientation  through  an
automated coding schema. The procedure began with a key-
word search task including possible synonyms pertaining to
a charity’s supportive or combative orientation. For exam-
ple, we classified charities that included descriptors such as

“against,” “anti-,” “fight(ing),” or “opposing” as combative,
whereas we coded charities that included keywords such as
“for,”  “support,”  “aid(ing),”  “helping,”  or  “assisting”  as
supportive. We coded the remaining charities as having a
neutral orientation. Although neutral classifications were
not pertinent to our main analyses, their inclusion provides a
conservative reliability test for our coding schema. Among
all charities, our method yielded an output of approximately
1,500 combative and 30,000 supportive charities. This dis-
proportionate  categorization  is  not  surprising  in  light  of
prior research showing significantly higher frequency for
positive versus negative words (e.g., a 7:1 ratio for “love”
vs. “hate,” a 41:1 ratio for “beauty” vs. “ugliness”; Zajonc
1968;  see  also  Johnson,  Thompson,  and  Frincke  1960;
Kloumann et al. 2012).

Validating the computer-generated classification. To vali-
date the computer-generated classification, we chose a total
of 300 cases—consisting of 100 cases each from the sup-
portive, combative, and neutral categories from the coding
output—at random and assigned them to two independent
judges for an interrater reliability assessment. Judges were
provided with a randomized list of charities and instructed
to classify the charity as “for” when the name seemed most
likely to be supportive, “against” when the name seemed
most likely to be combative, and “neutral” when the name
was deemed as neither supportive nor combative. We gave
the judges hypothetical examples to aid them in categoriz-
ing (e.g., “Fund for the Environment” was marked as “for,”
“People Against Pollution” was marked as “against”).

Next, we subjected the ratings to an interrater reliability
test. We deemed an acceptable alpha level to be .70 (Lom-
bard, Snyder-Duch, and Bracken 2002), interpreted as 70%
agreement between the computer-based and independent
judges’ categorizations. We chose Krippendorff’s alpha for
its  advantages  in  accounting  for  chance  agreements  and
allowance of missing data (Hayes and Krippendorff 2007).
In comparing the computer-based classifications and those
of the two independent judges, an initial assessment of the
300 cases yielded an alpha of .69. To run a more conservative
test, we subsequently removed 100 cases at random, result-
ing in 200 cases in total. This analysis yielded an alpha of
.72. From these results,4 we deemed the computer-generated
classification acceptable for use in categorizing names as
supportive,  combative,  or  neutral.  We  next  examine  the
impact of this name categorization on survival and revenue
generation.

Examination of Long-Term Survival

Although it is possible for a charity to succeed financially
through a multitude of one-time donors, its long-term via-
bility can only be enhanced by its ability to receive ongoing
donations. We use survival analysis to test our proposition
that a supportively oriented charity would achieve greater
survival compared with a combatively oriented charity.

Method. The primary measure of interest is that of the
hazard function h(t), specifying the instantaneous risk of
failure f at time t, conditional on a firm surviving up to that
point in time. To control for key attributes of a charity, our

4Importantly, in examining combative and supportive names, only 2.5%
of charities were misclassified as their opposite (e.g., classified as “for” by
a judge when the computer coding schema classified it as “against”).

What’s in a Message?

43

model accounts for several covariates, whereby the hazard
for charity i at time t is noted in Equation 1. The hazard for
charity i is a fixed proportion of the hazard for any other
charity j (see Equation 2), yielding the hazard ratio. For
example, in our data, a hazard ratio of 1.15 for the combat-
ive orientation would represent a 15% greater risk of event
versus a supportive orientation.
b

b

b

l

(1)        hi(t) = 

0(t) exp[

1xi1 + 

2xi2(t) + ... 

kxik(t)], and

(2)

( )
h t
i
( )
h t
j

=

{
β
1

(

x

il

−

)

+

(

β

k

...

x

j

x

ik

−

}
)

.

x

j

exp

Applying Equation 1 to our analysis yields Equation 3,
which models the hazard of charity i at time t as a function
of NAME while accounting for time-varying covariates of
AGE and ASSET as well as the time-invariant variables of
CLASS, RATING, and STATE.

(3)    hi(t) = 

l

b

b

0(t) exp[
b

1NAMEi + 
b

2AGEi(t) + 
b

b

3ASSETi(t) 

                   + 

4CLASSi + 

5RATINGi + 

6STATEi].

To determine whether an event occurred (i.e., if a charity
ceased to operate within the ten-year time frame), we exam-
ined charities’ tax filings by year. In addition to containing
key  measures  on  all  501(c)(3)  organizations  required  to
comply with submission of tax forms (e.g., Form 990, Form
990-EZ), the data are reconciled with the Business Master
File of Exempt Organizations. The Business Master File
includes information for all active and registered nonprofits
applying for tax-exempt status. We also relied on the IRS
guideline that any charity that does not file a tax return with
its unique Employer Identification Number for three con-
secutive years is considered dissolved (IRS 2011). Per this
guideline, we have complete visibility for a charity’s disso-
lution through year 7 of the ten-year data. For example, a
charity founded in 1996 with no filings from 2006 to 2009
would be recorded as an event in 2006 (at an age of ten).

However, we do not know whether the charities that dis-
solved  within  the  final  three  years  of  our  ten-year  data
might have been revived. To address this issue, we obtained
a list of active charities (as reported by the IRS) at the sec-
ond and third years that came after our ten-year time frame.5
The  list  consisted  of  two  variables,  name  and  Employer
Identification Number, which enabled us to verify whether
any  of  the  charities  originally  classified  as  dissolved  in
years 8–10 might have resurfaced. We found that among the
2,995  charities  showing  dissolution  in  years  8–10,  there
were 478 revivals. In light of these findings, we recoded
these charities as being “alive” and used them in the analy-
sis that we discuss next.

Analysis  and  results.  Before  including  covariates,  we
began with a test of homogeneity of survival for AGE over
the NAME strata. Significance from the test of equality over
strata  (log-likelihood  test)  allowed  us  to  reject  the  null
hypothesis that NAME (combative vs. supportive orienta-
c2(1, N = 38,226) = 7.78, p <
tion) had the same influence (
.01). The results indicate that combative charities experi-

ence a steeper decline in survival probability (relative to
supportive charities) over time. Figure 1 provides a graphi-
cal representation.

Next,  we  conducted  an  analysis  with  the  full  set  of
covariates. First, given the left-censoring of the data, we
began our analysis by examining only those firms founded
within the ten-year data period (approximately one-third of
c2(62,
all charities). The model as a whole was significant (
N = 14,588) = 3,091.42, p < .01). Within this time frame,
the hazard ratio of 1.19 for a combative (vs. a supportive)
c2(1, N = 14,588) = 1.65, p <
charity was not significant (
.20), presumably because of the limited time in which we
could  measure  dropout.  For  example,  the  population  of
charities founded in our ten-year data provides us with an
average of 4.61 years of data from which we could measure
dropout (vs. a total of 9 periods for the full data set). Thus,
with  the  average  age  of  a  charity  being  23.6  years,  we
believed that expanding our examination beyond those char-
ities founded in the 10-year period would allow us to more
effectively test our hypothesis pertaining to long-term sur-
vival. In doing so, we (1) aimed to use a time frame that
included  more  charities  (because  the  charities  founded
within the 10-year time frame included only one-third of all
charities) and (2) attempted to reduce instances of older
charities that are more likely to have left-censored competi-
tors. Therefore, we used charities within the grand mean age
of 23.6 years, capturing more than 73% of the data. The
c2(63, N = 28,007) =
model as a whole retained significance (
11,255.11, p < .01) and revealed a significant hazard ratio of
c2(1, N = 28,007) = 4.34, p < .04) for a combative (vs.
1.18 (
supportive) charity. In other words, the results indicate that
a combatively oriented charity is 18% more likely to experi-
ence an event relative to a supportively oriented charity.
Appendix A includes the model details.

Discussion. The results from this analysis indicate that
combatively  oriented  charities  are  less  likely  to  survive
compared with supportively oriented charities. However,
survival  is  merely  one  measure  of  performance.  Might
another measure—such as revenue—tell the same story?
That is, all else being equal, would a charity’s ability to gen-
erate ongoing revenue be better for a supportive or combat-
ive orientation? A pattern of greater revenue for support-

Figure 1
SURVIVAL CURVES SUGGEST GREATER DURATION FOR A

SUPPORTIVE (VS. COMBATIVE) ORIENTATION

Supportive orientation
Combative orientation

1.0

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

l

a
v

i

v
r
u
S

.9

.8

.7

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

5The first year after the ten-year time frame was unavailable, although
we can use the list from the second year after our ten-year data to validate
whether dissolved charities from year 8 were revived.

1

11  21  31  41  51  61  71  81  91 101  111

Age (Years)

 
44

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

ively (vs. combatively) oriented charities over time would
further reinforce our findings.

Examination of Firm Revenue over Time

In  the  next  part  of  our  analysis,  we  test  whether  the 
revenue-generating ability of supportively oriented charities
would follow the same pattern as predicted by the hazard
model. For example, although greater survival for support-
ive (vs. combative) charities implies greater revenue from
increased donor interest over time, it is possible that, rela-
tive  to  combative  charities,  a  supportive  charity  simply
lingers in the market longer, with lower revenues.

Method. We employed hierarchical linear modeling (HLM)
to analyze the longitudinal data. One advantage of HLM is
that it provides the ability to enable user-defined covariance
structures, whereby we assigned an autoregressive covari-
ance structure (first-order autoregressive) in recognition of
the homogenous variance and the correlation from more
proximate observations of equally spaced measures of our
dependent variable (Littell et al. 1996). Hierarchical linear
modeling also affords a more flexible approach with regard
to missing data (Shin 2009). In our analysis, we examined
REVENUE as a function of NAME along with the same
covariates included in our examination of survival. The full
model, noted in Equation 6, builds from a two-level hierar-
chical model—that is, charities within name orientations.
We include the time-varying variables of AGE and ASSET
as Level 1 predictors of REVENUE (as noted in Equation
4), with a charity-specific intercept and a name-orientation-
specific slope included in Level 2 (see Equation 5):

(4)               Level 1: REVENUEi(t) = 
b

                          + 

2iASSETi(t) + 

e
ti; i = 1, …, N,

b

0i + 

b

1iAGEi(t) 

(5)  Level 2: 

b

g

0i = 

00 + 

g

01NAMEi + 

g

02CLASSi + 

g

03RATINGi

b

0i + 

b

1i = 

b

2i = 

g

g

g

04STATEi + u0i,

g

10 + 

11NAMEi,

20, and

(6)  Mixed: REVENUEi(t) = 

g
00 + 

g

g

10AGEi(t) 

01NAME + 
¥

11NAMEi

g

20ASSETi(t) + 
g

03RATINGi + 
e
ti; i = 1, …, N.

g

g

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

AGEi(t) 
g
02CLASSi

04STATEi + u0i

¥

Analysis and results. Analysis began with an uncondi-
tional, intercept-only model, adding in a stepwise fashion
AGE, ASSET, CLASS, RATING,
NAME, AGE, NAME 
and STATE. We used maximum likelihood to assess model
significance, analyzing the difference in the Akaike infor-
mation criteria (AIC) between each model and its preceding
alternative. As we note in Appendix B, Model 5 results in
AGE,
optimal fit, which includes NAME, AGE, NAME 
ASSET, and CLASS. We considered each of the variables
included in this model and whether they exhibited a signifi-
cant influence on revenue. The analyses did not reveal a sig-
nificant main effect for NAME on REVENUE (F(1, 27,963) =
1.70,  p <  .20).  However,  a  significant  main  effect  did

¥

emerge for AGE (F(1, 175,102) = 56.95, p < .01), indicating
greater revenue as a charity ages. In addition, significant
effects  emerged  for  covariates ASSET  (F(1,  175,102)  =
13,904, p < .01) and CLASS (F(1, 27,963) = 53.34, p < .01).
Most pertinent to our prediction, we observed a significant
effect for the AGE 
NAME interaction (F(1, 175,102) =
23.54, p < .01), indicating greater revenue over time for
supportive (vs. combative) charities.

¥

b

Our main interest (and prediction) pertained to the influ-
ence  of  the  interaction  of  NAME  and AGE—that  is,  to
examine whether the effect of a supportive versus combat-
ive orientation would differ over time. In interpreting these
¥
findings,  the  significant  beta  coefficient  for  the AGE 
NAME interaction (
Combative = –.002, t(175,102) = –4.85,
p < .01) indicates that as a combative charity ages, its reve-
nues experience a significant decrease relative to a support-
ive charity. Thus, considering two charities differing only on
NAME, each at the mean AGE of 24 years, revenue for the
combative charity would be 3.81% lower than that the sup-
portive charity. That is, a combative charity loses 3.8% in
incremental revenue as a result of its name orientation. From
a revenue perspective, this differential can be significant for
a charity seeking year-over-year growth amid a competitive
market. Taking into account the average year 10 revenue of
combative and supportive charities, this differential equates
to nearly $25,000 in lost revenue for a combative charity.
Over the average lifespan of a charity, the model predicts
approximately $300,000 in lost incremental revenue for a
cause associated with a combative orientation.

Moreover, considering the average annual revenue growth
over the ten years of data, we further find that combative
charities experience an annual growth of .23%, compared
with supportive charities’ growth of 6.23%. Importantly,
when we compare these annual revenue percentages with
inflation—which averaged 2.56% during this period (Bureau
of Labor Statistics 2014)—we find that growth of a combat-
ively framed charity falls short of inflation, making it less
competitive and, we believe, contributing to its eventual
inability to survive in the long run.

Finally, in our analysis we report the revenue and survival
models  separately  because  our  a  priori  approach  was  to
examine  whether  revenue  followed  the  expected  pattern
from the initial survival analysis. However, we acknowl-
edge that these separate models may not account for poten-
tial dependencies between the time-to-event and longitudi-
nal outcomes from our survival and revenue examinations.
Thus,  to  validate  the  inferences  made  from  our  separate
models, we turn to joint modeling.6 Our aim is to examine
the relationship strength between revenue trajectory and
survival for combative versus supportive charities.7 Given
this objective, we use the approach suggested by Wulfsohn
and  Tsiatis  (1997)  and  Henderson,  Diggle,  and  Dobson
(2000). In this joint analysis, both the longitudinal (revenue)
response and time-to-event (hazard) outcome are dependent
on latent random effects Ui and Vi, each following a zero-

6We thank the associate editor for this valuable suggestion.
7That is, we were interested not in predicting survival but rather in test-
ing survival across groups. In addition, we chose a joint model that consid-
ers variables from the same time frame because we assessed revenue and
survival annually.

What’s in a Message?

45

mean multivariate normal distribution. Thus, we restate our
longitudinal model as

(7)                              Yi(t) = Xi1

1 + U0i + 

b

e
ti

and the hazard model as

(8)        hi(t) = 

0(t) exp{Xi2

2 + V0i}, where V0i = 

l

b

g

(U0i).

In Equation 7, Xi1 denotes the covariates from our original
longitudinal model (i.e., Model 5 in Appendix B), and U0i
denotes the charity-specific random effect. In Equation 8,
Xi2 denotes the effect of NAME, with latent random effect
V0i. As Wulfsohn and Tsiatis (1997) discuss, the propor-
tional random effects for the longitudinal and hazard models
g
result in V0i = 
representing the association
between the longitudinal and survival processes.

(U0i), with 

g

¥

Our  joint  model  consists  of  a  longitudinal  submodel
including  NAME,  AGE,  NAME 
AGE,  ASSET,  and
CLASS, with the survival submodel including the NAME
effect as well as the time-varying effect of REVENUE as
estimated from the longitudinal model. For the survival sub-
model, we chose an accelerated failure time Weibull model,
a parametric approach commonly used in joint modeling
(Ibrahim, Chu, and Chen 2010) that is closely related to the
Cox model in that both assume proportional hazards and
provide unbiased, equally efficient estimates of the hazard
ratio  (Carroll  2003).  Furthermore,  the  Weibull  model
enables us to measure not only the hazard ratio (similar to
Cox) but also the relative increase or decrease in survival
time, aiding our interpretation of the effect of NAME on
survival longevity. Thus, Equation 8 is restated in Equation
9 as a Weibull accelerated failure time model, which pre-
dicts the log of survival time as a function of NAME and the
underlying REVENUE effect:

(9)           Log(T) = 

a

0 + 

a

1Xi2 + V0i, where V0i = 

g

(U0i).

b

¥

a

a

The joint analysis validated results of the separate reve-
nue and survival models. As Appendix C shows, we contin-
ued to observe a significant negative NAME 
AGE inter-
= –.003, z(168,274) = –5.04, p < .001) for the
action (
longitudinal submodel, indicating lower revenue for com-
bative charities as they age. For the NAME coefficient in
1 in Equation 9), we continue to find
survival submodel (
combative = –.18, z(26,493) = –2.58, p < .01).
significance (
in
We also find significant positive association (noted as 
Equation  9)  between  survival  and  revenue  (
=  3.35,
z(26,493) = 7.88, p < .001), consistent with our prediction
of greater survival with increased revenue. Specifically, the
NAME coefficient indicates that a charity with a combative
(vs. supportive) orientation has a 16.2% shorter life span.
Moreover, the findings from the survival submodel translate
to a hazard ratio of 1.22 for a combative orientation (calcu-
lated as e–
; see Allison 2010); that is, a finding similar to
the separate survival analysis.

ga

g

g

Accounting for self-selection. With a charity’s name ori-
entation being self-selected, standard analysis with NAME
as  an  independent  variable  may  lead  to  inconsistent  and
biased  parameter  estimates  (Heckman  1979;  Maddala
1983). In light of the nonrandom nature of a charity’s name,
an uncorrected effect for NAME may be correlated with the
error term predicting REVENUE (see James 2006). To cor-
rect for potential self-selection, we implemented a two-step
procedure (Heckman 1979; James 2006; Smits 2001; Vella

1998). We first estimated the self-selection process itself
with a probit model predicting NAME orientation as a func-
tion of the available variables theorized to influence a char-
ity’s decision to frame itself as supportive or combative.
Including  the  variables  of AGE,  CLASS,  RATING,  and
STATE, this model as a whole was significant in predicting
c2(65, N = 32,889) = 280.81, p < .01). We then
NAME (
used these results to compute a self-selection adjustment for
lˆ , which we added to our proposed model to
each charity, 
account for the potential effect of endogeneity. We obtained
nearly identical results with this analysis, whereby we con-
NAME interaction
tinue to observe a significant AGE 
(F(1, 175,102) = 4.87, p < .01 ). Furthermore, a nonsignifi-
cant correction factor (F(1, 175,102) = .79, p > .30) suggested
no main effect from self-selection on charitable revenue.

¥

Additional controls. We added more control variables to our
proposed model to account for two additional factors. First,
we control for whether a charity’s data were right-censored,
thus addressing the issue that a “dying” charity might exhibit
disproportionate losses in its later years. Second, as a proxy
for expenditures a charity may incur in promoting its cause,
we control for administrative expenses, despite its sporadic
reporting (by approximately two-thirds of all charities). Both
assessments show the same pattern relative to our proposed
¥
model.  That  is,  we  continue  to  see  a  significant AGE 
NAME interaction (i.e., a pattern similar to our prior analy-
ses)  after  accounting  for  the  effects  of  right-censoring
b
right-censored = –.01, t(27,963) = 5.65, p < .01) as well as for
(
expenses (

expenses = .05, t(93,787) = 110.07, p < .01).

b

Discussion.  The  results  of  this  analysis  show  greater
revenue over time for supportive (vs. combative) charities,
providing further evidence of supportively oriented chari-
ties’ stronger long-term performance. These results hold
both before and after accounting for survival, the possibility
of self-selection bias, and expenses. The findings follow the
expected pattern from the hazard model, which also shows a
supportively oriented charity’s ability to sustain. That is,
both examinations point to a supportive charity prevailing
in the long run.

However, we acknowledge that our empirical evaluation
cannot  address  the  multitude  of  exogenous  factors  that
affect a charity’s long-term performance. That is, several
alternate accounts—such as the overall frequency of com-
bative versus supportive orientations and its effect on the
charity’s popularity (as discussed in our theoretical back-
ground)—could produce similar results. Thus, in the sec-
tions that follow, we present field and lab studies to examine
in  depth  the  role  of  one  possible  mechanism:  regulatory
focus theory.

CHARITY FIELD STUDY

Given the evidence provided by the aggregate-level char-
ity data, we conducted a field study to test our propositions
at the individual (donor) level, involving actual pledges for
a 501(c)(3) public charity. We approached a charity that was
collecting responses from members and nonmembers about
their intent to donate their time to various events throughout
the fiscal year. The charity allowed us to frame its cause
before the pledges were solicited. We created a supportive
and  combative  version  of  the  cause,  which  the  charity
included in a survey aimed at soliciting pledges. Thus, we
were able to control for the type of charity and frame the

46

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

same cause supportively or combatively. Participants in this
field study indicated the amount of hours they were willing
to donate. Those who did not want to make a pledge for any
of the events indicated zero as their response. In line with
the findings of the IRS charity data, we predicted that the
supportive  orientation  is  more  likely  to  garner  greater
pledges over time than the combative orientation. More-
over, the field study enabled us to test whether the proposed
effect  would  emerge  for  donations  of  time  rather  than
money.

Method

We approached a mountain biking advocacy organization
(in the recreation and sports segment in the Human Services
domain) to gather data from its members during its annual
pledge drive. Fifty-nine current and prospective members
completed a survey administered by the charity as part of its
annual pledge efforts. The 59 respondents included 20 exist-
ing members and 39 prospective members who had shown
some  interest  or  had  taken  part  in  past  events;  thus,  all
respondents were aware of the charity’s objectives and con-
sidered them relevant. A link to an online survey/pledge
form was posted on the organization’s website to aid in its
planning  for  the  upcoming  season.  Contributions  were
solicited  as  time  from  the  donors  (rather  than  money)
because the organization mostly asks for volunteer hours to
help build and maintain trails in the area. Thus, donations of
time were more applicable than donations of money. Ten
events,  spaced  evenly  and  organized  chronologically
throughout the charity’s fiscal year, were presented, and the
donors indicated the total hours they would be willing to
pledge for each event. Specifically, respondents viewed a
series of four screens, each pertaining to a season in which
events were planned (i.e., spring, summer, fall, and winter).
For each event within a given season, respondents saw a
numerical  field  that  required  him  or  her  to  enter  a  time
pledge greater than or equal to zero hours.

After clicking the link to complete the survey, respon-
dents were randomly assigned to either a combative or sup-
portive  orientation  for  the  charitable  cause,  which  was
included as part of the larger survey. Given that we were
working with a charity whose name was already well estab-
lished,8 we were able to manipulate the orientation (tone) of
the messaging as supportive versus combative. The support-
ive orientation read, “[Charity Name] supports the preserva-
tion, expansion, and enhancement of natural surface trail
systems throughout the [region] area in an effort to ensure
continued access to high quality, well-maintained trails,”
whereas the combative orientation read, “[Charity Name]
fights the neglect, downsizing and deterioration that has
plagued  many  natural  surface  trail  systems  throughout
[region] in an effort to eliminate low quality, poorly main-
tained trails.” Respondents were then directed to the pledge
portion of the survey, where they entered their time pledge
for  each  of  the  ten  chronologically  presented  events.
Respondents then concluded the survey by answering ques-
tions pertinent to the charity’s planning efforts and unrelated
to our research propositions.

Results

b

b

We examined the dependent variable of hours donated as
a function of the charity’s combative or supportive orienta-
tion. To control for any effects from participants’ member-
ship status, we used it as a covariate. For the key predictor
of name orientation, the results revealed that a supportive
orientation resulted in greater overall donation of time (
sup-
portive = .49, t(56) = 2.18, p < .04). The covariate of member-
ship status was significant, with members pledging less time
members = –.55, t(56) = –2.35, p < .03).
than nonmembers (
The data enabled us to test an aspect of regulatory focus
theory, in addition to examining the impact on donation of
time. Because the respondents indicated a value either equal
to or greater than zero, we were able to preliminarily test for
whether respondents were considering donating or deferring
their donations for later.9 Importantly, deferral of donations
helped us connect the responses to predictions made by regu-
latory focus theory, which suggests that prevention-oriented
consumers are more likely to defer choice (Dhar 1997) to
avoid mistakes (Pham and Higgins 2005). Applied to our
charitable context, if a combative orientation activated a
prevention focus, this might result in more instances of the
donors deferring on the choice to donate in a given period.
Therefore, we would be more likely to observe more zero
donations among respondents assigned to the combative
(vs. supportive) condition. In the long run, this should result
in a smaller amount donated overall, adversely affecting the
revenue collected (or time donated) for combatively ori-
ented charities.

Therefore, we dichotomized the dependent variable of
hours as “donated” versus “not donated.” That is, we cate-
gorized any period in which the respondents pledged time
as “donated,” with any period of a zero donation catego-
rized as a donation deferral or as “not-donated.” We ran a
logistic  regression  model,  with  the  probability  of  a  zero
donation predicted by name orientation while controlling
for membership status. The results indicated that the log of
the odds of the charity receiving a zero donation was greater
combative – supportive = .59,
for the combative orientation (
t(56) = 2.73, p < .01). More specifically, the odds of a com-
bative orientation having a zero donation were 1.81 times
greater than a supportive orientation. In comparing non-
members with members, we observe directional evidence
for greater probability of zero donations for nonmembers
b
(

nonmembers – members = .43, t(56) = 1.93, p < .06).

b

Discussion

The results of the field study (as summarized in Figure 2)
help us test the findings from the charity data in a more con-
trolled  yet  realistic  setting  (i.e.,  individual,  donor-level
responses). First, the field study replicates the result of the
charity data by demonstrating that a supportive orientation
is more likely to garner higher donations. Moreover, we find
that the results hold even when we consider donations of
time rather than money and when we track individual-level
rather than aggregate contributions. Finally, though prelimi-
nary, the field study enabled us to test for the role of regula-

8The charity name was neutral and was commonly referred to by its ini-
tials; therefore, we could cleanly manipulate combative and supportive
messaging that accompanied the name.

9Note that we provide a more direct test for deferral of donations in the
next study. However, we can obtain some insights from the presence of
zeros in this study.

What’s in a Message?

47

Figure 2
CHARITY FIELD STUDY: GREATER DONATION FOR A

SUPPORTIVE (VS. COMBATIVE) ORIENTATION

orientation triggered a prevention focus. We measured this
in a pretest with a different sample of participants from the
main  study,  thus  eliminating  any  carryover  effects  that
could influence the main study participants.

(βSupportive = .49, t(56) = 2.18, p < .04)

Pretest

2.34

2.83

4.00

3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

d
o
i
r
e
P
r
e
p
d
e
t
a
n
o
D
s
r
u
o
H

1.00

Combative

Supportive

tory focus through the presence of zero donations. We find
that a combative orientation results in greater deferral (cap-
tured through zero donation values) and thus behaves in a
manner similar to a prevention orientation.

In summary, from this field study we conclude that a sup-
portive orientation is likely to prevail over a combative one.
However, although respondents indicated their donations to
ten events, they entered their pledges in one sitting; that is,
pledges were not elicited over time. Thus, despite donation
intent being measured by actual pledges to an existing charity,
one could argue that intent was not measured over time. More-
over, the support for deferral was preliminary because respon-
dents were not explicitly deferring donations. To address
these concerns and gather more evidence for the theoretical
propositions, we conducted a longitudinal lab study.

LONGITUDINAL LAB STUDY

The longitudinal lab study enables us to test whether the
same charity oriented as supportive versus combative would
replicate our previous results. To address the concerns of the
field study, we designed the lab study in such a manner that
the same charity was oriented differently (combatively or
supportively) and that donations (money and time) were
elicited longitudinally. In other words, by manipulating only
the message orientation and controlling for other factors, we
manipulated the regulatory focus that would be activated by
the charity’s orientation. Finally, to more effectively test for
deferral of donations, we gave participants the option of
donating within a specific period or deferring to the next
period.

To ensure that participants were actually donating (vs.
indicating intent to donate) to the charity, we designed a
procedure such that each week participants were asked to
complete a task whereby they were provided with monetary
remuneration on the basis of their performance. They were
then provided information about a charitable organization in
a purportedly unrelated task (appearing along with other
filler  tasks)  and  asked  if—and  how  much—they  would
donate  to  the  charity  from  the  amount  they  just  earned.
Thus, a participant’s donation was from money that he or
she had actually earned, with the maximum donation based
on  a  consistent  amount  that  could  be  earned  each  week.
Moreover, we wanted to directly test whether a supportive
orientation triggered a promotion focus and a combative

The pretest enabled us to test two important factors. First,
we wanted to ensure that the charities we were using in the
main study—though framed differently as supportive versus
combative—had a similar impact and conveyed a similar
meaning  to  the  donors.  In  addition,  we  also  wanted  to
choose a charitable domain that our participants found rele-
vant. Second, the pretest enabled us to test whether a pre-
vention versus a promotion orientation was activated on the
basis of the name used. We recruited 80 participants from an
online panel in return for monetary compensation and ran-
domly assigned them to a combative or supportive condi-
tion.  Within  each  condition,  participants  evaluated  five
charitable messages in the Urban Development, Environ-
ment, Education, Business/Commerce, and Animal-Related
domains. Each charity description consisted of a headline,
body copy, and tagline presented in either a combative or
supportive orientation (for details, see Appendix D). Partici-
pants  first  indicated  whether  the  given  charity  appeared
“supportive” versus “combative” on a seven-point bipolar
scale. To shed light on whether the charity triggered a pro-
motion versus a prevention focus, we also asked partici-
pants to indicate their responses to scale items assessing the
type  of  regulatory  orientation  that  was  activated.  In  the
absence of extant scales specifically measuring orientation
for a marketing message or brand name, we created a seven-
point bipolar scale including six scale items adapted from
keywords in promotion/prevention descriptions from Hig-
gins, Shah, and Friedman (1997) and Higgins (1998). The
scale  items  included  the  following  pairs  of  keywords
describing regulatory focus: promotion versus prevention,
hope versus duty, aspiration versus responsibility, approach
versus avoid, nurture versus protect, and wish versus obli-
gate. Finally, to understand the relevance of the charitable
domain to the participants, we asked them to rank the chari-
ties from most to least important.

The  results  indicated  that  in  terms  of  relevance,  the
domains of Education, Environment, and Animals were at or
above the median, with Urban Development and Business/
Commerce below the median. Results from the six regulatory
focus scale items indicated that, except for the domain of
Education, a supportive name resulted in participants rating
it as more promotion oriented, whereas a combative name
resulted in a more prevention-oriented rating. Therefore, the
results of the pretest indicated that a supportive orientation
activated a promotion focus, whereas a combative orienta-
tion activated a prevention focus. Because we needed two
charitable  domains  to  provide  donors  with  choice  in  the
main  study,  we  selected  the  Environment  and  Animal
domains on the basis of their above-median performance on
the relevance measure and a clear promotion versus preven-
tion delineation, as noted in Appendix E, Panels A–C.

Method for the Main Study

Ninety-one  undergraduate  students  were  recruited  in
return  for  partial  course  credit  to  take  part  in  the  study.
Before the study began, we invited participants to an infor-

 
 
 
48

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

mation session and gave them detailed instructions on the
procedure.  During  this  information  session,  participants
completed a brief questionnaire that collected their e-mail
addresses and demographic data. They were informed that
the study would last for five weeks and that each week they
would be given a marketing task to complete. At the end of
each week, they would receive an e-mail with a link to a
questionnaire. By clicking on the link, they would first input
the information they had collected for the marketing task
assigned for that week. Importantly, they would earn mone-
tary compensation for these efforts. The maximum amount
they could earn each week was $5. The questionnaire would
also provide them with information about the task for the
next week as well as other items for them to complete.

Those enrolled in the study were then contacted at a set
frequency each week. First, they provided the information
they had collected on the assigned marketing task (for a
complete list of tasks by week, see Appendix F). After pro-
viding this information, we informed participants how much
they had earned from their work on the task. To ensure that
participants  earned  approximately  the  same  amount  of
money, we randomly chose an amount between $4.60 and
$5.00, which was presented to them after a delay of 30 or
more seconds of processing time. The time delay and the
randomized compensation were aimed at creating the feel-
ing that participants’ responses were being scrutinized and
that their resulting compensation would be based on their
responses. Afterward, participants completed the charitable
donation task. Specifically, in the first week they were pre-
sented with two supportive or combative charities from the
Environment and Animal domains (from the pretest) and
asked to select the more important charity. This selection
would serve as the target charity used for that participant in
subsequent  weeks.  Each  week,  participants  were  asked
whether they would be willing to donate to the same charity
from the amount they had earned in the marketing task, with
those willing to donate entering a dollar amount. Notably,
the question soliciting monetary donations for each of the
five periods included the choices of “Yes, I would like to
donate” or “No thank you. Not this week” (with the latter
choice modeled after tactics commonly used by charities to
better allow for donation requests in subsequent periods).
Thus, we were able to test for deferral of donations. Subse-
quent to the monetary donation request, participants were
asked to contribute as much or as little time as they wanted
to a task aimed at helping out the charity (as a proxy for
donation of time).

Finally,  participants  answered  five  questions  aimed  at
measuring  feelings  or  affective  involvement  toward  the
charity. Our rationale for including this scale was to provide
another  test  for  regulatory  focus  theory.  Importantly,
research  on  feelings  transfer  in  goal  systems  (Fishbach,
Shah,  and  Kruglanski  2004)  has  suggested  that  the  tone
associated with a goal’s attainment (in our case, a combative
vs. supportive tone) can influence the process of achieving
the goal. That is, the feelings experienced during goal pur-
suit  mirror  the  feelings  experienced  when  the  goal  is
achieved (Spence 1956). Importantly, research has shown
that the intensity of feelings experienced when a goal is
achieved (in our case, donating to a cause) is greater under a
promotion versus a prevention focus (see Idson, Liberman,
and Higgins 2000). To measure feelings specific to charitable

situations, we used the affective and moral reaction ques-
tions suggested by Small, Loewenstein, and Slovic (2007).

The five-point scale items (ranging from “not at all” to
“extremely”)  included  the  following  questions:  (1)  How
upsetting is this situation to you? (2) How sympathetic did
you feel while reading the description of the cause? (3) How
much do you feel it is your moral responsibility to help out
with this cause? (4) How touched were you by the situation
described?  and  (5)  To  what  extent  do  you  feel  that  it  is
appropriate to give money to aid this cause? Before con-
cluding each week’s questionnaire, participants were given
information about the next week’s marketing task.

Results

Monetary donations. There was no significant difference
in money earned between participants randomly assigned to
supportive orientations (who, on average, earned $4.81) and
combative  orientations  (who  earned  $4.82  on  average).
When  participants  were  given  the  option  to  choose  a
domain of either Environment or Animal, we observed a
60%  choice  of  Environment  domain  and  40%  choice  of
Animal domain (z = 1.92, p < .10). Furthermore, no signifi-
cant differences surfaced in earnings or donations between
the two domains. Over the five weeks, three participants
dropped out of our panel (two participants after the first
week and one participant after the second week), resulting
in 88 total participants. In comparing donations between the
two  name  conditions,  we  found  that  the  total  monetary
donations for the combative (vs. supportive) condition were
combative = –.66, t(86) = –5.22, p <
significantly lower (
.01).  Specifically,  donations  in  the  supportive  condition
amounted to $.79 (or approximately 16% of participants’
weekly earnings) per period, while donations in the combat-
ive condition averaged $.13 (or 3% of earnings) per period.
Deferral on monetary contributions. Similar to the field
study, to examine deferral of monetary donations, we again
created an outcome of “donated” versus “not donated” for
the dependent measure of monetary donation. That is, we
categorized any time period in which participants chose the
“No thank you. Not this week” option as “not donated.” A
logistic regression model indicated that the log of the odds of
a combative charity receiving a zero donation was signifi-
combative – supportive =
cantly higher than a supportive charity (
.82, t(86) = 3.16, p < .01). More specifically, the odds of a
combative charity having a zero donation was 2.27 times
greater (i.e., e.82) than a supportive charity.

b

b

Time donation. We next considered participants’ dona-
tions of time/effort to the five charity tasks requested of
them. We  calculated  a  variable  of  task  involvement  that
measured depth of interaction within a given task and con-
sisted of the quantity of output produced. For example, in
week 1, the task involved generating a list of viable brand
partners for cause-related marketing efforts by the partici-
pant’s chosen charity. We calculated the task involvement
for this round as the number of ideas generated. For other
list-based tasks, such as in weeks 2 (soliciting banner ad
copy) and 4 (generating search keywords), the total number
of items participants entered served as the task involvement
measure. For tasks calling for paragraph responses (e.g., a
donor e-mail letter in task 3, input on funding campaigns in
task 5), task involvement was the total number of words typed.
Of the 88 participants, 61 donated their time in at least one

What’s in a Message?

49

of the five weeks, yielding a total of 275 observations over
time. We first standardized the task involvement dependent
variable for comparability across periods and removed four
observations that were more than three standard deviations
above the mean.10 In predicting the dependent variable of
task involvement across the two name conditions, we find
directional evidence for lower task involvement in the com-
combative = –.20, t(86) =
bative versus supportive condition (
–1.73, p < .07). Specifically, we find that the combative ori-
entation results in a task involvement measure that is .16
standard deviations below the mean, whereas the supportive
orientation results in a measure that is .04 standard devia-
tions above the mean.

b

Affective involvement. Finally, we summed each of the
five  seven-point  affective  scale  items  to  provide  a  total
affect score, with higher scores indicating greater affective
involvement. Our decision to sum each of the five responses
was based on two factors: (1) a Cronbach’s alpha greater
than .85 for each individual period and (2) a factor analysis
confirming our a priori criteria that all measures would load
onto a single factor explaining at least 70% of total variance
(per Stevens 1992). We ran a repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) across the two name orientations over the
five time periods as well as a name orientation 
time period
interaction. Both name orientation and time, in isolation, are
insignificant (p > .25). However, we observe a significant
name orientation 
time period interaction. Specifically, the
affect score for the combatively oriented charity decreases
¥
week = –.55, t(86) = –1.97, p <
over the five weeks (
.05) compared with the supportively oriented charity, which
indicates that participants assigned to the combative condi-
tion experience a reduction in affective involvement as time
progresses. We depict the results in Figure 3, Panels A–C.

combative 

b

¥

¥

Discussion

The results from the longitudinal lab study provide fur-
ther evidence that a supportively oriented charity is more
likely to garner higher monetary donations in the long run,
which is likely to increase its chances of survival. Moreover,
we find directional evidence of greater charity involvement
as captured through the task involvement variable for the
supportive orientation. Finally, we find that the affective
involvement with a combative (vs. supportive) orientation
decreases over time. Theoretically, this study accomplished
several things. First, by changing just the messaging orien-
tation—or  activating  a  promotion  or  prevention  focus
through the name and supporting tone of the charity—we
were  able  to  replicate  our  previous  results.  Second,  the
pretest provided direct evidence that a supportively oriented
charity activated a promotion focus, whereas a combatively
oriented charity activated a prevention focus. Third, similar
to the field study, we again find that choice deferral is more
likely for a combatively oriented charity than for a support-
ively oriented charity, highlighting the former’s prevention-
focused nature. Fourth, through the affective involvement
scales, we determine that a supportive charity is more likely
to lead to sustained positive affect with the cause, providing
evidence in line with goal systems theory, which suggests a

10Of the four removed observations, two were from the supportive con-
dition (SD = +4.57 and SD = +3.06 in week 4) and two were from the com-
bative condition (SD = +3.5 in week 3 and SD = +3.86 in week 5).

Figure 3
LONGITUDINAL LAB STUDY: GREATER DONATION AND

INVOLVEMENT FOR A SUPPORTIVE (VS. COMBATIVE)

ORIENTATION

A: Monetary Donation per Period

$1.20

(βCombative = –.66, t(86) = –5.22, p < .01)

$.79

$.13

Combative

Supportive

B: Task Quantity Donation (Standardized) per Period

b

Combative = –.20, t(86) = –1.73, p < .07)

(

.04

–.16

Combative

Supportive

C: Affective Involvement by Period

b

Combative 

(

¥

Week = –.55, t(86) = –1.97, p < .05)

$.80

$1.00
)
$
(
n
o
i
t
a
n
o
D

$.60

$.40

$.20

$0

.25

.15

.05

–.05

–.15

–.25

)

m
u
S

(

e
r
o
c
S
r
e
t
f

22

21

20

19

A

18

1 

2 

3 
Period
(cid:1)

4 

5

Combative orientation

(cid:1)

Supportive orientation   

transfer mechanism of positive and negative affect from
supportive and combative orientations, respectively.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

In this research, we examine whether a combative versus
supportive orientation is likely to prevail in the long run.
Although extant research stemming from prospect theory and
loss aversion (Tversky and Kahneman 1981) varies with the
context, in general it supports the notion that negative mes-
saging garners greater attention. However, because much of
this  previous  research  examines  a  short  time  frame,  and
because there has been relatively little research in the realm
of charitable contributions, we examined whether a combative
versus supportive orientation for a charity is likely to succeed
in the long run. We utilized three types of data to answer
this question: aggregated firm-level data, time pledges from
prospective donors to an actual charity, and a longitudinal

 
 
 
50

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

panel  with  donor-specific  monetary  and  time  measures.
Across our empirical investigations, we find that a support-
ively oriented charity is more likely to endure compared
with a combatively oriented charity. For the aggregate char-
ity data, we find that a supportive orientation is more likely
to survive for longer and earn greater revenue. To validate
these findings in a controlled yet realistic setting, we con-
ducted field and longitudinal lab studies. Both these studies
again showed (for monetary as well as time donations to
charities) that a supportive orientation garners higher levels of
donations over time compared with a combative orientation.
In addition to our demonstration of the effect, we pro-
posed  and  tested  the  theoretical  mechanism  causing  the
effect. Utilizing regulatory focus theory, we proposed that a
supportively (combatively) oriented charity activates pro-
motion (prevention) motivations. Prior research has shown
that  a  promotion  focus  is  likely  to  lead  to  more  goal-
directed  actions,  greater  affective  involvement,  and  less
choice  deferral.  Thus,  a  supportively  oriented  charity  is
likely to generate greater donations and survive for longer
because it activates a promotion focus. Through our field
study and longitudinal lab study, we demonstrate that a sup-
portive (combative) orientation activates a promotion (pre-
vention)  focus  and  leads  to  less  donation  deferral  and
greater  affective  involvement.  Moreover,  we  infer  that
global,  top-down  processing  for  a  supportively  oriented
charity encourages a greater amount of time invested in the
cause, which we find in our field and lab studies in the form
of time donations and task involvement.

Although we do test for the role of regulatory focus in our
lab study, we acknowledge that regulatory focus is just one of
the mechanisms at play in causing the proposed effect. That
is, it is possible that other mechanisms—such as the less-
frequent occurrence of negative names, the greater liking
for  positive  names,  or  social  influence  of  seeing  others
donate to a specific charity—could contribute to the pro-
posed  effect.  Thus,  it  would  be  worthwhile  for  further
research to parse out these explanations in greater detail.
Moreover, future studies could examine consumer choice
among several charitable alternatives or assess value through
paired  choice  study  (e.g.,  conjoint).  Further  research
notwithstanding, our findings provide several theoretical
and practical applications, which we discuss next.

Theoretical Implications

From a theoretical perspective, this research first informs
extant research on the influence of message orientation on
long-term  persuasion.  Although  extensive  research  has
shown that negatives tend to outweigh positives in a point-
in-time examination, relatively little work has empirically
examined this influence over time. Through our longitudinal
empirical examinations, we demonstrate that a supportive
orientation tends to prevail relative to a combative orientation.
Second, our findings have implications for branding as well as
signaling theory research. For branding, our research indicates
that a combative name might not endure (e.g., achieve long-
term brand relevance) relative to a supportive name. Further-
more, it is possible that signaling the brand’s intent in a sup-
portive versus a combative frame might result in greater
performance over time. Third, in examining the longitudinal
influence, we are able to inform extant theory on regulatory
focus by linking supportive and combative tones to promotion

and prevention orientations, respectively. Fourth, literature
in economics has suggested that people engage in altruistic
acts for a variety of reasons (Andreoni 1990; Rose-Acker-
man 1996), and our findings help inform how one aspect—a
charity’s message orientation— can influence people’s altru-
istic behavior differently in the short and the long run.

Practical Implications

This research also has many practical implications. First,
understanding the impac t of a supportive or combative ori-
entation is significant for firms in choosing the most appro-
priate frame on the basis of their strategic intent. We address
the unique situation faced by nonprofits, which work under
the constraints of advertising and promotion dollars, and
discuss how they can utilize the name and/or accompanying
message tone of their organization to sustain long-term con-
tributions. Second, for brand names or taglines outside the
charitable domain, the findings from this research could be
used to predict the long-term effect of a positive orientation
(i.e., emphasizing a product’s benefits) versus a negative
orientation  (i.e.,  eliminating  unwanted  consequences).
Third, extending these findings to the policy or political
realms, this article could help determine strategy using a
temporal focus. Specifically, our research can aid decision
making in line with whether the goal for return is immediate
(e.g., a one-time exchange) or long term (e.g., forging an
ongoing relationship). Fourth, our research illustrates the
importance  of  using  longitudinal  data  to  understand  the
various factors that have a temporal influence. Over time,
people encounter new influences, acquire new learning, and
alter their attitudes and behavior accordingly. Thus, short-
term predictions might not hold in the long run.

REFERENCES
Allison, Paul D. (2010), Survival Analysis Using SAS: A Practical

Guide. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.

Andreoni, James (1990), “Impure Altruism and Donations to Pub-
lic Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow Giving,” Economic Jour-
nal, 100 (401), 464–77.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014), “Overview of BLS Statistics on
Inflation and Prices,” (accessed May 31, 2014), [available at
http://www.bls.gov/bls/inflation.htm].

Carroll, Kevin J. (2003), “On the Use and Utility of the Weibull
Model in the Analysis of Survival Data,” Controlled Clinical
Trials, 24 (6), 682–701.

Center on Philanthropy at Indiana University (2007), “Overview
of Overall Giving: Center on Philanthropy Panel Study: A Part
of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” (accessed November
17, 2014), [available at http://www.philanthropy.iupui.edu/files/
research/2007_copps_key_findings.pdf].

Coursey, Don L., John L. Hovis, and William D. Schulze (1987),
“The Disparity Between Willingness to Accept and Willingness
to Pay Measures of Value,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1
(2), 679–90.

Dekimpe, Marnik G. and Dominique M. Hanssens (2000), “Time-
Series Models in Marketing: Past, Present and Future,” Inter-
national Journal of Research in Marketing, 17 (2), 183–93.
Dhar,  Ravi  (1997),  “Consumer  Preference  for  a  No-Choice

Option,” Journal of Consumer Research, 24 (2), 215–31.

Dixon, Michelle (1997), “Small and Medium-Sized Charities Need
a Strong Brand Too: Crisis’ Experience,” International Journal
of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 2 (1), 52–57.

What’s in a Message?

51

Fishbach, Ayelet and Ravi Dhar (2008), “Dynamics of Goal-Based
Choice: Toward an Understanding of How Goals Commit Ver-
sus Liberate Choice,” in Handbook of Consumer Psychology,
Curtis P. Haugtvedt, Paul M. Herr, and Frank R. Kardes, eds.
New York: Taylor & Francis, 611–37.

———, James Y. Shah, and Arie W. Kruglanski (2004), “Emotional
Transfer in Goal Systems,” Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
chology, 40 (6), 723–38.

Hayes, Andrew and Klaus Krippendorff (2007), “Answering the
Call for a Standard Reliability Measure for Coding Data,” Com-
munication Methods and Measures, 1 (1), 77–89.

Heckman, James (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as a Specifica-

tion Error,” Econometrica, 47 (1), 153–61.

Henderson,  Robin,  Peter  Diggle,  and  Angela  Dobson  (2000),
“Joint Modeling of Longitudinal Measurements and Event Time
Data,” Biostatistics, 1 (4), 465–80.

Higgins, E. Tory (1998), “Promotion and Prevention: Regulatory
Focus as a Motivational Principle,” Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 30, 1–46.

———,  James  Shah,  and  Ronald  Friedman  (1997),  “Emotional
Responses to Goal Attainment: Strength of Regulatory Focus as
Moderator,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72
(3), 515–25.

Ibrahim,  Joseph  G.,  Haitao  Chu,  and  Liddy  M.  Chen  (2010),
“Basic Concepts and Methods for Joint Models of Longitudinal
and  Survival  Data,”  Journal  of  Clinical  Oncology,  28  (16),
2796–2801.

Idson, Lorraine Chen, Nira Liberman, and E. Tory Higgins (2000),
“Distinguishing Gains from Nonlosses and Losses from Non-
gains: A Regulatory Focus Perspective on Hedonic Intensity,”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36 (3), 252–74.
IRS (2011), “IRS Identifies Organizations That Have Lost Tax-
Exempt  Status;  Announces  Special  Steps  to  Help  Revoked
Organizations,” (June 9), (accessed May 31, 2014), [available at
http://www.irs.gov/uac/IRS-Identifies-Organizations-that-Have-
Lost-Tax-Exempt-Status;-Announces-Special-Steps-to-Help-
Revoked-Organizations].

Jacoby, Jacob, George J. Szybillo, and Carol K. Berning (1976),
“Time and Consumer Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Overview,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 2 (4), 320–38.

James, Harvey S. (2006), “Self-Selection Bias in Business Ethics

Research,” Business Ethics Quarterly, 16 (4), 559–77.

Johnson,  Ronald  C.,  Calvin  W.  Thomson,  and  Gerald  Frincke
(1960), “Word Values, Word Frequency, and Visual Duration
Thresholds,” Psychological Review, 67 (5), 332–42.

Kloumann, Isabel M., Christopher M. Danforth, Kameron Decker
Harris, Catherine A. Bliss, and Peter Sheridan Dodds (2012),
“Positivity of the English Language,” PLoS One, 7 (1), e29484.
Littell, Ramon C., George A. Milliken, Walter W. Stroup, and Rus-
sell D. Wolfinger (1996), SAS System for Mixed Models. Cary,
NC: SAS Institute.

Lombard,  Matthew,  Jennifer  Snyder-Duch,  and  Cheryl  Cam-
panella Bracken (2002), “Content Analysis in Mass Communi-
cation: Assessment and Reporting of Intercoder Reliability,”
Human Communication Research, 28 (4), 587–604.

Maddala, George S. (1983), Limited-Dependent and Qualitative
Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Mogliner, Cassie, Jennifer L. Aaker, and Ginger L. Pennington
(2008), “Time Will Tell: The Distant Appeal of Promotion and
Imminent  Appeal  of  Prevention,”  Journal  of  Consumer
Research, 34 (5), 670–81.

Morgan, Robert M. and Shelby D. Hunt (1994), “The Commitment–
Trust Theory of Relationship Marketing,” Journal of Marketing,
58 (July), 20–38.

Pennington, Ginger L. and Neal Roese (2003), “Regulatory Focus
and Temporal Distance,” Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
chology, 39 (6), 563–76.

Pham, Michel Tuan and E. Tory Higgins (2005), “Promotion and
Prevention in Consumer Decision-Making,” in Inside Consump-
tion: Consumer Motives, Goals, and Desires, S. Ratneshwar and
David Glen Mick, eds. New York: Routledge, 8–43.

Ritchie,  Robin  J.B.,  Sanjeev  Swami,  and  Charles  B. Weinberg
(1999), “A Brand New World for Nonprofits,” International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 4 (1), 26–
42.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1996), “Altruism, Nonprofits, and Eco-
nomic Theory,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34 (2), 701–
728.

Shin,  Juh  Hyun  (2009),  “Application  of  Repeated-Measures
Analysis of Variance and Hierarchical Linear Model in Nursing
Research,” Nursing Research, 58 (3), 211–17.

Small, Deborah A., George Loewenstein, and Paul Slovic (2007),
“Sympathy  and  Callousness:  The  Impact  of  Deliberative
Thought on Donations to Identifiable and Statistical Victims,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102
(2), 143–53.

Smits, Jeroen (2001), “Career Migration, Self-Selection and the
Earnings of Married Men and Women in the Netherlands, 1981–
93,” Urban Studies, 38 (3), 541–62.

Spence, Kenneth W. (1956), Behavioral Theory and Conditioning.

New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Stevens,  James  P.  (1992),  Applied  Multivariate  Statistics  for 
the Social Sciences, 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Tabachnick, Barbara G. and Linda S. Fidell (2002), Using Multi-

variate Statistics, 5th ed. New York: Pearson Education.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1981), “The Framing of
Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,” Science, 211 (4481),
453–58.

Urban  Institute,  NCCS  (2006),  “Guide  to  Using  NCCS  Data,”
(accessed  November  10,  2014),  [available  at  http://nccs-
dataweb.urban.org/kbfiles/468/NCCS-data-guide-2006c.pdf].
Vella, Francis (1998), “Estimating Models with Sample Selection
Bias: A Survey,” Journal of Human Resources, 33 (1), 127–69.
Wulfsohn, Michael S. and Anastasios A. Tsiatis (1997), “A Joint
Model  for  Survival  and  Longitudinal  Data  Measured  with
Error,” Biometrics, 53 (1), 330–39.

Zajonc, Robert B. (1968), “Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9 (2, Part 2), 1–
27.

Zhou, Rongrong and Michel Tuan Pham (2004), “Promotion and
Prevention Across Mental Accounts: When Financial Products
Dictate Consumers’ Investment Goals,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 31 (1), 125–35.

52

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

Appendix A
SURVIVAL ANALYSIS: SIGNIFICANTLY GREATER HAZARD FOR COMBATIVE (VS. SUPPORTIVE) NAME ORIENTATION

A: Type 3 Tests

Variable                                                                                            d.f.                                                  

c2                                 p 

NAME                                                                                                1                                                   4.34                           .037**
AGE                                                                                                   1                                               162.72                        <.001***
ASSET                                                                                               1                                               127.73                        <.001***
CLASS                                                                                               4                                                   6.16                           .188
RATING                                                                                             3                                            8,808.60                        <.001***
STATE                                                                                              53                                                 85.15                           .003***

Variable                                                                           

B: Analysis of Maximum Likelihood Estimates
b                                

SE                                

c2                                 p                        Hazard Ratio

NAME      Combative                                                     .17                               .08                               4.34                           .037*                           1.18
AGE                                                                              –.04                               .00                           162.72                        <.001**                           .958
ASSET                                                                      –14.76                             1.31                           127.73                        <.001*                             .000
CLASS      Arts and Culture                                            .08                               .06                               1.85                           .174                             1.080
                  Education                                                    –.00                               .05                                 .00                           .988                               .999
                  Health                                                            .09                               .05                               3.42                           .065                             1.091
                  Human Services                                          –.01                               .04                                 .04                           .850                               .993
RATING   A                                                                –5.47                               .07                        6,297.09                        <.001**                           .004
                  B                                                                –5.43                               .07                        6,396.25                        <.001**                           .004
                  C                                                                –2.48                               .06                        1,525.59                        <.001**                           .084
STATE      Individual state/territory coefficients have been withheld from this table.

*p < .10.
**p < .05.
***p < .01.

Appendix B
HLM DETAIL: MODEL 5 (OPTIMAL AIC); RESULTS SHOW LOWER REVENUE OVER TIME FOR COMBATIVE CHARITIES

                                                                                                                                                      Model
                                                                       0                  1                  2                  3                  4                  5                  6                  7
AIC                                                          –402,174       –402,177         –404,503         –404,514         –417,719         –417,888         –417,875         –417,556
AIC versus prior                                                                         –3             –2,326                  –11           –13,205                –169                    13                  319
AIC versus minimum                                                          15,711             13,385             13,374                  169                      0                    13                  332
AIC weight                                                                         <.0001             <.0001             <.0001           <.0001               .9985               .0015             <.0001
INTERCEPT                                             15.742**       15.742**         15.724**         15.724**          6.776**           6.771**           6.776**           6.751**
NAME (Combative)                                                            –.017**           –.015**           –.004              –.005               –.006               –.006               –.006
AGE                                                                                                              .003**             .003**            .002**             .002**             .002**             .002**
AGE (Combative)                                                                                          –.002**          –.002**           –.002**           –.002**           –.002**
NAME 
ASSET (Log)                                                                                                                                               .492**             .492**             .491**             .492**

¥

CLASS

Arts and Culture                                                                                                                                                            –.002               –.003               –.004
Education                                                                                                                                                                        .013**             .013**             .013**
Health                                                                                                                                                                              .032**             .031**             .030**
Human Services                                                                                                                                                              .011**             .011**             .012**

RATING

A                                                                                                                                                                                                              .011*               .011*
B                                                                                                                                                                                                              .005                 .005
C                                                                                                                                                                                                              .001                 .001

STATE                                                            Individual state/territory coefficients in Model 7 have been withheld from this table.

*p < .01.
**p < .01.

What’s in a Message?

53

Appendix C
JOINT LONGITUDINAL AND SURVIVAL MODEL: VALIDATES FINDINGS OF LOWER REVENUE OVER TIME AND LOWER SURVIVAL

FOR COMBATIVE CHARITIES

A: Longitudinal Submodel

Variable                                 Label                                 

SE                               d.f.                                 z                                  p

b                                

¥

INTERCEPT                                                               15.726                            .001                           26,493                      10,853.52                     <.001**
NAME                        Combative                                 –.001                            .004                           26,493                               –.20                        .8433
AGE                                                                                .001                            .000                         168,274                             12.10                     <.001**
NAME 
AGE            Combative                                 –.003                            .001                         168,274                             –5.04                     <.001**
ASSET (Log)a                                                                 .073                            .000                         168,274                           254.55                     <.001**
CLASS                        Arts and Culture                          .009                            .002                           26,493                               5.35                     <.001**
                                    Education                                    .071                            .002                           26,493                             32.73                     <.001**
                                    Health                                          .010                            .002                           26,493                               7.06                     <.001**
                                    Human Services                        –.001                            .002                           26,493                               –.76                        .4457
                                    Other                                           .000

Variable                                 Label                          Coefficient                         SE                               d.f.                                 z                                  p

B: Survival Submodel

a

INTERCEPT                                                             –48.967                          6.682                           26,493                             –7.33                     <.001**
NAME (
)                  Combative                                 –.177                            .069                           26,493                             –2.58                        .0098*
)                                                       3.349                            .425                           26,493                               7.88                     <.001**
ASSOCIATION (
SCALE (Log)                                                                  .130                            .014                           26,493                               9.31                     <.001**

g

*p < .01.
**p < .001.
aWe standardized the ASSET variable (M = 0, SD =1) to aid in model convergence.

54

JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2015

Appendix D
PRETEST STIMULUS (COMBATIVE VS. SUPPORTIVE BY DOMAIN)

Supportive

Compative

t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
D
n
a
b
r
U

t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
E

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

e
c
r
e
m
m
o
C
s
s
e
n
s
u
B

i

/

d
e
t
a

l

e
R

-
l
a
m
n
A

i

 
What’s in a Message?

55

Appendix E
PRETEST RESULTS

A: Supportive Versus Combative Ratings by Conditiona

                                                  Condition                                  ANOVA

                                       Combative    Supportive     

D            

F             p

Urban Development            4.00              5.08        –1.08        8.44       .005
Environment                        3.51              4.57        –1.06        6.18       .015
Education                            4.97              5.32          –.35          .90       .344
Business/Commerce            3.58              5.70        –2.12      30.86       .000
Animal Related                   3.16              4.78        –1.62      12.2         .000

B: Promotion/Prevention Score by Conditionb

                                                  Condition                                  ANOVA

                                       Combative    Supportive     

            F             p

D

Urban Development           31.40            24.41        6.99      22.82       .000
Environment                       33.53            24.68        8.85      41.94       .000
Education                            23.79            16.97        6.82      14.26       .000
Business/Commerce           29.18            16.78      12.40      65.14       .000
Animal Related                   30.51            23.84        6.67      15.37       .000

C: Ranking Data by Domain

                                                   Condition                            ANOVA
                                   Median     Average            Lower        Upper
                                     Rank          Rank              95% CI      95% CI
Urban Development                 4              3.96                 3.73           4.20
Environment                             2              2.46                 2.21           2.72
Education                                  2              2.25                 1.96           2.54
Business/Commerce                 4              3.38                 3.06           3.69
Animal Related                         3              2.95                 2.63           3.27

aRated on a seven-point scale (1 = “Combative,” and 7 = “Supportive”).
bSum of six seven-point scales, with higher score being more prevention

focused.

Notes: CI = confidence interval.

Week

Week 1

Appendix F
PANEL STUDY TOPICS BY WEEK

Topic

Marketing task

Generate a total of four headline and four tagline/slogan ideas on the basis of body copy for an Apple print advertisement.

Donation task

Generate a list of viable brand partners for the charity (for cause-related marketing efforts) and rank these in order of importance.

Week 2

Marketing task

Assess, rank, and comment on various out-of-home media being considered for best-in-class awards in their respective product

categories. Assessments will help an independent advertising federation in awarding the “Best Outdoor Ad.”

Donation task

Help the charity by crafting banner advertising elements that will drive consumers to a charity/fundraising site. Then, recommend

specific websites on which the banner ad(s) should run.

Week 3

Marketing task

Define four distinct product segments within the beverage category. [For all brands of which participants were aware, they were to

assign each brand to their previously defined categories.]

Donation task

Generate e-mails to both prospective and repeat donors for the charity in the form of a “Thank You” letter.

Week 4

Marketing task

For each of three actual print advertisements, complete an advertising positioning statement indicating the target, the competition,

the key benefit, and the key functional attribute.

Donation task

Assist in the charity’s donation efforts through eBay’s Giving Works by (1) writing a mission statement, (2) including possible

search keywords, and (3) selecting/budgeting product categories in which to promote the charity.

Week 5

Marketing task

View a series of ads as part of an actual print advertising campaign and complete three key areas of the creative brief including

target, role of the communication, and recommended media venues.

Donation task

Assist the charity in providing recommendations on how to best craft a holiday giving campaign, providing input in five key areas.

aDonation tasks in weeks 1 and 2 were presented only when participants agreed in advance to donate time. For weeks 3–5, the time task was presented to all

participants, asking them to complete as much or as little as they preferred.