Does brand trust matter to brand equity?
Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán
Marketing Department, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain
Abstract
Purpose – The most recent literature on competitive advantage views brand equity as a relational market-based asset because it arises from the
relationships that consumers have with brands. Given the fact that trust is viewed as the corner-stone, as well as one of the most desirable qualities in
any relationship, the objective of this study is to analyze the importance of brand trust in the development of brand equity. Specifically, the paper
examines the relationships network in which brand trust is embedded.
Design/methodology/approach – A quantitative methodology was adopted. The data are based on a survey conducted in a region in the southeastern part of Spain, resulting in 271 surveys.
Findings – The findings reveal that brand trust is rooted in the result of past experience with the brand, and it is also positively associated with brand
loyalty, which in turn maintains a positive relationship with brand equity. Furthermore, the results suggest that, although brand trust does not play a full
mediating role as suggested by Morgan and Hunt, it contributes to a better explanation of brand equity.
Originality/value – These results have significant implications. The fact that brand equity is best explained when brand trust is taken into account
reinforces the idea that brand equity is a relational market-based asset. Therefore, branding literature may be enriched through the integration with the
literature on the resource-based-view of the firm. From a practical point of view, companies must build brand trust in order to enjoy the substantial
competitive and economic advantages provided by brand equity as a relational, market-based asset.
Keywords Brand equity, Brand management, Trust, Consumer behaviour
Paper type Research paper

The most recent literature (Falkenberg, 1996; Hooley et al.,
2005; Srivastava et al., 1998, 2001) considers brand equity as
a relational market-based asset because it exists outside the
firm and resides in the relationships of final users with brands.
At the same time, the emergence of relationship marketing as
a dominant focus of both marketing theorists and
practitioners suggests that trust is the main factor on which
a relationship is based. Connecting, then, the relationship
principles with a resource-based approach to brand equity, we
propose the following research question: Does brand trust
matter to brand equity?
The study of brand trust in the branding literature has not
flourished. Much of the interest in this issue has been
conceptual or theoretical in nature, and there has been little
empirical research into it. This lack of research is pointed out
by Chaudhuri and Holbrook (2001) who affirm that the role
of brand trust in the brand equity processes has not been
explicitly considered. Nevertheless, its importance has been
theoretically highlighted in the branding literature (see
Ambler, 1997; Sheth and Parvatiyar, 1995) and in the
current brand management practices (see Bainbridge, 1997;
Kamp, 1999; Scott, 2000).
On the basis of these considerations, and connecting both
the resource-based approach of the firm and the relationship
marketing literatures, this study aims to fill this gap by
examining the importance of brand trust in the development
of brand equity.
To address this objective, the rest of this paper is therefore
organized as follows. We begin by analyzing brand equity from
a resource-based approach. Its consideration as a relational
market-based asset leads us to focus on brand trust.
Consequently, we present a definition of brand trust, and

An executive summary for managers and executive
readers can be found at the end of this article.

Introduction
Building a strong brand in the market is the goal of many
organizations because it provides a host of benefits to a firm,
including less vulnerability to competitive marketing actions,
larger margins, greater intermediary co-operation and support
and brand extension opportunities.
Given this interest in brand building, what actually makes a
brand strong? This question has been a significant and
recurrent theme in the branding literature over the past two
decades, resulting in a vast body of research on the salient
concept of brand equity. However, since the late 1990s, new
research streams in marketing (e.g. long-term relationships,
the creation of added value based on knowledge and
experience, the role of marketing resources in firm
performance, etc.) have allowed for a new way of
approaching the question of what makes a brand strong,
thereby enriching our understanding of brand equity.
Specifically, it is within a resource-based approach and
relationship marketing perspective that we analyze brand
equity.
The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1061-0421.htm

Journal of Product & Brand Management
14/3 (2005) 187– 196
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/10610420510601058]

This research was funded by grant SEC2002-04321-CO2-01 from the
Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology.

187

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

we discuss the manner in which brand trust contributes to the
development of brand equity. Based on this discussion, a
theoretical model of brand equity is proposed and the main
hypotheses of this study are presented. Subsequently, the data
collection, the method used to test the hypotheses and the
results are described. Finally, we discuss the results in terms
of their implications for managerial practice, their limitations
and directions for further research on the branding literature.

as well as in more applied areas such as management and
marketing. This multidisciplinary interest has added richness
to the construct, but has also made it difficult to integrate the
various perspectives on trust and to find a consensus on its
nature. Nevertheless, a careful review of the extant literature
reveals that confident expectations and risk are critical
components of a definition of trust. Trust therefore is
defined as the confidence that one will find what is desired
from another, rather that what is feared (Deutsch, 1973). It
represents the confidence that the relational party in an
exchange will not exploit another’s vulnerability. Accordingly,
to trust a brand implicitly means that there is a high
probability or expectancy that the brand will result in positive
outcomes for the consumer.
Considering brand trust as expectancy, it is based on the
consumer’s belief that the brand has specific qualities that
make it consistent, competent, honest, responsible and so on,
which is in line with the research on trust (e.g. Andaleeb,
1992; Doney and Cannon, 1997; Larzelere and Huston,
1980). This research suggests that trust is based on the
dispositional attributions made to the partner about his/her
intentions, behaviors and qualities. The key issue, then, is to
know which specific attributions form brand trust.
Drawing on the research on brand trust developed by
Delgado et al. (2003), we consider that these specific
attributions have a technical and intentional nature, which is
in line with a two-dimensional idea of trust more commonly
found in management and marketing literature (see Doney
and Cannon, 1997; Ganesan, 1994; Morgan and Hunt,
1994). Therefore, the first dimension of brand trust
(reliability) has a technical or competence-based nature,
involving the ability and willingness to keep promises and
satisfy consumers’ needs. The second dimension (intentions)
comprises the attribution of good intentions to the brand in
relation to the consumers’ interests and welfare, for example
when unexpected problems with the product arise.
Consequently, a trustworthy brand is one that consistently
keeps its promise of value to consumers through the way the
product is developed, produced, sold, serviced and
advertised. Even in bad times when some kind of brand
crisis arises.
In summary, brand trust is defined as addressed by Delgado
et al. (2003):

Brand equity as a relational market-based asset
A firm’s survival and wealth is determined by its ability to
create a superior value to the market. From a resource-based
view of the firm, the sources of wealth creation are found in
the resources endowment that enable the firm to efficiently
and/or effectively produce a market offering that has value for
some market segments (Hunt and Morgan, 1995). By doing
so, the firm achieves superior financial performance that is
reflected in higher dividends and value of stocks (Falkenberg,
1996).
There is a growing recognition, regarding the resources in
which this superior financial performance lies, that a
significant proportion of organizational performance is
determined by intangible assets such as: the quality and
experience of personnel, corporate culture, knowledge, brand
equity, and so forth (Falkenberg, 1996; Lusch and Harvey,
1994; Srivastava et al., 1998). As with other intangible assets,
brand equity exhibits the qualities required for creating a
sustainable competitive advantage. It adds value for
customers, helps to create defensible competitive positions,
takes time to develop, is inherently complex, and cannot be
easily transferred to other organizations (De Chernatony and
MacDonald, 1992). Therefore, its value as an asset is
reflected in superior financial performance in so it leads to
higher margins (Farquhar, 1989), greater sales and market
shares (Hooley et al., 2005; Park and Srinivasan, 1994),
advertising and promotions that are more responsive (Keller,
1993), earlier market penetration (Robertson, 1993) and
cheaper product line extensions (Keller and Aaker, 1992). As
a consequence, a positive influence of brand equity on the
firm value has also been found by Simon and Sullivan (1993).
The most recent literature (Hunt, 1997; Srivastava et al.,
1998, 2001) specifically characterizes brand equity as a
relational market-based asset. It is primarily relational
because, according to the branding literature (Aaker, 1991;
Keller, 1993), much of its value is a result of the brand’s
external relationships with other members of the value chain
(e.g. the distribution system and the final users). This
relational nature makes brand equity be an external asset to
the firm because it is often merely “available” and not
“owned” by the firm. In other words, brand equity ultimately
derives in the market place from the set of brand associations
and behaviors that have been developed towards the brand.
In summary, as a relational market-based asset, brand
equity may be expressed as a function of brand-consumer
relationships (Ambler, 1997), and as such the introduction of
trust as a key relational variable enriches our understanding of
brand equity and may provide better performance predictions
and assessment of brand equity.

The confident expectations of the brand’s reliability and intentions.

Brand trust is therefore conceptualized as having two distinct
dimensions that reflect different perspectives from which a
brand may be considered trustworthy.

The contribution of brand trust to brand equity
To accomplish our aim of analyzing the role of brand trust in
the development of brand equity, we examine the
relationships network in which brand trust is embedded,
and specifically the relationships that have with its main
antecedent and the main asset of brand equity: brand loyalty.
Brand trust evolves from past experience and prior
interaction (Garbarino and Johnson, 1999) because its
development is portrayed most often as an individual’s
experiential process of learning over time. Therefore it
summarizes the consumers’ knowledge and experiences with
the brand. As an experience attribute, it is influenced by the
consumer’s evaluation of any direct (e.g. trial, usage) and

What is brand trust?
Trust has received a great deal of attention from scholars in
several disciplines such as psychology, sociology, economics,
188

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

indirect contact (e.g. advertising, word of mouth) with the
brand (Keller, 1993; Krishnan, 1996). Among all these
different contacts, the consumption experience is the most
relevant and important source of brand trust, because it
generates associations, thoughts and inferences that are more
self-relevant and held with more certainty (Dwyer et al., 1987;
Krishnan, 1996). In this sense, it can be postulated that the
overall satisfaction, as a general evaluation of the
consumption experience with the brand, generates brand
trust (Ganesan, 1994; Selnes, 1998). This leads us to propose
the following hypothesis:
H1. The consumer’s overall satisfaction with the brand has
a positive effect on brand trust.

Based on these ideas, we put forward the hypothesis that
brand trust will contribute to brand loyalty as the maximum
expression of a successful relationship between the consumer
and the brand.
H2. The consumer’s trust in a brand has a positive effect on
brand loyalty.
Finally, one characteristic of brands with high levels of equity
is that consumers are very loyal to them. In fact, brand loyalty
is the main driver of brand equity because it is considered to
be the path that leads to certain marketing advantages and
outcomes (e.g. reduced marketing costs, price premiums,
market share, greater trade leverage), which have been closely
associated with brand equity (Aaker, 1991; Bello and
Holbrook, 1995; Park and Srinivasan, 1994). Therefore, we
propose another hypothesis describing the relationship
between brand loyalty and brand equity:
H3. The consumer’s loyalty to the brand has a positive
effect on brand equity.

Considering brand equity as a relational market-based asset
implies that building and maintaining trust is at the core of
brand equity, because it is a key characteristic of any
successful long-term relationship (Garbarino and Johnson,
1999; Larzelere and Huston, 1980; Morgan and Hunt, 1994).
Taking into account the conceptual connections of
relationship aspects and the notion of loyalty (Fournier and
Yao, 1997), the prevailing idea in these studies (Chaudhuri
and Holbrook, 2001; Delgado et al., 2003; Garbarino and
Johnson, 1999; Lau and Lee, 1999) is that trust is the cardinal
driver of loyalty because it creates exchange relationships that
are highly valued. In this context, brand loyalty does not
exclusively focus on repeated purchases, but on the internal
dispositions or attitude towards the brand, the focus on
behavior would otherwise not provide an adequate basis for a
complete understanding of the brand-consumer relationship.
Consequently, brand loyalty underlies the ongoing process of
continuing and maintaining a valued and important
relationship that has been created by trust (Chaudhuri and
Holbrook, 2001).
This is fairly well supported by several authors in the
branding literature. For example, Sheth and Parvatiyar (1995)
assert that the logic behind the existence of the brand is to
transmit trust to the market, especially when direct contact
between consumers and companies are not possible. Another
telling argument in support of this viewpoint is that the
unique value perceived in a brand by consumers may be
derived from greater trust in that particular brand that other
brands do not provide (Chaudhuri and Holbrook, 2001).
From a managerial perspective, companies have also begun
to consider the idea of wining consumers’ trust in order to
build a relationship. In the consumer market, there are too
many anonymous consumers, making it unlikely that the
company could develop personal relationships with each one.
Thus, consumers develop a relationship with the brand,
which becomes a substitute for human contact between the
organization and its customers (Sheth and Parvatiyar, 1995).
Trust, therefore, can be developed through this relationship
with the brand. The current practices of companies in
managing their brands illustrate this idea. For example,
MacLeod (2000) considers that much of the vocabulary of
modern brand building uses words associated with personal
relationships such as trust and Blackston (1992) views trust to
be one component of consumers’ relationships with brands.
More recently, Hiscock (2001, p. 1) has claimed that “the
ultimate goal of marketing is to generate an intense bond
between the consumer and the brand, and the main
ingredient of this bond is trust”.

Method
Data collection
The data are based on a survey done in a Region of 1,100,000
inhabitants in the south-eastern part of Spain. A
questionnaire was administered through the use of a
computer-aided telephone interviewing (CATI) program by
a market research firm. The participants were real consumers
who reported their consumption experience with one of two
different product categories: shampoo and beer. These
products were chosen because they are frequently
purchased, and most people are familiar with them and
have experienced different brands. Respondents were
assigned to one product and were asked which brands they
used. They were interviewed with reference to one of the
brands mentioned. To obtain reliable answers, the sample unit
was composed of those individuals who were active decision
makers of the brand they consumed.
By random phone-calls with the use of the CATI program,
we obtained 271 completed questionnaires (134 for shampoo
and 137 for beer), yielding a response rate of 67 percent – a
reasonable response rate given that the survey was completely
voluntary and the participants received no compensation for
answering the questionnaire.
The sample was well balanced in terms of most
demographic and socio-economic characteristics (e.g. age,
incomes, education) except for gender. Specifically, 23
percent of the sample was male and 77 percent was female.
Although a random sampling process was used to select each
participant in the study, there is a disproportional
representation of women to men. This can be explained by
the cultural and social values of the geographical area in which
the survey was administered. Significant gender differences
still exist in the sense that there is a large proportion of
housewives. In addition, both stay-at-home and working
women retain the vast majority of traditional responsibilities
for the care of the household including most forms of
shopping. However, most people are familiar with both
shampoo (because it is a personal hygiene product) and beer
(because the geographical area of this study is one with the
highest levels of beer consumption in Spain).
Table I provides a detailed description of the sample.
189

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

Table II also reports information about the reliability and
convergent validity of the different measures. Discriminant
validity is also indicated since the confidence interval (^
2 £ standard errors) around the correlation estimate between
any two latent indicators never includes 1.0 (Anderson and
Gerbing, 1988).

Table I Sample information
%

Gender
Male
Female
College degree
No degree
Primary education
Secondary education
Higher education
Work
Unemployed
Retired
Full-time
Housewife
Students
No response
Behavioral data
Buying always the same brand
It is important to buy a good brand
It matters what brand to buy
Age
Mean
SD

23
77
6.6
25
35.4
32.8

Results
The proposed structural model is specified by the hypothesized
relationships in Figure 1, discussed in the text as H1-H3. The
path linking overall satisfaction and brand loyalty is also
estimated, which is in line with previous research on brand
loyalty (see Anderson and Sullivan, 1993; Bloemer and Kasper,
1995; Oliver, 1999)[1]. Conventional maximum likelihood
estimation techniques were used to test the model. The fit of
the model is satisfactory (x2ð146Þ ¼ 399:08; GFI ¼ 0.87;
SRMR ¼ 0.046; RMSEA ¼ 0.08; CFI ¼ 0.92; TLI (NNFI)
¼ 0.91), thereby suggesting that the nomological network of
relationships fits our data.
In terms of our hypotheses (see Table III), the findings for
H1 (overall satisfaction ! brand reliability; g11 ¼ 0:88,
p , 0:05; overall satisfaction ! brand intentions; g21 ¼ 0:55,
p , 0:05) suggest that brand trust is rooted in the result of
past experience with the brand (i.e. overall satisfaction). As
suggested by Singh and Sirdeshmukh (2000), we observe that
the effects of overall satisfaction are not specific to a single
dimension of brand trust.
Specifically, as the squared multiple correlations (SMCs)
reveal, overall satisfaction explains a substantial amount of the
variance of brand trust: brand reliability ¼ 0:78, and brand
intentions ¼ 0:30. The fact that brand reliability, as perceived
by consumers, relies more heavily on overall satisfaction than
brand intentions do is in line with Rempel et al.’s (1985)
statements about how trust evolves. According to their
reasoning, brand reliability is heavily related to the
consistency of brand performance as signaled by the overall
satisfaction consumers have with the brand. In comparison with
brand reliability, brand intentions capture the essence of brand
trust that is not securely rooted in past experience. However,
the fact that past experience (e.g. satisfaction with the brand) is
not an exact barometer of brand intentions does not imply that
past experience plays no role in explaining brand intentions.
Continuing with the consequences of brand trust, it is
found to be positively associated with brand loyalty, giving
support to H2 (brand reliability ! brand loyalty; b31 ¼ 0:42,
p , 0:05; brand intentions ! brand loyalty; b32 ¼ 0:20,
p , 0:05).
H3 is also supported, with brand loyalty significantly
associated with an increase in brand equity (b43 ¼ 0:87,
p , 0:05). This suggests that the postulated relationship of
brand loyalty and brand equity is confirmed.
Nevertheless, the question of interest is to determine the
relevance of brand trust in the development of brand equity.
For this purpose we specified different models that, from a
theoretical perspective, give alternative interpretations of the
relative importance attributed to brand trust when explaining
the bond between consumers and brands.
Specifically, we test out theoretical model (MT) against
alternative model specifications (MA). The alternative models
specifications to our theoretical model depicted in Figure 1
are:
.
a less parsimonious model MA1 such as the CFA;

4.4
3.3
46.4
29.3
15.6
1
66
70.5
68.3
39.4
14.27

Measures
Brand trust
Based on previous research (Delgado, 2004; Delgado et al.,
2003) a set of four items was used to measure each dimension
of this construct. As in the case with all of the multi-item
measures, each item was framed as an agree/disagree
statement.
Brand loyalty
A four-item scale was used to measure the dispositional
commitment to maintaining an ongoing relationship with a
brand (e.g. Bloemer and Kasper, 1995; Dick and Basu,
1994). Each item was framed as an agree/disagree statement.
Brand equity
Brand equity was measured with a four-item Likert scale
developed by Yoo and Donthu (2001) which is in line with the
definition of brand equity proposed by Keller (1993). The
four items measure the difference in consumer choice
between the focal branded product and an unbranded
product given the same level of product features. In line
with our view of brand equity as a relational market-based
asset, this definition explicitly relies on brand knowledge
structures in the minds of consumers as the foundation of
brand equity.
Overall satisfaction
In line with Anderson et al. (1994, p. 54), overall satisfaction
is defined as an overall evaluation based on the total purchase
and consumption experience with a product or service over
time. Therefore, we used an overall satisfaction measure as a
summary evaluation of the entire brand use experience (see
Table II). This measure involves not only the valence (positive
and negative) but also the intensity and is represented by
three items measured on a fvie-point scale (Oliver, 1997;
Spreng et al., 1996).
190

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

Table II Constructs measurement summary: confirmatory factor analysis and scale reliability
Standardized
Reliability
loading
t-value SCRa AVEb Alpha

Item description

Brand reliability
0.93 0.77 0.88
[X] is a brand name that meets my expectations
0.94
20.33
I feel confidence in [X] brand name
0.88
18.20
[X] is a brand name that never disappoints me
0.78
15.09
[X] brand name guarantees satisfaction
0.92
19.81
Brand intentions
0.87 0.62 0.83
[X] brand name would be honest and sincere in addressing my concerns
0.77
14.54
I could rely on [X] brand name to solve any problem with the product
0.70
12.63
[X] brand name would make any effort to satisfy me in case of a problem
0.91
18.54
[X] brand name would compensate me in some way for the problem with the [product]
0.75
13.95
Brand loyalty
0.75 0.45 0.7
1. I consider myself to be loyal to [X]
0.41
6.73
2. Only under extreme circumstances would I consider purchasing a brand of this product 0.86
16.87
different from [X]
3. If the store was out of [X], I would go somewhere else to buy some
0.70
12.71
4. Even when another brand is on sale, I would prefer the brand [X]
0.60
10.44
Brand equity
0.88 0.66 0.85
1. It makes sense to buy [X] instead of any other brand, even if they are the same
0.81
15.77
2. Even if another brand has the same features as [X], I would prefer to buy [X]
0.74
13.84
3. If there is another brand as good as [X], I prefer to buy [X]
0.81
15.86
4. If another brand is not different from [X] in any way, it seems smarter to purchase [X] 0.88
18.05
Overall satisfaction with the brand
Considering all my consumption experience with [X] I am . . .
0.85 0.66 0.77
1. . . . Very satisfied
0.91
19.09
2. . . . Pleased
0.91
18.92
3. . . . Not very disappointed
0.58
10.19
h
i

2
2
; Bagozzi and Yi, 1988); b Average variance extracted
composite
reliability
(
r
¼
S
l
var
ð
j
Þ=
S
l
var
ð
j
Þ
þ
E
Q
Notes: a Scale
h
i
c
i
i
ii
2

2
(rc ¼ Sli varðjÞ= Sli varðj Þ þ EQii ; Fornell and Larcker, 1981); Fit statistics for measurement model of 19 indicators for five constructs:
x2ð142Þ ¼ 389:59; CFI ¼ 0:92; TLIðNNFIÞ ¼ 0:91, GFI ¼ 0:87; SRMR ¼ 0:044; RMSEA ¼ 0:080; [X] indicates a brand name

constrained model (MA2) in which the parameter of the
relationship among overall satisfaction and brand loyalty (g31)
is constrained to zero; and
.
a second constrained model (MA3) in which the
parameters of the relationship among brand trust and
brand loyalty (b31 and b32) are constrained to zero.

a

.

Figure 1 Theoretical model of relationships

These last two models represent the next most likely
constrained alternatives to our theoretical model from a
theoretical perspective.
These models were sequentially compared to one another
according to Anderson and Gerbing’s (1988) suggestions.
These authors recommend this procedure and suggest the use
Table III Construct structural model
Linkages in the model
Overall satisfaction ! brand reliability
Overall satisfaction ! brand intentions
Overall satisfaction ! brand loyalty
Brand reliability ! brand loyalty
Brand intentions ! brand loyalty
Brand loyalty ! brand equity

Hypotheses
Number

Sign
þ
þ

H1
H1
a

þ
þ
þ

H2
H2
H3

Standardized parameter estimates
Parameter
Estimate
t-value

g11
g21
g31
b31
b32
b43

0.88
0.55
0.34
0.42
0.20
0.87

Notes: a No hypothesis is offered; * p , 0:05; x2(146) = 399.08; GFI = 0.87; SRMR = 0.046; RMSEA = 0.08; CFI = 0.92; TLI (NNFI) = 0.91

191

16.59*
8.12*
2.62*
3.31*
3.22*
6.48*

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

of a chi-square difference test (CDT) to test the null
hypothesis: MT 2 MA ¼ 0.
In comparison with the theoretical model, the constrained
model (MA2) identifies brand trust as the primary precursor
of brand loyalty because it plays a full mediating role between
overall satisfaction and brand loyalty, which is in line with the
commitment-trust theory (Morgan and Hunt, 1994). In
contrast, the constrained model (MA3) is in line with the
literature that considers overall satisfaction as the key
construct in explaining brand loyalty. Consequently, in this
model brand trust is only just a peripheral evaluation of the
past experience with the brand that does not have further
effects on brand loyalty.
The top section of Table IV offers the chi-square fit
comparisons among these models. In the first step, the
theoretical model (Figure 1) was compared with a less
parsimonious MA1. A non-significant CDT would lead to the
acceptance of the more parsimonious MT. Table IV reports a
non-significant change in chi-square between our model and
the CFA, leading us to consider MT as a better specification.
Next, we contrasted MT with a constrained model MA2 (i.e.
with g31 path equal to zero) and the difference in chi-square
fit between the two models was significant. This result leads
us to stay with the less parsimonious theoretical model
because it has a significant better fit. Finally, we compared
MT with an alternative model (MA3) where it is proposed
that brand trust has no effect on brand loyalty. In this case we
are comparing MT with a more parsimonious model.
According to the CDT, the theoretical model (MT)
provided a significantly better fit to the data (p , 0:01) than
the model MA3. Therefore, the theoretical model was
deemed the best representation of the network relationships
in which brand trust is embedded.

models, not just test a proposed model, we analyzed
alternative models. To better know the role of brand trust in
brand equity processes we compared the proposed model with
other alternative models in which the central nomological
status for brand trust and brand loyalty varies. In the
alternative model MA2, the direct effect of overall satisfaction
on brand loyalty is not allowed. Therefore, brand trust is
identified as a key full mediating variable to develop brand
loyalty and consequently brand equity. In the alternative
model MA3, on the contrary, the direct effect of brand trust
on brand loyalty is not identified. Then, brand trust is not
allowed to mediate, being overall satisfaction the main driver
of brand loyalty, and brand equity.
Compared to these more parsimonious models, the
proposed model is preferred because it has a better
significant fit. Consequently, although brand trust does not
play a full mediating role as suggested by Morgan and Hunt
(1994), it contributes to a better explanation of brand equity.
These results have significant implications for both
scholarship and practice.
Implications for scholarship and limitations
The results obtained about the role of brand trust in the
development of brand equity enrich branding literature
through the integration with the literature on the resourcebased view of the firm. For instance, the empirical evidence
about the fact that brand equity is best explained when brand
trust is taken into account reinforces the idea that brand
equity is a relational market-based asset. Morgan and Hunt
(1996) proposed that resources such as loyalty and trust are
immobile and cannot be purchased or replicated. These
resources can therefore be combined in order to form higher
order resources (e.g. brand equity) from which sustainable
resource-based competitive advantages will result. Some open
questions on this topic warrant further research.
First, stakeholder theory says that the firm is reliant on a
network of relations in which it becomes obliged to the
members of this network. Therefore, as a relational marketbased asset, the analysis of brand equity must also consider
the relationships with other members of the value chain,
including employees (especially in service companies),
investors or even suppliers.
Second, because there are interconnections among
stakeholders, an interesting point is that a firm might build
up strong brand equity based on the relationships developed
with consumers that could be undermined by the firm
neglecting its relationships with other stakeholders groups. In
other words, to what extend does brand equity depend on
relationships with stakeholders groups other than the focal
group; that is consumers? To what extent is it important to
manage each relationship? Is trust the most valued aspect in

Discussions
The benefits of developing and exploiting marketing resources
have been a significant theme in the marketing literature. By
leveraging marketing resources, it is argued that firms will be
in a stronger position to succeed in the marketplace
(Srivastava et al., 1998). Among these resources we identify
brand equity, which is viewed as a relational market-based
asset because it lies in the relationships between the brand and
key external stakeholders for example end consumers. Under
this framework we theorized the role of an important
relationship variable such as trust in the development of
brand equity. We developed a causal model containing three
hypotheses and structural equation modeling supported all of
them.
Because an emerging consensus in structural equations
modeling is that researchers should compare alternative
Table IV Goodness-of-fit measures for alternative models of brand equity

MA1 (CFA)
MT
MA2
MA3

Model comparison
df
Accepted

Model description

x2

df

RMR

NFI

GFI

x2d

Figure 1

389.69
399.08
404.59
424.5

142
146
147
148

0.044
0.046
0.047
.053

0.089
0.89
0.89
0.88

0.87
0.87
0.86
0.86

9.39*
5.51
19.91

g31 ¼ 0
b31 ¼ 0
b32 ¼ 0

Notes: * Not significant at p , 0:05;  Significant at p , 0:05;  Significant at p , 0:01

192

4
1
2

MT
MT
MT

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

all of relationships? If that is the case, then, how is trust
defined?
Third, research on branding industrial products has been
limited. The fact that, in today’s competitive business
environment, industrial firms are increasingly using
branding to differentiate their products and also develop
relationships with their customers makes apparent the need of
expanding the body of knowledge of the subject. A point of
departure is to examine the research on consumer branding.
Therefore, our findings offer industrial branding researchers
some ideas that can be applied in the industrial sector.
On a more general level, there is also room for additional
studies that overcome the limitations of this research. The
sample is not representative of the entire population of
consumers. As discussed previously, the sample was randomly
selected by phone-calls interviewing only those individuals
who were active decision makers in the products analyzed.
This resulted in a disproportional representation of women
versus men. Being so, our results may reflect a gender bias
that limits the external validity of this study. The
generalizability of the results could be extended by
considering other demographic groups. Finally, the
generalizability of the results could be extended by
broadening the list of products, for example durable goods
and services in which brand trust may be even more
important in developing brand equity.

in point. Because of the strength of both brands they continue
to enjoy a substantial reputation despite of the unexpected
product-harm crises. Consequently, as far as the branding
literature suggests that trust is the essence of the value that a
strong brand provides for consumers, paying attention to how
much consumers trust in a brand might be considered as a
tool to manage brand equity. This is particularly important in
healthcare, legal services and in durable products.
Our findings are of special relevance in the business-to
business arena as far as a number of studies (see Henthorne
et al., 1993; McQuiston and Dickson, 1991) have shown that
industrial buyers will choose recognized brand names from
established companies as a way to reduce both corporate and
personal risk.
Finally, companies with trusted off-line brands also benefit
from a “halo effect” in trying to establish a presence on the
web. The anonymity of the Internet makes branding more
crucial because consumers are likely to be more receptive to
trying on-line offerings from a trusted brand name. In other
words, having a trusted brand gave companies a relatively
smooth and successful transition to the Net as in the case of
Barnes & Noble and Toys R Us (Harvin, 2000).

Note
1 Recently, researchers have begun to document that this
satisfaction-loyalty relationship is not a simple linear effect
(Oliva et al., 1992). However, as pointed by Singh and
Sirdeshmukh (2000), sufficient research does not exist to
specify the nature of this no linearity or to suggest
conditions that favor it. Consequently, we specify a
directional relationship only.

Implications for practice
This study has several managerial implications regarding
brand equity. First, in order to enjoy the substantial
competitive and economic advantages provided by brand
equity as a relational market-based asset, companies must
build brand trust. To that purpose a promise-centric approach
is needed when managing the brand. It implies to position the
brand as a promise, as a set of expectations that the brand
offers a certain type and level of value. Providing this value on
a consistent basis is at the heart of building strong
relationships with consumers because they develop a sense
of trust that the brand will continue to deliver that value.
When this happens, the brand can serve as a catalyst for
strengthening the relationship and for forming a bond that
competitors will find difficult to break. This will be the
foundation for the ongoing success and sustained competitive
advantage.
However, companies must take care not to promise
everything for all people. They have to consider their own
capabilities and the desires of their target consumer segments
before defining their promises of value. Once they are defined
these promises have to be kept consistently, especially when
things change quickly and buyers face great uncertainty.
Second, since trust is built through experience, the more
positive experiences the consumer has with the brand, the
more trusting he or she is likely to become. As such,
investments in satisfaction programs, complaint handling and
in the design of communication and merchandising strategies,
that aid in creating and informing consumers about the
responsive attitudes and behaviors of the brands, are ways of
building brand trust.
Third, history has proven that consumers will give second
chances to brands they trust (Harvin, 2000). The consumer
outrage at contaminated Coca-Cola cans in some western
European countries in 1998 and Perrier mineral water
containing unacceptable levels of benzene in 1990 are cases

References
Aaker, D.A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity: Capitalizing on
the Value of a Brand Name, Free Press, New York, NY.
Ambler, T. (1997), “How much of brand equity is explained
by trust?”, Management Decision, Vol. 35 No. 4, pp. 283-92.
Andaleeb, S.S. (1992), “The trust concept: research issues for
channels of distribution”, Research in Marketing, Vol. 11,
pp. 1-34.
Anderson, E.W. and Sullivan, M.W. (1993), “The antecedents
and consequences of customer satisfaction for firms”,
Marketing Science, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 125-43.
Anderson, J.C. and Gerbing, D.W. (1988), “Structural
equation modelling in practice: a review and
recommended two-step approach”, Psychological Bulletin,
Vol. 103 No. 3, pp. 411-23.
Anderson, E.W., Fornell, C. and Lehmann, D. (1994),
“Customer satisfaction, market share, and profitability:
findings from Sweden”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58, July,
pp. 53-66.
Bagozzi, R. and Yi, Y. (1988), “On the evaluation of
structural equation models”, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 74-94.
Bainbridge, J. (1997), “Who wins the national trust?”,
Marketing, October 23, pp. 21-3.
Bello, D.C. and Holbrook, M.B. (1995), “Does an absence of
brand equity generalize across product classes”, Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 34 No. 2, pp. 125-31.
193

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

Blackston, M. (1992), “A brand with an attitude: a suitable
case for the treatment”, Journal of the Market Research
Society, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 231-41.
Bloemer, J. and Kasper, H. (1995), “The complex
relationship between consumer satisfaction and brand
loyalty”, Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 16 No. 2,
pp. 311-29.
Chaudhuri, A. and Holbrook, M.B. (2001), “The chain of
effects from brand trust and brand affect to brand
performance: the role of brand loyalty”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 65, April, pp. 81-93.
De Chernatony, L. and MacDonald, M. (1992), Creating
Brands, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Delgado, E. (2004), “Applicability of a brand trust scale
across product categories: a multigroup invariance
analysis”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 38 Nos 5/6,
pp. 573-96.
Delgado, E., Munuera, J.L. and Yagüe, M.J. (2003),
“Development and validation of a brand trust scale”,
International Journal of Market Research, Vol. 45 No. 1,
pp. 35-54.
Deutsch, M. (1973), The Resolution of Conflict: Constructive
and Destructive Processes, Yale University Press, New Haven,
CT.
Dick, A.S. and Basu, K. (1994), “Customer loyalty: toward
an integrated conceptual framework”, Journal of Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 99-113.
Doney, P. and Cannon, J.P. (1997), “An examination of the
nature of trust in buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 61, April, pp. 35-51.
Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H. and Oh, S. (1987), “Developing
buyer-seller relationship”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 51
April, pp. 11-27.
Falkenberg, A.W. (1996), “Marketing and the wealth of
firms”, Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 4-24.
Farquhar, P.H. (1989), “Managing brand equity”, Marketing
Research, Vol. 1, September, pp. 24-33.
Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.F. (1981), “Evaluating structural
equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research,
Vol. 27, February, pp. 39-50.
Fournier, S. and Yao, J.L. (1997), “Reviving brand loyalty:
a reconceptualization within the framework of consumerbrand relationships”, International Journal of Research in
Marketing, Vol. 14, pp. 451-72.
Ganesan, S. (1994), “Determinants of long-term orientation
in buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58,
April, pp. 1-19.
Garbarino, E. and Johnson, M.S. (1999), “The different roles
of satisfaction, trust, and commitment in customer
relationships”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 63 April,
pp. 70-87.
Harvin, R. (2000), “In internet branding, the off-lines have
it”, Brandweek, Vol. 41, No. 4, January 24, pp. 30-1.
Henthorne, T., LaTour, M. and Williams, A. (1993), “How
organizational buyers reduce risk”, Industrial Marketing
Management, Vol. 22, pp. 41-8.
Hiscock, J. (2001), “Most trusted brands”, Marketing, March
1, pp. 32-3.
Hooley, G.I., Greenley, G.E., Cadogan, J.W. and Fahy, J.
(2005), “The performance impact of marketing resources”,
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 58 No. 1, pp. 18-27.

Hunt, S.D. (1997), “Competing through relationships:
grounding relationships marketing in resource-advantage
theory”, Journal of Marketing Management, No. 13,
pp. 431-45.
Hunt, S.D. and Morgan, R.M. (1995), “The comparative
advantage theory of competition”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 59, April, pp. 1-15.
Kamp, B.E. (1999), “We’re all brands around here”,
Brandweek, Vol. 40 No. 25, pp. S6-S15.
Keller, K.L. (1993), “Conceptualizing, measuring, and
managing customer-based brand equity”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 57, January, pp. 1-22.
Keller, K.L. and Aaker, D.A. (1992), “The effects of
sequential introductions of brand extensions”, Journal of
Marketing Research, Vol. 29, February, pp. 35-50.
Krishnan, H.S. (1996), “Characteristics of memory
associations: a consumer-based brand equity perspective”,
International Journal of Research in Marketing, No. 13,
pp. 389-405.
Larzelere, R. and Huston, T.L. (1980), “The dyadic trust
scale: toward understanding interpersonal trust in close
relationships”, Journal of Marriage and the Family, August,
pp. 595-604.
Lau, G.T. and Lee, S.H. (1999), “Consumers’ trust in a
brand and the link to brand loyalty”, Journal of Market
Focused Management, Vol. 4 No. 4, pp. 341-70.
Lusch, R. and Harvey, M.G. (1994), “The case for and offbalance-sheet controller”, Sloan Management Review,
Vol. 35, Winter, pp. 100-5.
MacLeod, C. (2000), “Does your brand need a makeover?”,
Marketing, No. 21, September, pp. 24-7.
McQuiston, D.H. and Dickson, P.R. (1991), “The effect of
perceived personal consequences on participation and
influence in organizational buying”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 159-78.
Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994), “The commitmenttrust theory of relationship marketing”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 58, July, pp. 20-38.
Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1996), “Relationships-based
competitive advantage: the role of relationship marketing in
marketing strategy”, working paper, The University of
Alabama, Birmingham, AL.
Oliva, T.A., Oliver, R.L. and Ian, C.M. (1992),
“A catastrophe model for developing service satisfaction
strategies”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, July, pp. 83-95.
Oliver, R.L. (1997), Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on
the Consumer, McGraw-Hill International, New York, NY.
Oliver, R.L. (1999), “Whence consumer loyalty?”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 63, Special issue, pp. 33-44.
Park, C.S. and Srinivasan, V. (1994), “A survey-based
method for measuring and understanding brand equity and
its extendibility”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 31,
May, pp. 271-88.
Rempel, J.K., Holmes, J.G. and Zanna, M.P. (1985), “Trust
in close relationships”, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Vol. 49 No. 1, pp. 95-112.
Robertson, T.S. (1993), “How to reduce market penetration
cycle times”, Sloan Management Review, Vol. 35, Fall,
pp. 87-96.
Scott, D. (2000), “One day and a lifetime of brand lessons”,
Brandweek, Vol. 41 No. 34, pp. 30-2.
194

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

Selnes, F. (1998), “Antecedents and consequences of trust
and satisfaction in buyer-seller relationships”, European
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 32 Nos 3/4, pp. 305-22.
Sheth, J.N. and Parvatiyar, A. (1995), “Relationship
marketing in consumer markets: antecedents and
consequences”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 255-71.
Simon, C.I. and Sullivan, M. (1993), “The measurement and
determinants of brand equity: a financial approach”,
Marketing Science, Vol. 12, Winter, pp. 28-52.
Singh, J. and Sirdeshmukh, D. (2000), “Agency and trust
mechanisms in consumer satisfaction and loyalty
judgments”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 150-67.
Spreng, R.A., Mackenzie, S.B. and Olshavsky, R.W. (1996),
“A reexamination of the determinants of consumer
satisfaction”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60, July, pp. 15-32.
Srivastava, R.K., Fahey, L. and Christensen, H.K. (2001),
“The resource-based view and marketing: the role of
market-based assets in gaining competitive advantage”,
Journal of Management, Vol. 27 No. 6, pp. 777-802.
Srivastava, R.K., Shervani, T.A. and Fahey, L. (1998),
“Market-based assets and shareholder value: a framework
for analysis”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 62 No. 1, pp. 2-18.
Yoo, B. and Donthu, N. (2001), “Developing and validating a
multidimensional consumer-based brand equity scale”,
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 1-14.

makes claims about safety these can be substantiated (e.g. as a
result of crash testing) and the buyer – one hopes – is not
intending to put such claims to deliberate test! On the other
hand promises that imply glamour, status or other self-image
benefits are less measurable.
As brand managers we need to consider the extent to which
our brand promise is realistic and deliverable. A trusted brand
is one that, as the authors here conclude: “. . . that consistently
keeps its promise of value to consumers through the way the
product is developed, produced, sold, serviced and
advertised”. If we do what we say we will do – more often
than not – we will benefit from this through being more
trusted.
It is all in the consumer’s mind!
Brand equity sits in the mind of the consumer consisting of
those associations, attitudes and behaviors linking to the
brand. And we want the consumer to know that our promise
is what we say it is not for that consumer to disbelieve what
we say. When the consumer is confronted with our brand we
want a positive response to the message conveyed by the
brand and for that consumer to trust our promise.
The evolution of trust in this context not only increases the
attention given to our brand claim, but also offers a degree of
protection to our brand that a less trusted brand would not
receive. As the authors here point out, trusted brands are
more likely to be given a second chance by the consumer
following a failure or bad publicity. For example, it is
interesting to note the continuing brand strength of Nescafé
despite a long-term campaign by various pressure groups
against the company. The brand promise (consistently high
quality instant coffee) protects against the accusations of
unfair trade and third world exploitation.
A less well-trusted brand lacks this protection. Rover, for
example, was unable to take full advantage of the patriotic
appeal of being the last British-owned mass car manufacturer
because prospective buyers did not trust the wider brand
appeal – reliability, image, style, etc. Past impressions of
unreliability, labour unrest, poor service and unattractive
styling afforded the brand little or no protection.

Executive summary
This executive summary has been provided to allow managers and
executives a rapid appreciation of the content of this article. Those
with a particular interest in the topic covered may then read the
article in toto to take advantage of the more comprehensive
description of the research undertaken and its results to get the full
benefit of the material present.
Getting and protecting brand trust – a challenge for
marketers
Those of you who followed the recent UK General Election
will know that during the campaign a great deal of time was
devoted to the question of “trust” (as in “Do you trust Tony
Blair?”). The argument goes that if we cannot trust Tony Blair
to be straight and honest on one issue (the Iraq war), how can
we trust him on other important domestic issues? The
consensus was that, while Mr Blair’s “brand” was damaged,
the damage to the bigger Labour “brand” was limited
allowing Mr Blair to win – albeit with a smaller share of the
vote.
We know – at least intuitively, that the extent to which we
“trust” a brand influences our propensity to purchase that
brand. And this mistrust therefore impacts on brand equity.
However, as Delgado-Ballester and Munuera-Aleman point
out, there is limited empirical study – and hence
understanding – of the connection between brand trust and
brand equity. We take the relationship on trust!

You only get trusted over time
At the beginning of a brand’s life, it should sit in a neutral
space – neither trusted nor mistrusted. This might be
qualified where the new brand is associated with or extended
from an existing brand but it provides the basis for decisions
about brand trust. However, while messages that imply
trustworthiness can be applied, the measure of trust requires
(as ever) for the consumer to believe the claim.
Trust is engendered on one level by product or service
performance (it does what it says it does), by the consistency
of this performance and by other objective factors. At the
same time less tangible aspects of brand communication can
act to generate trust – this represents those aspects of value
that cannot be assessed in utilitarian terms.
All this takes time and effort especially since it is far easier
to destroy trust than it is to create trust. As the authors
observe, trust is determined only by experience – we base
our assessment as to the extent of trustworthiness on what
has happened in the past. If we have no experience, we
accept that we are taking a risk. Subsequent brand
experience allows us to become more comfortable with the

Keeping our promises
Any brand contains – either implicitly or explicitly – a
promise or promises. Sometimes these promises are tangible
and measurable, but more often the promise contains a
significant element of intangibility. When a car manufacturer
195

Does brand trust matter to brand equity?

Journal of Product & Brand Management

Elena Delgado-Ballester and José Luis Munuera-Alemán

Volume 14 · Number 3 · 2005 · 187 –196

brand and to begin trusting – assuming that the brand meets
its promises.
Brand managers need to recognise the importance of trust
and to factor it into planning for brands. It is important that
we are prepared for the occasion when, for whatever reason,
there is a failure to deliver a promise. A prompt response is
vital and it will be sensible to remind consumers of the

brand’s history of delivering on promises. Loss of trust is a
major risk to brand equity and brand managers must work to
prevent such losses and to store up levels of trust that can
accommodate occasional failures.
(A précis of the article “Does brand trust matter to brand equity?”.
Supplied by Marketing Consultants for Emerald.)

196

