626

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 22, No. 6, July 2016, pp. 626–630

Jurisdiction-specific articles
The Austrian Charitable Foundation reform
of 2015
Michael Petritz and Andreas Kampitsch*

Abstract
Very recently, the Austrian legislator has issued
the
bill
on
charitable
organizations
(‘Gemeinnützigkeitsgesetz 2015’) that contains
the following two main features: a reformation
of the Austrian Charitable Foundation Act
(Bundes-Stiftungs und Fondsgesetz), as well as a
broadening of the tax benefits for charitable engagement. The following article focuses on the
‘new’ Austrian Charitable Foundation as provided
for in the Austrian Charitable Foundation Act.

Introduction
Very recently the Austrian legislator has issued the bill
on charitable organizations (‘Gemeinnützigkeitsgesetz
2015’1) that contains the following two main aspects: a reformation of the Austrian Charitable
Foundation Act (Bundes-Stiftungs und Fondsgesetz
2015, BStFG 20152) as well as a broadening of
the tax benefits for charitable engagement. The
following article focuses on the ‘new’ Austrian
Charitable Foundation as provided for in the
Austrian Charitable Foundation Act.

Austrian Foundations
The most common foundations in Austria are Private
Foundations, which were introduced in 1993 and may
be established for any purpose (even non-charitable).
Currently, there are more than 3000 Private
Foundations registered in the commercial register.
Most of these Private Foundations are family foundations, only 200 of them serve a charitable purpose.
Besides Private Foundations, Austria offers the
‘Charitable Foundation’ or the ‘Charitable Fund’ as
a possibility to endow assets for a charitable purpose.
However, the previous Act on Charitable Foundations
and Funds dated back to 1973 and—compared to
the modern and flexible legal structure of a Private
Foundation—was perceived to be inflexible and
less attractive due to strict governmental supervision.
Thus, only about 200 Federal Charitable Foundations
and 200 Regional Charitable Foundations exist at
the moment.3
Compared to many other European countries, first
and foremost Germany and Switzerland, Austrian
Charitable Foundations invest only a comparably
low amount in charity.4 Thus, the Austrian government in 2015 published a reform of the Charitable

* MMag. Michael Petritz, LL.M., TEP and Mag. Andreas Kampitsch, LL.M., KPMG Alpen-Treuhand GmbH; Wirtschaftsprüfungs- und
Steuerberatungsgesellschaft; Porzellangasse 51; 1090 Wien, Austria; Tel:þ43 (1) 31332 – 3304; Fax: þ43 (1) 31332 – 3500.
1. BGBl I Nr 160/2015.
2. Bundestiftungs- und Fondsgesetz 2015, BGBl I Nr 160/2015.
3. Schneider/Millner/Meyer, Die Rolle der Gemeinnützigkeit in Österreichischen Stiftungen (2010) 3.
4. German Foundations invest about EUR 15bn, Swiss Foundations about 1.2 billion while Austrian Foundations only invest EUR 20–25 million in charity, cf
‘Gemeinnützigkeitspaket 2015’ published 20155http://www.bmwfw.gv.at/Presse/AktuellePresseMeldungen/Documents/Eckpunkte_gemeinnuetzigkeitspaket_text_
24maerz2015L.pdf4 accessed on 14 March 2016.
ß The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1093/tandt/ttw090

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 22, No. 6, July 2016

Foundations Act accompanied by several tax reliefs to
improve the attractiveness of the Austrian Charitable
Foundation.

In the following all statements
‘Foundations’ apply to Funds alike.

627

concerning

Obligatory charitable purpose

The ‘new’ Charitable Foundation
The reformed Charitable Foundations Act is based on
the Austrian Private Foundations Act and contains:
– privately organized supervision;
– possibilities to amend and to revoke the
Foundation;
– a link between the charity concept in the
Foundations Act and that in tax law;
– the obligatory involvement of the financial authorities when a new Charitable Foundation is established (to ensure the charitable character of the
Foundation); and
– the flexibilization of the Charitable Foundation
itself.

Thus, the Austrian government in 2015 published a reform of the Charitable Foundations
Act accompanied by several tax reliefs to improve the attractiveness of the Austrian
Charitable Foundation
It has been the aim of the legislator to make the
establishment of a Charitable Foundation as easy as
setting up a registered association. The main characteristics of the Charitable Foundation are described in
the following:

The purpose of the Foundation has to be charitable.
The main issue was that the concept of a charitable
purpose was a different one in the past, which in some
cases may have led to the peculiar consequence that a
Foundation was ‘charitable’ pursuant to the
Charitable Foundations Act but was not been treated
as ‘charitable’ pursuant to tax law.6 These two concepts have now been aligned. Moreover, when a new
Foundation is established, the ‘declaration of establishment’ (‘Gründungserklärung’) has to be transmitted to the Viennese tax office for the 1st and
23rd district, which examines whether the declaration
fulfils the prerequisites stated in the Federal Tax
Code7 to gain the charitable status. The tax office
will then issue a decree stating that the declaration
is in line with the Federal Tax Code which provides
legal certainty for the Foundation Board
(‘Stiftungsvorstand’).

Founders
There are no restrictions on the founders. Founders
may be legal as well as natural persons; even unlimited
or limited partnerships may act as founders. The
Charitable Foundations Act provides for the possibility to transfer the rights of the founders to their legal
successors, which is not possible under the Private
Foundation Act.

Differentiation between‘Foundation’and ‘Fund’
Just as the former Charitable Foundations Act also
the recent reform still differentiates between a
‘Foundation’ and a ‘Fund’. While a Foundation is
set-up for an unlimited term and only uses its
income for charitable purposes, a Fund is set-up for
a limited term and may also use the capital endowed.5
5. § 2 BStFG (n 2).
6. Cf BFG (Bundesfinanzgericht) 4 March 2015, RV/7101339/2011.
7. Bundesabgabenordnung (BAO), latest amendment BGBl I Nr 163/2015.

Legal person
The Austrian Charitable Foundation is a legal person
and thus is a subject of rights and duties. If a
Foundation does not have enough assets to continuously fulfil its purpose, it may be restructured into a
Charitable Fund.

628

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Minimum capital
The minimum capital of the Foundation has to be
EUR 50,000 which must be immediately available to
the Foundation. If the minimum capital is not contributed in cash but in kind, a compulsory audit has
to be performed.

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 22, No. 6, July 2016

– information about the restructuring or the dissolution of the foundation, and
– annual statements of the foundation.
The Charitable Foundation is thus more transparent than the Austrian Private Foundation. The
Charitable Foundation is formed upon entry into
the register.

Compulsory bodies
The compulsory bodies of a Charitable Foundation
are:
– the Board of the Foundation (‘Stiftungsvorstand’);
– the Auditor (‘Rechnungsprüfer’ or ‘Stiftungsprüfer’);
– and—if the Charitable Foundation disposes of
substantial
sums—the
Supervisory
Board
(‘Aufsichtsorgan’).
The Foundation is managed and represented by the
Board of the Foundation, which has to draw up
annual statements that are then audited by the auditor. In case that the Foundation disposes of large
sums, the auditor has to be a qualified auditor/auditing firm, in all other cases no specific credentials are
necessary.

Right to amend and/or to revoke the
Foundation
Moreover, the new Charitable Foundations Act provides for a right of the founders of a Charitable
Foundation to amend the declaration as well as for a
right to revoke the Foundation. However, it is necessary that these rights are already retained in the declaration of establishment. According to some scholars8
it should also be possible to retain the right to revoke
the Foundation in favour of a legal person and to
transfer it to the legal successor(s) of the founder.
This is a very important difference to the Private
Foundation where neither such revocation right in
favour of a legal person nor a transfer of founder’s
rights to a legal successor is possible.

Tax incentives
Register on Foundations and Funds
A further aim of the reform of the Charitable
Foundation was to increase transparency and publicity with regard to Charitable Foundations. Hence, a
publicly available register on Foundations and Funds
has been introduced, which includes the following
details of a Charitable Foundation:
– name, seat, and address,
– purpose,
– beneficiaries,
– name and address of the bodies of the Foundation,
– establishment declaration,

Together with the reformed Charitable Foundation
Act the tax incentives for charitable organizations
(such as associations) as well as foundations have
been broadened to make a charitable engagement
more tax efficient. Some of these incentives are presented in the following.

Together with the reformed Charitable
Foundation Act the taxincentives for charitable
organizations (such as associations) as well as
foundations have been broadened to make a
charitable engagement more tax efficient

8. Cf Melzer/Petritz, ‘Die gemeinnützige Stiftung und der gemeinnützige Fonds nach dem Gemeinnützigkeitsgesetz 2015’ – ÖStZ-Spezial (in print).

Jurisdiction-specific articles

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 22, No. 6, July 2016

Softening of the ‘Direct’criterion
According to the Austrian Federal Tax Code
(applying to all kinds of charitable organizations) a
legal person pursuing to gain charitable status has to
fulfil its charitable purpose ‘directly’ by itself, meaning that it itself has to carry out the respective charitable activity, eg the operating of a soup kitchen. The
mere financing of charitable organizations is not a
privileged purpose. This very strict rule has been softened by the new law. Now the financing of other
entities pursuing the same beneficial purpose as the
donating entity does not exclude the donor of being
charitable. This is very positive for all the entities
financing other entities pursuing a privileged purpose
as they now may achieve a charitable status as well.
Further exceptions have been made for the rendering
of services from one charitable entity to another as
well as for the granting of scholarships.

Privilege for the endowment of capital
to a Charitable Foundation
The most important tax incentive in connection with
the reformed Charitable Foundation is the tax privilege for the endowment of capital to a newly established Charitable Foundation. These endowments are
tax deductible at the level of the contributor in a
maximum amount of EUR 500,000 over five years.

The most important tax incentive in connection with the reformed Charitable
Foundation is the tax privilege for the endowment of capital to a newly established
Charitable Foundation
The prerequisites for such a deduction are that the
receiving Foundation is entered into the list of entities
qualifying for tax-deductible donations,9 kept by the
Viennese tax office for the 1st and 23rd district.
Entities qualifying for a registration must fulfil certain

629

criteria which are enlisted in § 4a Austrian Income
Tax Act.10 If the receiving foundation is not registered
with the Viennese tax office for the 1st and 23rd district, the prerequisites for an entry on that list must be
fulfilled within three years after the establishment of
the Foundation. This privilege is not only applicable
to Charitable Foundations pursuant to the Charitable
Foundations Act, but also to any other Foundation or
comparable entity (hence especially to Charitable
Private Foundations, established according to the
Private Foundations Act).
The maximum amount of EUR 500,000 may be
spread over five years; however there is only a possibility to deduct 10% of a taxpayer’s annual income:
Example:
Taxpayer’s annual income: EUR 2,000,000; taxpayer
makes a donation of EUR 400,000 to a Charitable
Foundation which is in principle subject to the tax privilege for the endowment of capital. Because of the fact
that the endowment exceeds 10% of the income (ie EUR
200,000) it may not be deducted in full but only in an
amount of EUR 200,000.
Moreover, if the prerequisites for the tax privilege
are not fulfilled, the tax office will retroactively deny
the deduction of the endowments.

No endowment tax
Endowments to Austrian Foundations are normally
subject to an endowment tax of 2.5% of the value
of the assets endowed. However, there is no endowment tax if the receiving Foundation has a charitable
status. Pursuant to the new rules this tax exemption
applies to all kinds of endowments.

No real estate transfer tax
Moreover, a new tax exemption for the gratuitous
transfer of real estate to charitable organizations has
been introduced. Normally such transfers would be
subject to real estate transfer tax (RETT). However, if

9. ‘Liste der begünstigten Spendenempfänger’.
10. Einkommensteuergesetz, EStG (Income Tax Act), latest amendment BGBl I Nr 163/2015.

630

Jurisdiction-specific articles

it is a gratuitous transfer, no RETT is due. Moreover,
also the endowment tax equivalent (‘Stiftungseingangssteueräquivalent’) usually levied in the case of
transfer of real estate to a Foundation does not apply
to gratuitous transfers to Charitable Foundations.
Hence, gratuitous transfers of real estate to Charitable
Foundations are tax-free.

No entry fee
Further, the entry fee of 1.1% on the value which is
levied for registering the ownership of a real estate in
the land register is not levied in case of a gratuitous
transfer of real estate property to a charitable organisation (and hence also for such transfers to Charitable
Foundations). Real estate property thus may be transferred to a Charitable Foundation without any transfer
tax or entry fee.

Summary
Austria has tried to raise the attractiveness of its
Charitable Foundations by applying a more flexible

Trusts & Trustees, Vol. 22, No. 6, July 2016

and modern law, broadening the tax privileges for
founders and by giving founders more rights with
regard to ‘their’ foundation. Moreover, in some
aspects the ‘new’ Charitable Foundation seems to
be even more flexible than the very successful
Austrian Private Foundation. This flexibility shows
itself in the possibility to transfer the rights retained (rights to amend and/or revoke the foundation) to the legal successor of the founder.
However, the attractiveness of the Austrian
Charitable Foundation will be assessed in comparison with charitable organizations in other
jurisdictions.

In some aspects the ‘‘new’’ Charitable
Foundation seems to be even more flexible than the very successful Austrian
Private Foundation. This flexibility shows itself in the possibility to transfer the rights
retained (rights to amend and/or revoke
the foundation) to the legal successor of the
founder

MMag. Michael Petritz, LL.M., TEP is a tax partner with KPMG, specializing in advising HNWIs and
UHNWIs. Moreover, he lectures and publishes on estate planning tax issues and is the current president of
STEP Austria. E-mail: mpetritz@kpmg.at; www.kpmg.at
Mag. Andreas Kampitsch LL.M. is a tax advisor with KPMG and specializes in the same field. E-mail:
akampitsch@kpmg.at; www.kpmg.at

