Journal of Brand Management
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41262-019-00167-5

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review
and future research directions
Muhammad Ishtiaq Ishaq1 · Eleonora Di Maria2
Revised: 21 December 2017
© Springer Nature Limited 2019

Abstract
Brand equity, a strategic marketing asset, can elicit a welcoming, unique relationship that characterizes the bond between
products and customers. An essential aspect of brand equity is sustainability, which has emerged as a paramount issue in
environmental concerns that firms cannot overlook. Numerous researchers have presented their empirical findings on brand
equity, but, with few exceptions, little knowledge has been published on its conceptualization and measurement. Accordingly, this research provides an in-depth analysis that brings associations to scattered brand equity literature, which merely
discusses sustainability/greening as an essential aspect. In doing so, we submit that the sustainability dimension in brand
equity can be helpful in two respects: (1) firms can use this concept to mitigate consumer cynicism about green attributes
and brand functionality; and (2) it bridges the significant flaws in the current conceptualization of brand equity, which can
serve as an inspiration for theoretical soundness and its betterment as a measuring tool. We also put forth that the concept
of brand equity should include a sustainability paradigm other than marketing assets and stakeholder value.
Keywords Brand Equity · Sustainability · Brand Management · Stakeholder Theory

Introduction
Factories rust away; Packages become obsolete,
Products lose their relevance. But great brands live
forever.
- Backer Spelvogel Bates
Due to increased sustainable consumption, consumer
environmentalism and ecological issues in society (Ishaq
2018; Chen and Chang 2008), companies have focused their
efforts on offering eco-friendly products and services to
meet environmental needs (Lintukangas et al. 2015; Alniacik
et al. 2011; Ishaq 2018). Hence, it appears to be a significant
asset for a brand to identify itself as an eco-friendly product.
Since the development of green marketing concepts about

* Muhammad Ishtiaq Ishaq
ishtiaq_042@yahoo.com;
ishaq.muhammadishtiaq@gmail.com
Eleonora Di Maria
eleonora.dimaria@gmail.com; eleonora.dimaria@unipd.it
1

Imperial College of Business Studies, Lahore, Pakistan

2

University of Padova, Padova, Italy

three decades ago (Bekk et al. 2016), only a few studies have
emphasized the processes that lead a green image concept to
brand equity (Chen and Chang 2008). Brand equity has been
defined as the reputation and power that a brand has that
influences an organization’s financial performance (Voss and
Gammoh 2004; Ishaq et al. 2014). Chen and Chang (2013)
argued that a firm’s sustainability commitments resulted in
a competitive advantage. The researchers were curious to
identify why brands attempt to establish eco-friendly products and services. Understanding this viewpoint is important
in identifying whether a brand’s sustainability image influences green consumer behaviour.
The story of sustainability was discussed prominently
in the Brundtland report (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987), Earth Summits at Rio de
Janeiro and Johannesburg in 1992 and 2002, respectively,
as “meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to respond to their needs”.
Lubin and Esty (2010) noted sustainability was an “emerging megatrend”. Practitioners and academics have different
perspectives related to sustainability (Sheth et al. 2011). The
academic stance on sustainability is based on environmental,
social, and economic dimensions (Funk 2003). It is a continual approach that encourages an organization to develop
Vol.:(0123456789)

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

its capabilities for facilitation in future turmoil (Chabowski
et al. 2011). The economic dimension of sustainability is
highly ranked among business researchers as it decreases the
chances of a firm’s early demise and strengthens its financial position (Szekely and Knirsch 2005). The environmental
dimension is related to greening prospects (Schubert et al.
2010). The social aspect is associated with corporate social
responsibility (Peloza and Shang 2011). From the practitioner’s standpoint, business firms are increasingly interested
in learning about sustainability and implementing its principles in business operations (Kumar and Christodoulopoulou
2014). Cronin et al. (2011) argued that firms could not practice sustainability without creating a balance among sustainability’s three dimensions.
Many renowned organizations have accepted sustainability as a purposeful business goal and established its link to
their marketing functions (Royne et al. 2011; Nidumolu et al.
2009). Firms from industries as diverse as Interface, General
Electric, Gap, Hewlett-Packard, Cisco, Patagonia, Starbucks,
Walmart, Johnson and Johnson, Caterpillar and Nokia have
recognized the importance of sustainability and embraced it
wholeheartedly (Sheth et al. 2011). However, environmental
and social concerns still require significant consideration on
a larger scale. Companies can exploit sustainability to create
environmental needs and provide solutions (Pickett-Baker
and Ozaki 2008) because consumers in the turbulent market
can quickly realize the importance of eco-friendly products.
Brands such as GM, Toyota, and Honda exploit environmental concerns effectively in the automobile industry (Oliver
and Lee 2010) and consumers are even willing to pay high
prices (Royne et al. 2011). The members of an international
club named Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability developing on less harmful, healthier brands to achieve a better environment for the society. Therefore, researchers have
strongly suggested that companies incorporate sustainability
practices into their branding strategies to promote green buying behaviour (Chen 2010; Ng et al. 2014).
The concept of branding has made significant progress
in giving superior products and services to the consumers
(Keller et al. 2011; Aaker and Joachimsthaler 2012). It now
provides the means to differentiate an enterprise’s offerings
and shape consumer attitude (Keller and Lehmann 2006),
provide self-expressive, emotional and functional benefits
(Aaker 1997) and stimulate strong customer relationships
communally and personally (Schau et al. 2009; Schouten
et al. 2007). Brand equity, considered the best way to evaluate brands, is defined as “a set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name and symbol that adds to or
subtracts from the value provided by a product or service
to a firm and/or to the its customers” (Aaker Aaker 1991).
Likewise, Keller (1993) stated it is “the differential effect
of brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the brand”. In academic settings, researchers usually

take one of three perspectives to measure brand equity: the
financial aspect (Simon and Sullivan 1993), the customerbased perspective (Yoo and Donthu 2001; Keller 1993;
Aaker 1991), and a combination of the two, known as the
comprehensive viewpoint (Motameni and Shahrokhi 1998).
The significance of brand equity is well documented in
the marketing literature (Zhang et al. 2015; Ishaq et al. 2014)
and includes consumer preferences, consumer confidence
towards brand, effectiveness in marketing communication,
brand loyalty, positive word-of-mouth communication, performance and satisfaction (Ishaq et al. 2014; Pappu et al.
2005). Since a plethora of studies has indicated that branding
has played a vital role in increasing positive word-of-mouth
and customer preferences, the logical question is: What
would consumer attitude be if an eco-friendly brand were
introduced with full functionality? Reynolds and Phillips
(2005) argued that “brand equity has become more important
as the key to understanding the objectives, the mechanisms,
and the net impact of the holistic impact of marketing”; still,
however, the literature on brand equity and its measurement
is widely varied and inconclusive. The environmental needs
have entirely changed consumer buying behaviour because
recent market trends require consumers to pay even higher
prices (do Paco et al. 2009). Empirical evidence is available
to understand the buying pattern for eco-friendly products
such as physical goods, furniture, and supermarkets but buying patterns in the services industry have changed as well,
especially the hospitality sector (Pickett-Baker and Ozaki
2008). Hence, it is necessary to add a sustainability paradigm in measuring brand equity for a better understanding
of purchasing patterns for both product and services.
In this context, it is not surprising that brand equity
measurement has become a marketing performance indicator (Baalbaki and Guzmán 2016; Christodoulides et al.
2015; Veloutsou et al. 2013; Ishaq et al. 2014, Rios and
Riquelme 2008; Veloutsou et al. 2017). Various consultancy
firms (such as Young and Rubicam, Research International,
WPP and Interbrand) have developed proprietary methods
to measure brand equity for business firms (Veloutsou et al.
2013). Keller and Lehman (2006) also proposed the development of holistic brand equity measurements as a future
research direction for brand management. While considering
these recommendations, this conceptual paper assesses the
available knowledge on brand equity and its measurement
methodologies. As Berthon et al. (2001) argued, “perhaps
the only thing that has not been reached concerning brand
equity is a conclusion”. This study develops an integration
and differentiation method for conceptual goals, as proposed
by Yadav (2014) and MacInnis (2011). This approach can
contribute extensively to the development of marketing
theory as it highlights how different conceptual paradigms
diverge from one another, recognizes antecedents, and proposes contingencies. In doing so, we provide an overview of

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

taxonomic frameworks, themes, methodological, and theoretical gaps. In addition, we open a new arena of research
for understanding sustainable brand equity and posit future
research directions towards integrated sustainable brand
equity theory.

Brand equity concept
Contemporary marketing practices and theories have
acknowledged brand equity as a key strategic asset for business firms. A brand comprises three unique yet interconnected dimensions: financial markets, product, and customer
(Keller and Lehmann 2006). The value acquired from these
dimensions is recognized as brand equity. Various researchers have offered a wide assortment of definitions of brand
equity, with various influential perspectives (e.g., Christodoulides and de Chernatony 2010). With regard to brand
equity, Winters (1991) argued that researchers may provide
10 or maybe 11 definitions of brand equity; as this statement
remains valid. The concept of brand equity is significant for
practitioners as it is related to the effectiveness of marketing
programmes, product quality, barriers to competitive entry,
greater promotional activity, and customer loyalty (French
and Smith 2013; Farquhar 1989; Erdem and Swait 1998).
As a matter of fact, the measurement method of brand
equity, its sources, and conceptual and theoretical foundations are still inconclusive (Ishaq et al. 2014) and taken as
the “blind men and elephant” syndrome (Ambler 2003).
For instance, there is no agreement in the literature as to
whether brand equity refers to the value of the brand itself or
the value of the brand name (Baalbaki and Guzmán 2016).
The various dimensions of brand equity are summarized in
Table 1. Moreover, there is no agreement as to which measurement approach is better for evaluating brand equity (Keller 1993; Aaker 1991). However, financial-based (Simon and
Sullivan 1993; Farquhar et al. 1991) and customer-based
approaches (Pappu et al. 2005; de Chernatony et al. 2004;
Ishaq et al. 2014) are dominant in research streams. The
financial-based paradigm of brand equity is related to an
organization’s performance and success (Saji et al. 2013;
Ailawadi et al. 2001), whereas the customer-based paradigm is associated with the interaction of brand and customer (Veloutsou et al. 2013). This study primarily focuses
on customer-based brand equity.
The most common definition arising from branding literature describes brand equity as the value added by the
brand name to a product that does not hold a brand name
(Sriram and Kalwani 2007). Some authors (Sinclair and Keller 2014) have provided a more comprehensive definition,
describing it as the brand value obtained from strong brand
associations, awareness, perceived quality, and high levels of
brand loyalty, as well as assets such as distribution channels,

patents, and trademarks associated with the brands. Aaker
(1991) defined brand equity as “a set of brand assets and
liabilities linked to a brand, its name, and symbol that add to
or subtract from the value provided by a product or service
to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers”. Another explanation of brand equity is an annual incremental contribution of
the brand when compared with the base product (Baalbaki
and Guzmán 2016). Similarly, Ambler et al. (2002) posited
it as the company’s asset developed from different marketing
efforts to increase sales and drive future cash flows. Sinclair and Keller (2014) declared brand equity as a strategic
asset that can sell or buy on a certain price. Brand equity
also symbolizes the mind of customers towards the brand’s
images, attitudes, experiences, thoughts, and perceptions
(Ambler et al. 2002).
In addition, researchers have also argued about the role of
brand equity in crisis and uncertainty as it provides goodwill
towards the brand and credibility in the market (Rea et al.
2014; Suder and Suder 2013; Hegner et al. 2014). Brand
equity includes the consumer’s attitude towards the brand,
perceived quality ratings, brand personality traits, brand
image, and brand awareness (Buil et al. 2008). However,
the central aspect of brand equity is associations about the
brand that consumers hold in their memories (Romaniuk and
Nenycz-Thiel 2013). Numerous theoretical and conceptual
models are available in the branding literature; however, the
Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993) models are the most important because of wide acceptance (Ishaq et al. 2014; Pappu
et al. 2005; Jung and Sung 2008; Atilgan et al. 2005).

Methodology
To understand brand equity and its evolution, one must first
identify the roots of the concept and appreciate the commonalities and differences of measuring brand equity that
described in the academic literature. The literature explains
different approaches and models to differentiating brand
equity concepts. For this purpose, three distinct areas are
identified using the content analysis of 2500+ articles
indexed in Scopus and the ISI Web of Knowledge. The three
areas are: (1) the conceptual approach, which defines the origin of brand equity and its definition; (2) basic concepts that
are used to investigate brand equity measurements; and (3)
the studies used to demonstrate the determinants and sources
of brand equity. Our theoretical framework is consistent with
the applications of Yadav (2014) and MacInnis (2011) in
theory development, in which they proposed to integrate and
differentiate specific conceptual goals.
We searched the ISI Web of Knowledge with the Social
Sciences Citation Index database and Scopus from 1990 to
2016. Results from the Arts and Humanities and Sciences
Citation Index were eliminated. Although the concept of

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria
Table 1  Summary of available brand equity dimensions in academic literature. Source: Authors elaborate this table from the searches on ISI
Web of Knowledge and Scopus
Dimension(s)

Author(s)

Perceived value/brand value

Lassar et al. (1995), Martin and Brown (1990), Netemeyer et al. (2004), Rios and Riquelme (2008), Kamakura and Russell (1993)
Reputation
de Chernatony et al. (2004)
Satisfaction
de Chernatony et al. (2004)
Perceived quality
Aaker (1991), Cobb-Walgren et al. (1995), Yoo and Donthu (2001), Pappu et al. (2005) Washburn and Plank
(2002), Ishaq et al. (2014), Martin and Brown (1990), Kamakura and Russell (1993), Veloutsou and Christodoulides (2010)
Willingness to pay premium price Netemeyer et al. (2004)
Social image
Lassar et al. (1995)
Online experience
Christodoulides et al. (2006)
Commitment
Lassar et al. (1995), Martin and Brown (1990),
Brand associations
Aaker (1991), Cobb-Walgren et al. (1995), Yoo and Donthu (2001), Pappu et al. (2005) Washburn and Plank
(2002), Ishaq et al. (2014), Rios and Riquelme (2008), Veloutsou and Christodoulides (2010)
Fulfillment
Christodoulides et al. (2006)
Performance
Lassar et al. (1995)
Brand dominance
Kamakura and Russell (1993)
Attachment
Lassar et al. (1995)
Emotional connection
Christodoulides et al. (2006)
Trustworthiness
Lassar et al. (1995), Martin and Brown (1990),
Brand Strength
Srivastava and Shocker (1991)
Responsive service nature
Christodoulides et al. (2006)
Brand awareness
Aaker (1991), Cobb-Walgren et al. (1995), Yoo and Donthu (2001), Pappu et al. (2005) Washburn and Plank
(2002), Ishaq et al. (2014), Rios and Riquelme (2008), Veloutsou and Christodoulides (2010)
Distinctiveness
Netemeyer et al. (2004)
Brand name symbolic utility
Vazquez et al. (2002); Kocak et al. (2007)
Brand image
Martin and Brown (1990), Tolba and Hassan (2009)
Park and Srinivasan (1994)
Attribute based brand equity
and non-attribute-based brand
equity
Brand loyalty
Aaker (1991), Cobb-Walgren et al. (1995), Yoo and Donthu (2001), Pappu et al. (2005) Washburn and Plank
(2002), Ishaq et al. (2014), Rios and Riquelme (2008)
Intangible value
Kamakura and Russell (1993)
Brand name functional utility
Vazquez et al. (2002); Kocak et al. (2007)

brand equity goes back on the 1970s with a complex study
of Srinivasan (1979), but we selected 1990 to be a suitable
year because this concept started its progression. We used
the topic field of the ISI search engine to search multiple
keywords, using a complete list of possibilities that included
“brand equity”, “green brand equity”, “sustainable brand
equity,” and “sustainability” with “brand equity”. The
search returned highly significant conceptual and empirical
references (n = 2527; ISI Web of Knowledge = 928, Scopus = 1599) that explicitly addressed the evolution, conceptualization, and measurements of brand equity and its
empirical evidence in various cultures.
In the first step following the search, the duplicate articles (n = 641) in both databases were deleted. In the next
step, empirical and conceptual/review papers on brand
equity were separated and analysed for novel theoretical

contribution according to their applications and themes. The
third step was a contextual analysis to eliminate articles that
had no novel theoretical contribution or that were an extension of available models. Additionally, the empirical and
conceptual papers were also excluded if they had no relationship with sustainability or brand equity. Of the 1886 articles,
21 articles were linked to sustainability/eco-friendliness and
brand management, whereas only six articles were found that
discussed measurement of sustainable/green brand equity as
a single variable without theory formulation. Of those six
articles, five used the same conceptual paradigm proposed
by Chen (2010) to measure green brand equity using a single
dimension. The purpose of this research was to identify the
progress of brand equity scale development with sustainability aspects hence the prime focus on theory development and
empirical research papers. After eliminating general papers,

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

literature reviews, and empirical papers with no advancement in brand equity scale, we ended up with 57 articles.
Table 2 shows various taxonomies, approaches, and models for measuring and conceptualizing brand equity. The
conclusions are summaries of existing brand equity, greening, sustainability, and green brand equity literature that
show dilemmas and serious questions regarding brand equity
management and its creation. There are numerous research
studies and approaches to conceptualizing and measuring
brand equity in marketing literature; those presented in
Table 2 are considered to be the basic conceptual, methodological, and theoretical foundations. Some consultancy firms
also offer different scales to measure brand equity. Since the
underlying purpose of this study is to provide an academic
overview of brand equity and aspects of sustainability, the
brand equity scales that could potentially be applied are
described in Table 3.
Figure 1 stems from concepts and taxonomies discussed
herein. Its purpose is to illustrate the key brand equity concepts from the organizational and consumer standpoints
while simultaneously addressing the marketing and finance
domains. The upper right quadrant illustrates the consumer/
marketing dimensions that have emerged primarily from
marketing disciplines to explain the theoretical and empirical foundations of brand equity with a focus on consumer
perceptions. The lower left quadrant illustrates the financial/
organizational perspective, which concentrates mainly on
company actions to elucidate determinants of brand equity.
Iglesias et al. (2013) argued that academics should focus
more on the systematic view of brand equity development
through business techniques and theoretical approaches.

Measurement of brand equity
The brand equity concept was first defined qualitatively
by Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993); its empirical measurement was proposed at later stages, i.e., Aaker (1996). Many
researchers have also taken the initiative to operationalize
this intangible asset with complex statistical procedures
and methodologies (Pappu et al. 2005; Yoo and Donthu
2001), although it can be difficult to gain insight from the
results. The literature offered two different mechanisms
to measure/operationalize brand equity: (1) the indirect
approach—measuring brand equity with its demonstrable dimensions, and (2) the direct approach—measuring
brand equity directly through utilities or consumer preferences. They observed that the direct measurement method
of brand equity lacks theoretical grounds, whereas indirect
approaches have methodological and conceptual soundness.
Apart from academic measurement of brand equity, various
market research firms have also developed instruments that
are occasionally referenced in academic literature (see, for

example, Mizik and Jacobson 2008). The summary of brand
equity measurement is shown in Table 2.
Using direct measurement approaches, Jourdan (2002),
Park and Srinivasan (1994) and Srinivasan (1979) used the
multi-attribute model to measure brand equity with a common departure point. Srinivasan (1979) used multi-attribute
conjoint analysis to measure brand equity with an observed
preference on actual choice compared with consumer preferences. The difference between preferences measured through
the multi-attribute approach and overall preference is quantified on a monetary scale. However, this direct measurement
approach failed to shed light on brand value sources. About
fifteen years later, Park and Srinivasan (1994) developed a
survey-based method to measure brand equity in the product category. They defined it as “the difference between
an individual consumer’s overall brand preference and the
consumer’s multi-attributed preference based on objectively
measured attribute levels” (p. 273) and argued that objective
preferences could be measured through surveys, blind tests,
and laboratory tests. They further categorized the brand
equity into two parts: an attribute associated with consumers’ evaluation of physical characteristics of the brand and
the non-attribute linked with the symbolic association of the
brand. This study provides key insights to resolving perceptual distortions of brand equity; however, the study did not
return significant findings for the non-attribute component
of brand equity.
Jourdan (2002) worked on Park and Srinivasan’s (1994)
model of brand equity with the aim of improving its validity and reliability. He argued that an error term was missing
in the calculation of utilities; he found two reasons for this.
First, he thought there was a systematic error when they
used a multi-attribute model to measure the brand’s objective evaluations. Second, a customer may have a favourable
assessment of product attributes but buy a different brand
for unknown reasons; Jourdan referred to this as random
error. Hence, he performed a repeat experimental design and
showed that an error term in Park and Srinivasan’s model
could not be neglected. After considering the error term, the
validity and reliability of the previous brand equity model
increased significantly. Despite having an advantage over its
predecessor, Jourdan’s (2002) brand equity model is much
more difficult to understand because of its complex experimental design.
Leuthesser et al. (1995) proposed their model of brand
equity and argued that consumers always have biased decisions because of a predisposition towards familiar brands.
They called this the halo effect. Two statistical procedures,
called double centring and partialling out, were proposed;
however, these methods could not provide a source of brand
equity. Furthermore, this research did not offer any advancement in previous brand equity models and was heavily based
on statistical analyses, which made it difficult to grasp.

Examining sports brand equity

Examining sports brand equity
Understanding service brand equity
Testing psychometric properties of CBBE

Multidimensional scale of brand equity

Measuring financial brand equity

Conceptualizing CBBE

Measuring CBBE
Investigating CBBE in sports industry

Improvement and amendment in Park and Srinivasan Scale while using experimental design
Develop and validate the instrument for measuring
CBBE
Testing one dimension of brand equity
Modification in Yoo and Donthu (1997) instrument
CBBE in sports industry

1995 Boone et al.

1999 Gladeen and Milne
2000 Berry
2001 Krishnan and Hartline

2001 Yoo and Donthu

2001 Mackay

2001 Gladden et al.

2001 Faircloth et al.
2001 Belen del Rio

2002 Jourdan

Simon and Sullivan
Park and Srinivasan
Keller
Leuthesser et al.
Lassar et al.

2003 Robinson and Miller

2002 Gladden and Funk
2002 Washburn and Plank

2002 Vazquez et al.

1993
1993
1993
1995
1995

1993 Swait et al.

Gladden et al. (1998)

Kamakura and Russell (1993), Cobb-Walgren
et al. (1995)
Aaker (1991)
Aaker (1991, 1996) and Keller (1993)

(Park and Srinivasan 1994)

Aaker (1991)
Aaker (1991)

Aaker (1991), Simon and Sullivan (Simon and
Sullivan 1993)
Aaker (1991)

Aaker (1991, 1996), Keller (1993)

Boone et al. (1995)
Aaker (1991), Keller (1993)
Aaker (1991), Keller (1993)

No theory available previously

No theory available previously
No theory available previously
No theory available previously
Thorndike (1920) and Keller (1993)
Keller (1993)

No theory available previously

No theory available previously
No theory available previously

Take brand intangible value and perceived quality
Measuring consumer and financial-based brand
equity
Equalization Price was used to measure brand
equity
Examining financial-based brand equity
Individual-level measurement of brand equity
Understanding CBBE
The halo effects measure of brand equity
Measure CBBE

1991 Kamakura and Russell
1991 Srivastava and Shocker

1991 Aaker

To measure CBBE, the author used multi-attribute No theory available previously
model
Understanding CBBE
No theory available previously/Conceptual Basis

1979 Srinivasan

Base conceptualization/research method

Objective of the paper

Year Author

Table 2  Measuring instruments of brand equity

16 dimensions of brand associations
Brand awareness, perceived quality, and brand
loyalty
Conceptual study

Brand name utility and product utility

Financial value to the brands
Non-attribute and attribute-based brand equity
Brand knowledge: brand image and brand awareness
Measured brand equity as single dimension
Attachment, worthiness, trust, value, social image,
and performance
Team revenues, operating expenses, attendance
capacity, and financial value
Stadium capacity, ticket price, and franchise value
Brand meaning and brand awareness
Familiarity with brand name, trustworthiness, credibility, quality, and willingness to pay premium
price
Brand awareness, perceived quality, and brand
loyalty
Market share compared with CBBE dimensions of
Aaker model
Brand awareness, perceived quality, brand association, and brand loyalty
Willingness to pay premium price
Four brand association dimensions: guarantee,
personal identification, social identification, and
status
Non-attribute and attribute-based brand equity

Measured brand equity as single dimension

Brand awareness, quality, brand association, and
loyalty
Brand intangible value and perceived quality
Brand strength and brand value

Measured brand equity as single dimension

Dimensions

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

Investigating CBBE

Develop and validate “revenue premium” as consequence of brand equity
Measuring brand equity for automobile industry in
20 countries
Measure brand performance for financial sector
Develop different facets of brand equity scale

Examining CBBE

2003 Kim et al.

2003 Ailwadi et al.

2004 De Chematony et al.
2004 Netemeyer et al.

2005 Bauer, Sauer, and Exler

Test brand equity model
Proposed own theory
Suggested a set of brand measures that can be used Keller and Lehman (2006)
to gauge performance of brand
New instrument for CBBE in India
Brucks and Zeithaml (1991) and Aaker (1996)

2008 Shanker et al.
2008 Lehmann et al.

2008 Ross, et al.
2008 Buil et al.

2008 Rajasekar and Nalina

2008 Guizani et al.

Evaluating brand equity’s one dimension
Aaker (1991)
Inclusion of personality dimension in brand equity Aaker (1991)
scale designed by Aaker (1991)

Aaker (1991, 1996) and Keller (1993)

Aaker (1991)
Aaker (1991), Keller (1993)
Vazquez et al. (2002)

Testing brand equity’s psychometric properties
CBBE in sports industry
Replicate Vazquez et al. (2002) study to measure
CBBE in cross-cultural analysis. After cross-culture analysis, items were reduced to 16 from 22.
Scale development of CBBE in France

2007 Low and Lamb
2007 Boyle and Magnusson
2007 Kocak et al.

2007 Kaynak et al.

Conceptualize and measure brand equity for online Qualitative research
brands
Proposing brand association
Gladden and Funk (2002)

Aaker (1991)
Aaker (1991)

2006 Christodoulides et al.

2006 Ross
2006 Ross, James, and Vargas

Aaker (1991, 1996) and Keller (1993)

2005 Pappu et al.

Improved version of customer-based brand equity
scale
Proposed CBBE
Testing brand association among sports consumer

Keller (1993)
Aaker (1991)

(Park and Srinivasan 1994) and Aaker (1991)

Interviews
Aaker (1991, 1996) and Keller (1993)

Data owned by MORPACE Keller (2003)

Keller (2003)

Aaker (1991), Keller (1993)

Base conceptualization/research method

2005 Bauer, Sauer, and Schmitt Financial- and consumer-based brand equity
2005 Bamert and Wehrli
Service based brand equity

2004 Hsieh

Objective of the paper

Year Author

Table 2  (continued)

Social value, brand knowledge, perceived brand
quality, and brand loyalty
Relative brand importance and offering value
Preference, interpersonal relations, comparative
advantage, comprehension, and attachment
Attachment, worthiness, trust, value, social image,
and performance
Internalization and identification
Brand association, brand personality, brand loyalty,
brand awareness and quality

Market size, brand attachment, and brand recognition
Reputation, satisfaction, and brand loyalty
Willingness to pay premium price, uniqueness,
perceived value, and perceived quality
Brand associations related to product and nonproduct benefits
Brand awareness, brand image
Brand loyalty, perceived quality, brand association,
and brand awareness
Brand loyalty, perceived quality, brand association,
brand personality, and brand awareness
Brand association and brand awareness
Qualitative study to test 13 dimensions of brand
association
Fulfillment, trust, responsive service nature, online
experience, and emotional connection
Measuring brand equity theory brand association
dimension
Perceived quality, brand image, brand attitude
Value, success, and quality
Brand name utility and product utility

Brand loyalty, perceived quality, brand awareness,
and brand image
Revenue premium between brand and private label

Dimensions

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

Brand equity scale for country

Brand equity measurement for Levi’s, Polo and
Gap
Measuring brand performance and brand equity
with 27 dimensions
Measured brand equity in soft drinks, fast food,
and toothpastes
Measure brand equity in logistics industry

2008 Zeugner-Roth et al.

2008 Jung and Sung

Inclusion of brand trust as new dimension in brand
equity model instead of brand awareness
Measuring functional aspect of quality and performance
Measuring green brand equity first time
Identification of brand equity components

Measuring brand equity in cross-cultural settings

2009 Atilgan et al.

2010 Chen
2013 Veloutsou et al.

2015 Christodoulides et al.

Aaker (1991)

Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993)
Aaker (Aaker 1991, 1996), Keller (1993)

Keller (1993)

Aaker (Aaker 1991, 1996), Keller (1993)

Aaker (Aaker 1991, 1996), Keller (1993)

Aaker (1991), Keller (1993) and Yoo and Donthu
(2001)
Aaker (1991), Keller (1993), Yoo and Donthu
(2001)
Aaker (1991, 1996), Keller (1993), Keller and
Lehmann (2006)
Aaker (1991, 1996), Keller (1993), Keller and
Lehmann (2006)
Keller (1993)

Base conceptualization/research method

Single dimensional construct
Four major dimensions were identified: consumer
behaviour towards brand, affective response
towards brand, brand evaluation, and brand characteristics understanding
Brand loyalty, brand association, perceived quality,
and brand awareness

Country brand awareness/association, perceived
country brand quality, and country brand loyalty
Overall brand equity, and multidimensional brand
equity as proposed by Yoo and Donthu
Brand loyalty, perceived quality, value, performance, awareness, and image
Brand loyalty, perceived quality, value, performance, awareness, and image
Overall brand quality, brand image, and brand
awareness
Destination brand loyalty, destination brand value,
destination brand quality, destination brand image,
and destination brand awareness
Brand trust, brand association, brand loyalty, and
perceived quality
Brand imagery, and brand resonance

Dimensions

Base conceptualization term in table is explaining the previously underlying theoretical background (if available), and authors elaborate this table from the searches on ISI Web of Knowledge
and Scopus

2010 Broyles et al.

Designed brand quality scale for destination
(Atlantic City and Las Vegas)

2009 Boo et al.

2009 Davis et al.

2008 Lehmann et al. Study 2

2008 Lehmann et al.

Objective of the paper

Year Author

Table 2  (continued)

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	
Table 3  Applied brand equity
scales

Consultancy name

Scale description

Research International Equity Engine

Functional performance, affinity, and the interaction
between brand’s price and equity
Bonding, advantage, performance, relevance, and presence
Differentiation, relevance, esteem, and knowledge
Protection, diversification, brand support, trend, brand
leadership, and market stability

WPP Brand Dynamics
Y&R Brand Asset Valuator
Interbrand Brand Strength

Fig. 1  Positions matrix of brand
equity concepts

Consumer

Financial Approach
Approach

Perspective

Article #

Article #

3, 12

1, 2, 4, 8, 13, 19,
22, 27

Marketing

Article #

Article #

5, 6, 11, 17, 24, 45

7, 9, 10, 14-16, 18,
20, 21, 23, 25, 26,
28-44, 46-57

Organizational Perspective

Kamakura and Russell (1993) used segment-wise logit models and measured actual purchase behaviours of consumers
instead of focusing on preferences; the data were taken from
scanners. In this particular study, brand equity was measured as “the implied utility or value assigned to a brand by
consumers” (p. 10). Kamakura and Russell (1993) proposed
brand value as a proxy of brand equity after eliminating the
impact of price promotions and short-term advertising. Tangible and intangible components were identified as sources
of brand equity; declared intangible brand value and brand
value were the two alternative mechanisms for measuring it.
Swait et al. (1993) used the information economics paradigm to measure brand equity with the help of an entire
utility linked with the brand instead of a few utility factors.
They offered a new brand equity measure, called equalization price (EP), which they defined as “the monetary
expression of the utility a consumer attributes to a bundle
consisting of a brand name, product attributes, and price”
(p. 30). The multinomial logit model used available information related to socio-demographics, image, customer
purchases, and product usage. One advantage of this model
is that it incorporates the individual-level measurement of
brand equity as well as various qualitative variables linked

with the symbolic association. However, this model was
unable to measure non-homogeneous consumer choices, as
it only focused on the same consumer preferences.
Shankar et al. (2008) proposed a model comprising
consumer survey and financial data. In this study, brand
equity was taken as a multiplicative component of relative
brand importance and offered values. The drivers of the
brand image were brand fame, brand regard, brand innovation, brand trust, brand associations, brand fit, brand
uniqueness, and brand reputation, as measured through a
consumer survey. This model was the first in the academic
literature that combined consumer and financial data in
measuring brand equity for multicategory brands. The only
drawback associated with this model was the unavailability of financial measures for rival brands. For measuring
the sustainability factor in brand equity, only Chen (2010)
offered a new construct with four items that measured
green brand equity in electronics and information products. After this study, a few studies were published (Ng
et al. 2014; Chang and Chen 2014) along the same lines of
Chen’s (2010) framework. Even though this model measured green brand equity at the individual level, the authors
did not explain the underlying factor(s)/dimension(s) that

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

made up green brand equity with no inclusion of purchase
preferences.
Indirect approaches, however, adopt a more holistic view
in measuring brand equity either with subdimensions or outcome variables, i.e., price premiums. Brand equity has been
defined as “the enhancement in the perceived utility and
desirability a band name confers on a product” (Lassar et al.
1995). Lassar et al. collected the data from consumers in two
product categories (watches and TV monitors) and proposed
five dimensions (commitment, trustworthiness, social image,
value, and performance). This brand equity scale comprised
17 items with adequate levels of discriminant validity and
internal consistency. This scale helped the manager to monitor brand performance through a paper and pencil instrument. Among its drawbacks, this scale did not include a
behavioural component (behavioural loyalty) for brand
equity and solely focused on its associations. Besides, a convenience sample of 113 consumers was used to check the
validity; this is inadequate for confirmatory factor analysis.
Based on previous studies, Vazquez et al. (2002) proposed
another holistic definition of brand equity as “overall utility
that the consumer associates to the use and consumption of
the brand, including associations expressing both functional
and symbolic utilities”.
The above studies were performed on utilities acquired
before consumer purchases (ex-ante utilities), whereas
Vazquez et al’s (2002) study focused on utilities obtained
after purchasing of the brand (ex-post utilities) under an
information economics paradigm. Vazquez et al. collected
the data from athletic shoe brands and identified four dimensions of brand utility: brand name symbolic utility, product
symbolic utility, brand name functional utility, and product
functional utility. Confirmatory factor analysis with strong
psychometric properties proposed a 22-item scale for brand
equity. The results also showed that consumers do not consider brand and product utilities to be identical because the
results showed adequate discriminant validity separately.
Among the various advantages of this study on predecessors, this method was relatively simple to understand for
corporate managers and easy to implement. Among its drawbacks, this scale was difficult to adopt in some industries as
it was calibrated only for athletic shoes and focused only on
ex-post brand utilities without measuring the significance
of ex-ante utilities.
To determine validity and reliability, Kocak et al. (2007)
replicated the study of Vazquez et al. (2002), with the
same brand equity dimensions, in the Turkish sports shoe
industry. Instead of the 22-item scale proposed by Vazquez
et al. (2002) which is incompatible with Turkish culture, a
16-item scale with a slight difference was found to be statistically significant. This study revealed that consumers might
approach brands differently in different cultures. In another
study, Rajh (2002) proposed a 14-item scale across four

dimensions (uniqueness of brand associations, favourability of brand associations, the strength of brand associations,
and brand awareness) to measure brand equity while using
Keller’s (1993) brand equity framework. This scale had a
couple of drawbacks: (1) a 2-item brand awareness scale,
which made it a weak instrument (Churchill 1979) and (2)
the scale was tested in only one cultural setting (Croatia) on
undergraduate students.
Numerous researchers (e.g., de Chernatony et al. 2004)
have also tried to provide industry or category-based measures for brand equity. De Chernatony et al (2004) proposed
a three-dimension brand equity construct (reputation, satisfaction, and brand loyalty) in the financial service industry.
In another study, Christodoulides et al (2006) offered brand
equity measures in the online industry. They proposed a
five-dimension e-tail brand equity scale: fulfillment, trust,
responsive service nature, online experience, and emotional
connection. Brand equity was also measured in the logistics
industry by Davis et al (2009); this study is considered to be
ground-breaking in logistic branding research. Moreover,
a five-dimension brand equity scale was developed across
different destinations (Atlantic City and Las Vegas): destination brand loyalty, destination brand value, destination brand
quality, destination brand image, and destination brand
awareness (Boo et al. 2009). Rajasekar and Nalina (2008)
developed five facets (attachments, trustworthiness, value,
social image, and performance) to measure brand equity for
a single destination.
The most important multidimensional scale for measuring
brand equity was developed by Yoo and Donthu (2001), in
line with Keller’s (1993) and Aaker’s (1991) theories. This
scale comprised three dimensions: brand associations/awareness, brand perceived quality, and brand loyalty. To assess
the convergent validity of this instrument, a composite scale
was developed separately to measure overall brand equity.
This study took a sample from multiple cultures in various
product categories to make it acceptable for both researchers
and brand managers. Nevertheless, this scale also had some
limitations. Aaker’s (1991) and Keller’s (1993) theories
were used in scale development where the authors provided
a clear distinction between brand associations and brand
awareness; however, Yoo and Donthu (2001) merged these
dimensions into one. For scale development, they collected
the data from product categories (colour televisions, athletic shoes, and camera film) and entirely ignored the service
industry, which ranks higher for brand equity.
To overcome the most serious limitation of Yoo and
Donthu’s (2001) scale, Pappu et al (2005) differentiated
between brand associations and brand awareness. However,
they did not complete the scale’s psychometric properties,
as they developed brand loyalty with two items but brand
awareness with only one item. In both studies, they used
student samples to create and validate brand equity scales,

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

which could not be considered to be key correspondents for
effective generalizability as compared to a general consumer
sample. Four dimensions (willingness to pay a premium
price, uniqueness, value for the cost, and perceived quality)
were also offered by Netemeyer et al (2004) to assess brand
equity in adult consumers. The four-dimension construct for
measuring customer-based brand equity (brand associations,
brand loyalty, perceived quality, and brand awareness) was
developed in two samples from Spain and the UK, which
supports the results in both countries (Buil et al. 2008). In a
recent study, Mohan et al (2017) conducted a pair of studies in line with Keller’s (2013) call for research on brand
functionality. The results showed a significant relationship between brand functionality, brand equity, and brand
connection.

Sustainability—missing link
Over the years, public demand has risen significantly for
environment-friendly products. Due to rising interest,
researchers have studied this phenomenon from multiple
standpoints (e.g., Van de Velde et al. 2010). Such studies have proven the close relationship of the environment
with buying behaviour (Connell et al. 2012; Ishaq 2018).
A plethora of empirical studies (Namkung and Jang 2013;
Kucukusta et al. 2013; Saari et al. 2017) and theoretical
papers (Kumar and Christodoulopoulou 2014; Gupta and
Kumar 2013) link brand management and sustainability, but
there is no coherent framework that relates to sustainability
as an aspect of the multidimensional brand equity construct.
The conceptualizations of brand equity primarily originated
from information economics and cognitive psychology. The
leading conceptual background of brand equity has been
substantiated by cognitive psychology, where researchers
focused on memory structure (Keller 1993; Aaker 1991).
The sustainability concept originated in academic literature following the deterioration of the Earth’s climate
and environment (Fadeeva 2005). The term sustainability
is defined as “an organizational practice that encourages
minimization of the energy used and efficient use of the
waste produced so that the adverse effects of the firm’s
actions on the human race can be reduced” (Eltayeb et al.
2011). Consumers’ environmental attitudes are explained
as an individual’s behaviour, feelings, and beliefs towards
eco-friendly concerns (Milfont and Duckitt 2010). Connelly et al. (2011) proposed a list of organizational theories that can be implemented in sustainability research,
i.e., signalling theory, social network theory, upper echelons theory, resource-based view, resource dependency
theory, population ecology, institutional theory, agency
theory, and transaction cost economies. Leonidou and
Leonidou (2011) argued that sustainability research has

grown exponentially in management journals, but there is
a dearth of material in marketing journals.
Kotler (2011) strongly proposed incorporating the
environmental agenda in marketing theory and practices.
Chabowski et al. (2011) are considered to be the most
influential authors in extensive sustainability-related
reviews and research in the marketing stream. They developed a sustainability capability typology that categories
classify as legal, ethical, or discretionary (intent-based
capability), environmental vs. social (emphasis-based
capability), and internal vs. external (resource-based capability). Since the last decade, we have observed numerous
moral testimonials on issues of social responsibility, sustainability, and ethics in corporate branding and communication (Kumar and Christodoulopoulou 2014; Sharma
et al. 2010; Dao et al. 2011). Since the globalization era
began, organizations have been considering sustainability
or social responsibility with keen interest and trying to
adopt them as the business case or market success (Carroll
and Shabana 2010).
In view of environmental concerns that plague the entire
planet (for example, resource depletion, air/water pollution,
habitat destruction, environmental degradation, and global
warming), consumers are actively looking for eco-friendly
products in order to make their contribution to the wellbeing of the world (Jones et al. 2016; Farber et al 2012;
Ishaq 2018). Moreover, consumers are actively making their
purchase decisions based on the company’s commitment to
the environment (Auger et al. 2010). Consequently, the concept of greening or sustainability is both growing and real
(Hartmann and Ibáñez 2006) and companies are embracing
it in their strategic planning (Kang and Hur 2012; Öberseder
et al. 2014). Saari et al (2017) conducted a cross-cultural
study to identify the eco-friendly brands in the smartphone
industry. They argued that brand experience could help companies to track the success of their sustainable initiatives.
However, there is no coherent theoretical framework
in brand management that links sustainability with brand
equity. Hence, the only way to link them is the notion of differences and consistency behind corporate brands that have
shaped brand management practices. The sustainable programme is an uneven process rather than linear. It comprises
numerous strategies that connect the corporate brand with
the decision-making process, consumer values, and social
causes (Peloza and Shang 2011), thereby establishing strong
brand equity for the eco-friendly organization. Organizations
can assess the effectiveness of sustainability implementation
in branding strategies through differentiation and the ability
to satisfy the customer (Bose and Luo 2011). Bridges and
Wilhelm (2008) contended that to manage differentiation,
organizations should persuade and educate their target market regarding societal marketing steps taken for the betterment of society.

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

Each firm adopts a unique way to communicate its green
initiatives and highlight its involvement in the ecological
health of the community; this makes it difficult for consumers to choose a suitable eco-friendly brand (Crittenden et al.
2011). So, this differentiation strategy will help organizations to build strong brand equity, which will provide consumers a product with better performance as compared to
competitors. Moreover, sustainability aspects in brand equity
can create competitive advantage, strong brand positioning,
enhance corporate image, provide the power to seize large
market share, and access to new target markets.
Sheth et al (2011) claimed that the awareness of sustainability is reached at its peak and a greater showstopper than
capital or technology. In this scenario, building sustainable
brand equity for any organization is an intimidating assignment. The sustainability role in business operations is taken
as a determinant of an organization’s capability to deliver
efficiently (Dao et al. 2011). Since environmental commitment enables an organization to achieve a green competitive advantage, the companies with low or no focus on
ecologically friendly services or products are still trying to
portray green images—an integral part of brand equity, as
per Aaker’s (1991) model. To develop a sustainable brand
image, organizations must focus on triple bottom line theory, i.e., financial, social, and environmental (or ecological). Grace and O’Cass (2002) describe the brand as a tool
that combines the social environment with the business by
establishing associations between customers and business
organizations. Brand association—the brand equity facet—
contributes to sustainability when the brand participates in
green initiatives (Chatterjee 2009). Whenever a company
communicates its green initiatives as brand communication,
consumers respond positively to it and increase confidence
in buying intentions.
Sustainability is taken as a significant predictor of examining brand equity because of active consciousness on the
part of consumers in recent years. They are familiar with
the brands that have offered healthy, sustainable, environmentally responsible, and eco-safe products, and become
more loyal. Sheth et al (2011) claimed that rising numbers
of customers worry about the environment and think about
going green, as well as reusing and recycling products. This
stage is where the sustainability dimension comes into play
to measure brand equity of traditional vs. green brands. As
established above, research indicates how sustainable practices embraced by an organization to manage its processes
become factors of its strength, being positively related to
signs of performance and competitiveness (e.g., Jacobs et al.
2010). These firms could reap additional advantages by
empowering their consumers to understand the brand-related
values and sustainability practices that have paramount influences on their lives. Brands should weigh the social and
ecological requirements of stakeholders or consumers and

communicate the methods they have adopted to create a sustainable environment and customer value.

Stakeholder orientation, branding,
and sustainability
The normative notion in marketing is to maximize the benefits for all stakeholders, including value chain participants,
governments, advocacy groups, and regulators (Chakravorti
2010). This differs from instrumental marketing, where
organizations can reap maximum profits by satisfying their
needs (Ishaq et al. 2014; Smith et al. 2010). Researchers
have claimed that the only way to move from the marketing
discipline to the stakeholder perspective is through practicing sustainability marketing (Laczniak and Murphy 2012;
Scandelius and Cohen 2016). The sustainability perspective
is based on the tripartite view—profit, planet, and people—
which received significant acceptance worldwide as a manifestation of the balanced scorecard. In this context, managing differentiation in vibrant market situations requires
firms to persuade and educate their consumers about their
welfare initiatives for the society (Bridges and Wilhelm
2008). Brands as an intangible asset of an organization may
be used as a tool to educate consumers and in designing
creative marketing techniques and effective implementation
(Day 2011).
The field of marketing has recently expanded such that
the stakeholder perspective is relatively new to it (Theodoulidis et al. 2017; Parmar et al. 2010). Marketers are still
unclear as to how stakeholder theory will be acknowledged
and applied in corporate life. Some examples indicate stakeholder theory is being put into practice, but the nature of
its implementation is triggered by external pressure and
is more instrumental rather than based on organizational
philosophy (Sheth and Sinha 2015). Branding in the sustainability paradigm can influence stakeholder perceptions
positively (Brown and Dacin 1997) and customer satisfaction (Luo and Bhattacharya 2009). Chabowski et al. (2011)
conducted a literature review on sustainability from 1958 to
2008 and found that environmental sustainability and even
economic sustainability have been growing in importance
recently, even though most of the population is living below
the poverty line. Therefore, firms should adopt sustainability
as their branding manifesto in emergent economies through
the cultural and holistic approach of considering the environment and local community (Cayla and Arnould 2008).
On the other side of the coin, organizations have had poor
direction in maintaining conflicting interests and acquiring
critical brand differentiation while communicating and leveraging their commitment, involvement, and global influence
(Kaynak and Zhou 2010; Chakravorti 2010).

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

Despite the research gap in the abovementioned areas
and the insufficiency of institutional frameworks, scientific
talent, infrastructure, and regulatory enforcement, some
renowned brands have been implementing sustainability
in their branding strategies for multiple stakeholders. For
instance, some brands are working on minimizing pollution,
waste, and resource utilization to retain consumers. Others
are working on greening the supply chain (e.g., recycling
units, waste disposal, retail stores, distribution systems, storage facilities and raw material extraction units), repairing/
recycling/remanufacturing processes, and reducing overproduction (Sharma et al. 2010). Caterpillar is investing in
poverty reduction, reduced emissions, water conservation,
energy conversation, and employee safety, and BHP Billiton devotes 1% of its profit to the development of the local
community. Many other firms are also communicating their
sustainable goals to the community, showing their commitment as moral citizens, decentralizing distribution and
production, and producing affordable, eco-friendly brands
(Hoejmose et al. 2012). Therefore, all firms should maintain
sustainability-based corporate branding strategies that are
both pervasive and programmatic. Furthermore, they should
invest in competitive conditions, socio-cultural, technological, and economical perspectives (Crane et al. 2014), especially where they impinge upon economic, environmental,
and social issues (Czinkota et al. 2014).
To address unsustainable practices in branding/marketing, firms should adhere to corporate social responsibility
strategies or corporate sustainability as a wider responsibility (Kumar and Christodoulopoulou 2014; Lindgreen
et al. 2012). The ideal collaboration among all stakeholders should form a value co-creation to ensure the societal
impact and strengthen community relationships. Given the
mounting comprehension of stakeholders in the marketing
domain, Du et al. (2010) urged that marketers should investigate stakeholder orientation of business firms in terms of
environmental, social, and economic aspects. This consideration is ethical but also a business necessity that can boost
brand reputation, market value, return on investment, firm
performance, and brand value (Kumar and Christodoulopoulou 2014). Additionally, some researchers (Sierra et al. 2017;
Balmer 2001) have claimed that the current socioeconomic
environment becomes relevant for the brands to incorporate
ethical and societal commitments at the corporate level, as
they enhance the brand’s reputation.
Firms are trying to increase their brand equity with the
help of economic sustainability and stakeholder orientation
through accessing economically disadvantaged markets to
increase market growth and local community development.
For instance, the Shell Foundation provides inexpensive
energy products, Amanco/Ashoka offers loans for farmers,
Masisa enhances carpenters’ living, Barrick finances education to increase employment prospects, and Dow provides

funding and affordable housing for community development.
Some brands also reap economic benefits from practicing
sustainability; one example is Shree Cement’s sale of lowcost electricity and reduced electric consumption. Moreover,
business-to-business firms can also build positive economic
influence by making their brands affordable, upgradable,
re-saleable, repairable, durable, multi-user, and shareable
(Sheth et al. 2011).
By engaging in social responsibility, many firms are codeveloping and coevolving national, regional, or local communities. For example, Shell Foundation has numerous partnerships with global entrepreneurs for eco-friendly, low-cost,
and innovative solutions for solar energy. This initiative has
entirely changed the communities but also linked the brand
with values such as openness towards substitute energy
sources, future-oriented entrepreneurship, and innovativeness, despite the fact that Shell’s core business is not related
to renewable energy development. In the process of partnering and networking, these businesses typically advance
business expertise, while social entrepreneurs provide deep
insights, strong social networks, and low-cost brands for
communities. BHP Billiton’s funding for sports centres and
theatres and Masisa’s work for social housing have created a
vivacious community that will only support such firms with
social business objectives; this, in return, enhances brand
reputation and brand equity.
Sheth and Sinha (2015) argued that the economic and
social status of the community drives consumption; however, this consumption damages the environment. For this
reason, the way firms offer balance and promote measures
to save the environment is notable. Some examples include
BHP Billiton starting an internal environment management
audits/programme, Shree Cements focusing on building
green power plants and dramatically lowering emissions,
Barrick’s promoting awareness initiatives for land degradation and water pollution, Masisa’s forest cover plantation,
biomass gasification by the Shell Foundation, Dow’s waste
management systems, and Amanco/Ashoka’s irrigation
techniques. These are considered some of the best examples of firms that endeavoured to better use limited natural
resources.
We believe that businesses having stakeholder orientations can address environmental, economic, and social
challenges decently after embracing sustainability for the
community they serve with eco-friendly products, advertising, and packaging. This step would enhance corporate
reputations because this perspective is not just instrumental where people managed through marketing; instead, it
is normative as well, which leads to ethical decision-making. Lai et al (2010) empirically verified the positive links
between corporate reputation and industrial brand equity
and organizational performance to the business industry. In
current brand management research, branding literature is

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

significantly shifting towards a perspective of stakeholder
co-creation, where brands are perceived as a social process
(Hult et al 2011); however, this point of view is somehow
unnoticed. Balmer and Grey (2003) asserted that branding
is considered to be an internally driven process where literature always take the managerial perspective while supposing
that customers are only passive receivers; they then react
in accordance with the organization’s will. This assessment
suggests that stakeholders are considered to be branding targets instead of co-creators or partners in branding (Gregory
2007), hence ignoring the consumers’ perceptions of brand
equity.
Recently, the stakeholder viewpoint (Zhang et al. 2016) of
brand management has been introduced. This view acknowledges the active participation and social interactions among
multiple stakeholders in branding co-creation and brand
discourse. With regard to the sustainability paradigm, Sisodia et al. (2003) conducted empirical research that used a
multiple bottom line approach on 30 firms. They found that
the stakeholder versus shareholder dichotomy is false. Moreover, the authors claimed that the organizations having a
profit orientation were not profitable most of the time; highly
profitable organizations, on the other hand, were those who
had no primarily profitable purpose. This type of orientation was coined by Philip Kotler four decades ago (Kotler
and Armstrong 2010). The organizations that failed in the
interconnection of ecosystems and stakeholders (Korschun
et al. 2014) suffered from new marketing myopia (Smith
et al. 2010). We believe that shifting brand equity’s literature
from a market orientation and customer focus to a stakeholder orientation can only be achieved with the integration
of sustainability.

Conclusion, recommendations, and future
research directions
Brooks and Rich (2016) argued that the sustainability paradigm in business operations is not mandatory. However,
the intense pressure to incorporate sustainability comes
from four sources: (1) institutional forces in the form of
expectations and norms; (2) societal stakeholders; (3) legislation, e.g., the United Nations Global Compact; and (4)
corporate stakeholders as suppliers, customers, employees, and investors (WBCSD 2000). Moreover, Stohl et al.
(2007) argued that researchers and practitioners should
reconsider sustainability as a global framework. They further argued that sustainability “is responsive to the multiple cultures, value sets, and communicative practices
of different nations while recognizing that (inter) organizational contexts are no longer bounded by the nationstate”. In line with this argument, Bondy et al. (2012) also
drew the same conclusion and contended that there is a

move towards standardization and institutionalization.
Businesses can communicate, demonstrate, and address
sustainability through external linkages and internal voluntary initiatives (Aggerholm et al. 2011). The academic
literature on sustainability is primarily focused on its policies (Chen 2010), evaluation of green marketing strategies
(Cronin et al. 2011), and diverse theoretical approaches.
Some researchers have also investigated organizations’
motives in adopting sustainability practices through
green initiatives (Sharma et al. 2010; Cronin et al. 2011),
as it enhances product value and engenders opportunities to enter into new markets (Chen 2010), the prospect
to develop reputation and favourable corporate image
(Sheth et al. 2011), links with the disposal of waste material (Tzschentke al. 2008), and pressure from government,
stakeholders, or competitors (Delmas and Toffel 2008). In
some situations, consumers are also exposed when they
must choose from a wide range of products and brands
that have different eco-friendly features. For instance, a
brand might offer a financial donation for an environmental reason (cause-related marketing), several certifications
related to the environment (green labelling), green packaging, or environmentally preferable products (Sony et al.
2015).
Chen (2010) pointed out reasons for organizations
to adopt environmental sustainability practices that are:
enhancing product value, seeking opportunities in new markets, improving corporate image, and obtaining a competitive advantage. Patagonia is considered to be a key brand
that introduced sustainability practices a long time ago and
is committed to making its products landfill-free and recyclable. Adidas, H&M, IKEA, Marks & Spencer, and Levi
Strauss reduced the amount of water usage and pesticides
after supporting Better Cotton Initiatives (BCI) (Confino
2011). Levi Strauss introduced less water consumption in
finishing off its product, and H&M exploits its Conscious
Collection brand line which is made up of recycled polyester, Tencel, organic linen, and cotton. Unilever also initiated its Sustainability Living Plan in 2011 to halve its
eco-friendly footmark by 2020. Following implementation,
Unilever reported higher business growth within one year.
General Electric’s Ecomagination Research and Development Program, a successful example of eco-friendly branding, was introduced with an extensive marketing budget for
mobile phone apps, online videos, print advertising, and TV
commercials. GE reserved a $1 billion annual budget for
this campaign and statistics have shown that GE reaped a
substantial $21 billion return in a single year. Timberland,
Walmart, IBM, and Starbucks are among the other companies that have successfully transformed themselves as sustainable brands. Hence, this study argues that implementing
eco-friendly practices could raise a firm’s sustainable brand
equities.

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	

The brand equity sustainability approach is based on
offering a differentiated product with the eco-friendly product, name, packaging, and symbols that offer green value
and functional and emotional benefits to consumers. Since a
holistic framework requires the implementation of green initiatives to become an environmentally friendly organization
(Szekely and Knirsch 2005), and acting according to rational
needs to justify its businesses (Crittenden et al. 2011), this
can become a strategic asset that can help an organization
to buy or sell at a certain price for a higher profit margin.
Rindfleisch et al. (2010) claimed that consumers are becoming more knowledgeable about how they perceive sustainability in brand and marketing strategies. Sustainable brand
equity not only directs consumers towards green branding,
but it can also deliver brand credibility during uncertainty
and crisis. Hendrickx and Nicolaij (2004) contended it is
highly unlikely that a customer will prefer traditional branding attributes like credibility, quality, and price over a sustainable branding strategy. In the meantime, consumer needs
have shifted significantly towards environmental responsibility; the implementation of such initiatives would provide a
crucial competitive advantage (Namkung and Jang 2013),
well-heeled and loyal consumers and increased price premiums (Grimmer and Bingham 2013).
The purpose of this paper is to identify the specific conceptual goals related to brand equity and sustainability as
a key dimension, segregate the conflicting paradigms, and
synthesize the contemporary approaches. The findings
identify gaps in the conceptualization of brand equity and
practice existing in the marketing/company, consumer/
financial, and consumer/company value creation domains.
Our taxonomic framework (see Fig. 1 and Table 2) indicates that several researchers pursued brand equity’s metric
approach (Ambler 2008; Yoo et al. 2000; Srinivasan et al.
2005; Ailawadi et al. 2003; Kamakura and Russell 1993;
Simon and Sullivan 1993) and conceptualization approach
(Keller and Lehmann 2006; Ambler 2008; Yoo et al. 2000;
Keller 1993; Aaker 1991; Pappu et al. 2005; Chen 2010) to
analyse the determinants of brand equity. After presenting
different typologies of brand equity existing in the literature,
we concluded there is a need for future studies that elicit a
better explanation of brand equity formation and inclusion
of new dimension(s).
There is a dearth of branding or marketing theories that
integrate sustainability as key aspects of the brand equity
model posited by various researchers, especially Aaker’s
(Aaker 1991) and Keller’s (1993) frameworks. We address
this gap by coining a new dimension in the brand equity
model, i.e., sustainability. A strong brand always enjoys
robust brand equity because it delivers meaningful and differentiated value to the consumers (Szekely and Knirsch
2005) and those brands that provide superior customer values are sustainable (Srivastava et al. 1998); we consider this

to be sustainable brand equity. As per our understanding, the
brand plays a significant role. We, therefore, suppose two
business-centric situations: (1) a sustainable brand equity
aspect has the ability to influence organizations’ operational,
management, and marketing opportunities to cater positively
to consumers’ eco-friendly demands; and (2) a sustainable
brand equity aspect can create sustainable competitive
advantage with the help of sustainability’s three dimensions, i.e., environmental protection, social well-being, and
economic development. We believe that businesses with a
stakeholder orientation are served better by the implementation of sustainability brand management strategies to address
environmental, economic, and social challenges of the community in which they operate.
We recommend future research directions that originate
from what we found in the existing literature of brand equity
that can be coupled by recourse to the future research directions, integrating sustainability in a brand equity model,
and other formats previously proposed. There is a need for
simultaneous and systemic integration among interdisciplinary topics. We propose avenues for future research that
should give rise to sustainable brand equity in the context of
stakeholder theory (company and consumer value perspective) and the societal marketing concepts proposed by Kotler in 1970s. The academic literature recommends further
research in the stakeholder and societal marketing domains.
This notion is in line with contemporary approaches (Davcik
et al. 2015; Hult et al. 2011; Iglesias et al. 2013). We assert
that the stakeholder and societal marketing concept is a significant pillar of brand equity that postulates brand equity
as the dynamic and social practice of eco-friendly brand
creation among stakeholders instead of the limited and narrow perspective at the company or consumer end. Those
organizations that are unable to create linked stakeholder
and ecosystem perspectives in their business operations are
classified as having new marketing myopia (Smith et al.
2010).
The importance of brand equity theory has been of significant interest in academic research for the last two decades; however, there is no agreement on its measurement
as a single or multidimensional construct. To study brand
equity as a multidimensional construct, we call for the
development of a comprehensive scale approach with the
integration of sustainability. There are eight contributions
in marketing literature for theory building (Yadav 2014;
MacInnis 2011). This process indicates the expansion of
knowledge develops and forms new contingencies. While
taking this approach into consideration, this conceptual
study addresses the integration and differentiation perspectives. To accumulate and integrate the brand equity’s literature for explicit conceptual objectives, based on Yadav’s
(2014) and MacInnis’s (2011) theoretical framework, we
followed three steps: (1) measurement approaches of brand

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria

equity; (2) determinants of brand equity; and (3) sources
of brand equity. The purpose behind explicit conceptual
objectives is to distinguish different approaches and combine sustainability aspects in the concept of brand equity
as a contemporary approach. This conceptual paper tries to
identify the gap not only in the theoretical model of brand
equity but also in the marketing/company, consumer/
financial, and consumer/company value creation domains
in practice. Our research on the brand equity framework
indicates that several authors provided their brand equity
framework (e.g., Keller and Lehmann 2006; Srinivasan
et al. 2005; Ailawadi et al. 2003; Yoo et al. 2000), and
none of them have tried to explore sustainability. After
analysing the giving taxonomies, we concluded that the
brand equity concept required a more theoretical foundation to address the gap, specifically in the context of sustainability. Eventually, what is pursued is an exploration
of the Holy Grail of brand management, a general and
unified theory of brand equity. The theory must encompass
not only marketing performance notions, net cash flows,
or short-term profits, but also take into account future
changes in stakeholder orientation and value propositions
that will help an organization to sustain itself in a challenging environment.

References
Aaker, David. 1991. Brand equity. La gestione del valore della marca.
Milan: FrancoAngeli.
Aaker, David A. 1996. Measuring brand equity across products and
markets. California Management Review 38(3): 102–120.
Aaker, David A., and Erich Joachimsthaler. 2012. Brand leadership.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Aaker, Jennifer L. 1997. Dimensions of brand personality. Journal of
Marketing Research 34: 347–356.
Aggerholm, H. Kryger, S. Esmann Andersen, and C. Thomsen. 2011.
Conceptualising employer branding in sustainable organisations.
Corporate Communications: An International Journal 16(2):
105–123.
Ailawadi, Kusum L., Donald R. Lehmann, and Scott A. Neslin. 2001.
Market response to a major policy change in the marketing mix:
learning from procter & gamble’s value pricing strategy. Journal
of Marketing 65(1): 44–61.
Ailawadi, K.L., D.R. Lehmann, and S.A. Neslin. 2003. Revenue premium as an outcome measure of brand equity. Journal of Marketing 67(4): 1–17.
Alniacik, U., E. Alniacik, and N. Genc. 2011. How corporate social
responsibility information influences stakeholders’ intentions.
Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management 18(4): 234–245.
Ambler, T. 2003. Marketing and the bottom line: the marketing metrics
to pump up cash flow. London: Pearson Education.
Ambler, T. 2008. Marketing metrics. In The Marketing Book,
ed. Michael J. Baker and Susan J. Hart, 6th edn. Oxford:
Butterworth-Heineman.
Ambler, T., C.B. Bhattacharya, J. Edell, K.L. Keller, K.N. Lemon,
and V. Mittal. 2002. Relating brandand customer perspectives

on marketing management. Journal of Service Research 5(1):
13–25.
Atilgan, Eda, Safak Aksoy, and Serkan Akinci. 2005. Determinants of
the brand equity: a verification approach in the beverage industry
in Turkey. Marketing Intelligence & Planning 23(3): 237–248.
Auger, Pat, Timothy M. Devinney, Jordan J. Louviere, and Paul F.
Burke. 2010. The importance of social product attributes in consumer purchasing decisions: a multi-country comparative study.
International Business Review 19(2): 140–159.
Baalbaki, Sally, and Francisco Guzmán. 2016. A consumer-perceived
consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of Brand Management 23(3): 229–251.
Balmer, J.M. 2001. Corporate identity, corporate branding and corporate marketing-Seeing through the fog. European Journal of
Marketing 35(3/4): 248–291.
Balmer, J.M., and E.R. Gray. 2003. Corporate brands: what are
they? What of them? European Journal of Marketing 37(7/8):
972–997.
Bekk, M., M. Spörrle, R. Hedjasie, and R. Kerschreiter. 2016. Greening the competitive advantage: antecedents and consequences
of green brand equity. Quality & Quantity 50(4): 1727–1746.
Berthon, J.P., Capon, Noel, Hulbert, J., Murgolo-Poore, N.J., Pitt,
L., and Keating, Sharon. 2001. Organizational and customer
perspectives on brand equity: issues for managers and researchers. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the ANZMAC
Conference.
Bondy, K., J. Moon, and D. Matten. 2012. An institution of corporate social responsibility (CSR) in multi-national corporations
(MNCs): Form and implications. Journal of Business Ethics
111(2): 281–299.
Boo, S., J. Busser, and S. Baloglu. 2009. A model of customer-based
brand equity and its application to multiple destinations. Tourism
Management 30(2): 219–231.
Boone, L.E., C.M. Kochunny, and D. Wilkins. 1995. Applying the
brand equity concept to Major League Baseball. Sport Marketing
Quarterly 4(3): 33–42.
Bose, Ranjit, and Xin Luo. 2011. Integrative framework for assessing
firms’ potential to undertake Green IT initiatives via virtualization–a theoretical perspective. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 20(1): 38–54.
Bridges, Claudia M., and Wendy Bryce Wilhelm. 2008. Going beyond
green: the “why and how” of integrating sustainability into the
marketing curriculum. Journal of Marketing Education 30(1):
33–46.
Brooks, A., and H. Rich. 2016. Sustainable construction and socio‐
technical transitions in London’s mega-projects. The Geographical Journal 182(4): 395–405.
Brown, Tom J., and Peter A. Dacin. 1997. The company and the product: corporate associations and consumer product responses. The
Journal of Marketing 61: 68–84.
Brucks, M., and V.A. Zeithaml. 1991. Price and Brand Name as Indicators of Quality Dimensions. Marketing Science Institute.
Buil, Isabel, Leslie de Chernatony, and Eva Martinez. 2008. A crossnational validation of the consumer-based brand equity scale.
Journal of Product & Brand Management 17(6): 384–392.
Carroll, Archie B., and Kareem M. Shabana. 2010. The business case
for corporate social responsibility: a review of concepts, research
and practice. International Journal of Management Reviews
12(1): 85–105.
Cayla, Julien, and Eric J. Arnould. 2008. A cultural approach to branding in the global marketplace. Journal of International Marketing
16(4): 86–112.
Chabowski, Brian R., Jeannette A. Mena, and Tracy L. GonzalezPadron. 2011. The structure of sustainability research in marketing, 1958–2008: a basis for future research opportunities.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 39(1): 55–70.

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	
Chakravorti, B. 2010. Stakeholder Marketing 2.0. Journal of public
policy & marketing 29(1): 97–102.
Chang, Ching-Hsun, and Yu-Shan Chen. 2014. Managing green brand
equity: the perspective of perceived risk theory. Quality & Quantity 48(3): 1753–1768.
Chatterjee, Anjan K. 2009. Sustainable construction and green buildings on the foundation of building ecology. Indian Concrete
Journal 83(5): 27–30.
Chen, Yu-Shan. 2010. The drivers of green brand equity: green brand
image, green satisfaction, and green trust. Journal of Business
Ethics 93(2): 307–319.
Chen, C.F., and Y.Y. Chang. 2008. Airline brand equity, brand preference, and purchase intentions—The moderating effects of switching costs. Journal of Air Transport Management 14(1): 40–42.
Chen, Y.S., and C.H. Chang. 2013. Greenwash and green trust: The
mediation effects of green consumer confusion and green perceived risk. Journal of Business Ethics 114(3): 489–500.
Christodoulides, George, and Leslie De Chernatony. 2010. Consumerbased brand equity conceptualization and measurement: a literature review. International Journal of Research in Marketing
52(1): 43–66.
Christodoulides, George, de Chernatony, Leslie, and Furrer, Olivier.
(2015). Moving away from short-term performance measurement
online: a new metric of brand equity. Paper Presented at the
Proceedings of the 2007 Academy of Marketing Science (AMS)
Annual Conference.
Christodoulides, George, Leslie De Chernatony, Olivier Furrer, Eric
Shiu, and Temi Abimbola. 2006. Conceptualising and measuring
the equity of online brands. Journal of Marketing Management
22(7–8): 799–825.
Churchill Jr., G.A. 1979. A paradigm for developing better measures
of marketing constructs. Journal of Marketing Research 16(1):
64–73.
Cobb-Walgren, Cathy J., Cynthia A. Ruble, and Naveen Donthu. 1995.
Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase intent. Journal of
Advertising 24(3): 25–40.
Confino, Jo. (2011). Puma world’s first major company to put a value
on its environmental impact. The Sustainable Business Blog,
The Guardian. Available at http://www.guard​ian.co.uk/susta​
inabl​e-busin​ess/puma-value​-envir​onmen​tal-impac​tbiod​ivers​ity.
Accessed 13 Sept 2015.
Connelly, Brian L., Ketchen Jr, J. David, and Stanley F. Slater. 2011.
Toward a “theoretical toolbox” for sustainability research in
marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
39(1): 86–100.
Crittenden, Victoria L., William F. Crittenden, Linda K. Ferrell, O.C.
Ferrell, and Christopher C. Pinney. 2011. Market-oriented sustainability: a conceptual framework and propositions. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 39(1): 71–85.
Cronin Jr., J., Smith Joseph, S. Jeffery, Mark R. Gleim, Edward Ramirez, and Jennifer Dawn Martinez. 2011. Green marketing strategies: an examination of stakeholders and the opportunities
they present. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
39(1): 158–174.
Dao, Viet, Ian Langella, and Jerry Carbo. 2011. From green to sustainability: information technology and an integrated sustainability framework. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 20(1): 63–79.
Davcik, Nebojsa S., Rui da Vinhas Silva, and Joe F. Hair. 2015.
Towards a unified theory of brand equity: conceptualizations,
taxonomy and avenues for future research. Journal of Product
& Brand Management 24(1): 3–17.
Davis, Donna F., Susan L. Golicic, and Adam Marquardt. 2009.
Measuring brand equity for logistics services. The International Journal of Logistics Management 20(2): 201–212.

Day, G.S. 2011. Closing the marketing capabilities gap. Journal of
Marketing 75(4): 183–195.
De Chernatony, Leslie, Fiona Harris, and George Christodoulides.
2004. Developing a brand performance measure for financial
services brands. The Service Industries Journal 24(2): 15–33.
Delmas, M.A., and M.W. Toffel. 2008. Organizational responses to
environmental demands: Opening the black box. Strategic Management Journal 29(10): 1027–1055.
do Paço, Arminda M.Finisterra, Mário Lino Barata Raposo, and
Walter Leal Filho. 2009. Identifying the green consumer: a
segmentation study. Journal of Targeting, Measurement and
Analysis for Marketing 17(1): 17–25.
Du, S., C.B. Bhattacharya, and S. Sen. 2010. Maximizing business
returns to corporate social responsibility (CSR): The role of CSR
communication. International Journal of Management Reviews
12(1): 8–19.
Eltayeb, Tarig K., Suhaiza Zailani, and T. Ramayah. 2011. Green
supply chain initiatives among certified companies in Malaysia
and environmental sustainability: investigating the outcomes.
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 55(5): 495–506.
Erdem, T., and J. Swait. 1998. Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of consumer Psychology 7(2): 131–157.
Fadeeva, Zinaida. 2005. Promise of sustainability collaboration—
potential fulfilled? Journal of Cleaner Production 13(2):
165–174.
Farber Canziani, Bonnie, Sönmez Sevil, Yuchin Hsieh, and Erick
T. Byrd. 2012. A learning theory framework for sustainability
education in tourism. Journal of Teaching in Travel & Tourism
12(1): 3–20.
Farquhar, P.H. 1989. Managing brand equity. Marketing Research 1(3):
24–33.
Farquhar, Peter H, Han, Julia Y, and Ijiri, Yuji. 1991. Recognizing
and measuring brand assets. Report/Marketing Science Institute (USA).
French, A., and G. Smith. 2013. Measuring brand association strength:
a consumer based brand equity approach. European Journal of
Marketing 47(8): 1356–1367.
Funk, Karina. 2003. Sustainability and performance. MIT Sloan
Management Review 44(2): 65.
Gladden, J.M., and D.C. Funk. 2002. Developing an understanding
of brand associations in team sport: empirical evidence from
consumers of professional sport. Journal of Sport Management
16(1): 54–81.
Gladden, J.M., G.R. Milne, and W.A. Sutton. 1998. A conceptual
framework for assessing brand equity in Division I college athletics. Journal of Sport Management 12(1): 1–19.
Grace, Debra, and Aron O’Cass. 2002. Brand associations: looking
through the eye of the beholder. Qualitative Market Research:
An International Journal 5(2): 96–111.
Gregory, A. 2007. Involving stakeholders in developing corporate
brands: the communication dimension. Journal of Marketing
Management 23(1–2): 59–73.
Grimmer, Martin, and Timothy Bingham. 2013. Company environmental performance and consumer purchase intentions. Journal of Business Research 66(10): 1945–1953.
Gupta, Suraksha, and V. Kumar. 2013. Sustainability as corporate
culture of a brand for superior performance. Journal of World
Business 48(3): 311–320.
Hartmann, Patrick, and Vanessa Apaolaza Ibáñez. 2006. Green value
added. Marketing Intelligence & Planning 24(7): 673–680.
Hegner, Sabrina M., Ardion D. Beldad, and Sjarlot Kamphuis op
Heghuis. 2014. How company responses and trusting relationships protect brand equity in times of crises. Journal of Brand
Management 21(5): 429–445.
Hendrickx, Laurie, and Sietske Nicolaij. 2004. Temporal discounting
and environmental risks: the role of ethical and loss-related

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria
concerns. Journal of Environmental Psychology 24(4):
409–422.
Hiller, Connel, Y. Kim, and Joy M. Kozar. 2012. Sustainability knowledge and behaviors of apparel and textile undergraduates. International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education 13(4):
394–407.
Hoejmose, Stefan, Stephen Brammer, and Andrew Millington. 2012.
“Green” supply chain management: the role of trust and top management in B2B and B2C markets. Industrial Marketing Management 41(4): 609–620.
Hult, G.Tomas M., Jeannette A. Mena, O.C. Ferrell, and Linda Ferrell. 2011. Stakeholder marketing: a definition and conceptual
framework. AMS Review 1(1): 44–65.
Iglesias, Oriol, Nicholas Ind, and Manuel Alfaro. 2013. The organic
view of the brand: a brand value co-creation model. Journal of
Brand Management 20(8): 670–688.
Ishaq, M.I. 2018. Testing sustainable consumption behavior in Italy and
Pakistan. European Journal of Business Science and Technology
4(1): 93–104.
Ishaq, Muhammad Ishtiaq, Nazia Hussain, Ali Ijaz Asim, and Luqman
J. Cheema. 2014. Brand equity in the Pakistani hotel industry.
Revista de Administração de Empresas 54(3): 284–295.
Jacobs, Brian W., Vinod R. Singhal, and Ravi Subramanian. 2010. An
empirical investigation of environmental performance and the
market value of the firm. Journal of Operations Management
28(5): 430–441.
Jones, Peter, David Hillier, Daphne Comfort, and Fevzi Okumus. 2016.
Sustainability in the hospitality industry: some personal reflections on corporate challenges and research agendas. International
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 28(1): 36–67.
Jourdan, Philippe. 2002. Measuring brand equity: proposal for conceptual and methodological improvements. Advances in Consumer
Research 29(1): 290–298.
Jung, Jaehee, and Eunyoung Sung. 2008. Consumer-based brand
equity: comparisons among Americans and South Koreans in
the USA and South Koreans in Korea. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal 12(1): 24–35.
Kamakura, Wagner A., and Gary J. Russell. 1993. Measuring brand
value with scanner data. International Journal of Research in
Marketing 10(1): 9–22.
Kang, Seongho, and Won-Moo Hur. 2012. Investigating the antecedents of green brand equity: a sustainable development perspective. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management 19(5): 306–316.
Kaynak, Erdener, and Lianxi Zhou. 2010. Special issue on brand
equity, branding, and marketing communications in emerging
markets. Journal of Global Marketing 23(3): 171–176.
Keller, Kevin Lane. 1993. Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing
customer-based brand equity. The Journal of Marketing 57: 1–22.
Keller, Kevin Lane. 2003. Brand synthesis: the multidimensionality of brand knowledge. Journal of Consumer Research 29(4):
595–600.
Keller, Kevin Lane. 2013. Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand
Equity. Pearson.
Keller, Kevin Lane, and Lehmann, Donald R. 2006. Measuring brand
equity. In Handbook of Marketing Research—Do’s and Don’ts.
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Keller, Kevin Lane, M.G. Parameswaran, and Isaac Jacob. 2011. Strategic brand management: Building, measuring, and managing
brand equity. Bangalore: Pearson Education.
Kocak, Akin, Temi Abimbola, and Alper Özer. 2007. Consumer brand
equity in a cross-cultural replication: an evaluation of a scale.
Journal of Marketing Management 23(1–2): 157–173.
Korschun, D., C.B. Bhattacharya, and S.D. Swain. 2014. Corporate social responsibility, customer orientation, and the job

performance of frontline employees. Journal of Marketing 78(3):
20–37.
Kotler, P. 2011. Reinventing marketing to manage the environmental
imperative. Journal of Marketing 75(4): 132–135.
Kotler, P., and G. Armstrong. 2010. Principles of marketing. Pearson
education.
Kucukusta, Deniz, Amy Mak, and Xavier Chan. 2013. Corporate social
responsibility practices in four and five-star hotels: perspectives
from Hong Kong visitors. International Journal of Hospitality
Management 34: 19–30.
Kumar, V., and Angeliki Christodoulopoulou. 2014. Sustainability and
branding: an integrated perspective. Industrial Marketing Management 43(1): 6–15.
Laczniak, Gene R., and Patrick E. Murphy. 2012. Stakeholder theory
and marketing: moving from a firm-centric to a societal perspective. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 31(2): 284–292.
Lai, Chi-Shiun, Chih-Jen Chiu, Chin-Fang Yang, and Da-Chang Pai.
2010. The effects of corporate social responsibility on brand
performance: the mediating effect of industrial brand equity
and corporate reputation. Journal of Business Ethics 95(3):
457–469.
Lassar, Walfried, Banwari Mittal, and Arun Sharma. 1995. Measuring
customer-based brand equity. Journal of Consumer Marketing
12(4): 11–19.
Leonidou, Constantinos N., and Leonidas C. Leonidou. 2011. Research
into environmental marketing/management: a bibliographic analysis. European Journal of Marketing 45(1/2): 68–103.
Leuthesser, Lance, Chiranjeev S. Kohli, and Katrin R. Harich. 1995.
Brand equity: the halo effect measure. European Journal of Marketing 29(4): 57–66.
Lindgreen, Adam, Martin K. Hingley, David B. Grant, and Robert E.
Morgan. 2012. Value in business and industrial marketing: past,
present, and future. Industrial Marketing Management 41(1):
207–214.
Lintukangas, K., J. Hallikas, and A.K. Kähkönen. 2015. The role of
green supply management in the development of sustainable supply chain. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental
Management 22(6): 321–333.
Lubin, David A., and Daniel C. Esty. 2010. The sustainability imperative. Harvard Business Review 88(5): 42–50.
Luo, Xueming, and Chitra Bhanu Bhattacharya. 2009. The debate over
doing good: corporate social performance, strategic marketing
levers, and firm-idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Marketing 73(6):
198–213.
MacInnis, Deborah J. 2011. A framework for conceptual contributions
in marketing. Journal of Marketing 75(4): 136–154.
Martin, Greg S., and Tom J. Brown. 1990. In search of brand equity:
the conceptualization and measurement of the brand impression
construct. Marketing Theory and Applications 2(1): 431–438.
Milfont, Taciano L., and John Duckitt. 2010. The environmental
attitudes inventory: a valid and reliable measure to assess the
structure of environmental attitudes. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 30(1): 80–94.
Mizik, Natalie, and Robert Jacobson. 2008. The financial value impact
of perceptual brand attributes. Journal of Marketing Research
45(1): 15–32.
Mohan, M., F.R. Jiménez, B.P. Brown, and C. Cantrell. 2017. Brand
skill: linking brand functionality with consumer-based brand
equity. Journal of Product & Brand Management 26(5):
477–491.
Motameni, Reza, and Manuchehr Shahrokhi. 1998. Brand equity valuation: a global perspective. Journal of Product & Brand Management 7(4): 275–290.
Namkung, Y., and S.S. Jang. 2013. Effects of restaurant green practices on brand equity formation: do green practices really matter?
International Journal of Hospitality Management 33: 85–95.

Sustainability countenance in brand equity: a critical review and future research directions﻿	
Netemeyer, Richard G., Balaji Krishnan, Chris Pullig, Guangping
Wang, Mehmet Yagci, Dwane Dean, and Ferdinand Wirth. 2004.
Developing and validating measures of facets of customer-based
brand equity. Journal of Business Research 57(2): 209–224.
Ng, Pui Fong, Muhammad Mohsin Butt, Kok Wei Khong, and Fon
Sim Ong. 2014. Antecedents of green brand equity: an integrated
approach. Journal of Business Ethics 121(2): 203–215.
Nidumolu, Ram, Coimbatore K. Prahalad, and Madhavan R. Rangaswami. 2009. Why sustainability is now the key driver of innovation. Harvard Business Review 87(9): 56–64.
Öberseder, Magdalena, Bodo B. Schlegelmilch, Patrick E. Murphy,
and Verena Gruber. 2014. Consumers’ perceptions of corporate
social responsibility: scale development and validation. Journal
of Business Ethics 124(1): 101–115.
Oliver, Jason D., and Seung-Hee Lee. 2010. Hybrid car purchase intentions: a cross-cultural analysis. Journal of Consumer Marketing
27(2): 96–103.
Pappu, Ravi, Pascale G. Quester, and Ray W. Cooksey. 2005. Consumer-based brand equity: improving the measurement-empirical evidence. Journal of Product & Brand Management 14(3):
143–154.
Park, Chan Su, and Veena Srinivasan. 1994. A survey-based method for
measuring and understanding brand equity and its extendibility.
Journal of Marketing Research 31: 271–288.
Parmar, Bidhan L., R.Edward Freeman, Jeffrey S. Harrison, Andrew C.
Wicks, Lauren Purnell, and Simone De Colle. 2010. Stakeholder
theory: the state of the art. Academy of Management Annals 4(1):
403–445.
Peloza, John, and Jingzhi Shang. 2011. How can corporate social
responsibility activities create value for stakeholders? A systematic review. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
39(1): 117–135.
Pickett-Baker, Josephine, and Ritsuko Ozaki. 2008. Pro-environmental
products: marketing influence on consumer purchase decision.
Journal of Consumer Marketing 25(5): 281–293.
Rajasekar, N., and K.G. Nalina. 2008. Measuring customer-based brand
equity in durable goods industry. Journal of Marketing & Communication 4(1): 48–58.
Rajh, E. 2002. Development of a scale for measuring customer-based
brand equity. Ekonomski Pregled 53(7–8): 770–781.
Rea, Brianna, J. Wang Yong, and Jason Stoner. 2014. When a brand
caught fire: the role of brand equity in product-harm crisis. Journal of Product & Brand Management 23(7): 532–542.
Reynolds, Thomas J., and Carol B. Phillips. 2005. In search of true
brand equity metrics: all market share ain’t created equal. Journal
of Advertising Research 45(02): 171–186.
Rindfleisch, Aric, Wong, Nancy, and Burroughs, James E. 2010. God
& Mammon: The influence of religiosity on brand connections.
The connected customer: The changing nature of consumer and
business markets, 163–202
Rios, Rosa E., and Hernan E. Riquelme. 2008. Brand equity for online
companies. Marketing Intelligence & Planning 26(7): 719–742.
Romaniuk, Jenni, and Magda Nenycz-Thiel. 2013. Behavioral brand
loyalty and consumer brand associations. Journal of Business
Research 66(1): 67–72.
Royne, Marla B., Marian Levy, and Jennifer Martinez. 2011. The public health implications of consumers’ environmental concern and
their willingness to pay for an eco-friendly product. Journal of
Consumer Affairs 45(2): 329–343.
Saari, U.A., R.J. Baumgartner, and S.J. Mäkinen. 2017. Eco-friendly
brands to drive sustainable development: replication and extension of the brand experience scale in a cross-national context.
Sustainability 9(7): 1286.
Saji, K.B., Steven Isberg, and Dennis Pitta. 2013. Using financial analysis to assess brand equity. Journal of Product & Brand Management 22(1): 65–78.

Schau, Hope Jensen, Muñiz Jr, M. Albert, and Eric J. Arnould. 2009.
How brand community practices create value. Journal of Marketing 73(5): 30–51.
Schouten, John W., James H. McAlexander, and Harold F. Koenig.
2007. Transcendent customer experience and brand community.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 35(3): 357–368.
Schubert, Franziska, Jay Kandampully, David Solnet, and Anna Kralj.
2010. Exploring consumer perceptions of green restaurants in the
US. Tourism and Hospitality Research 10(4): 286–300.
Shankar, Venkatesh, Pablo Azar, and Matthew Fuller. 2008. Practice
prize paper-BRAN* EQT: a multicategory brand equity model
and its application at allstate. Marketing Science 27(4): 567–584.
Sharma, Arun, Gopalkrishnan R. Iyer, Anuj Mehrotra, and R. Krishnan.
2010. Sustainability and business-to-business marketing: a
framework and implications. Industrial Marketing Management
39(2): 330–341.
Sheth, Jagdish N., and Mona Sinha. 2015. B2B branding in emerging markets: a sustainability perspective. Industrial Marketing
Management 51: 79–88.
Sheth, Jagdish N., Nirmal K. Sethia, and Shanthi Srinivas. 2011. Mindful consumption: a customer-centric approach to sustainability.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 39(1): 21–39.
Sierra, V., O. Iglesias, S. Markovic, and J.J. Singh. 2017. Does ethical
image build equity in corporate services brands? The influence
of customer perceived ethicality on affect, perceived quality, and
equity. Journal of Business Ethics 144(3): 661–676.
Simon, Carol J., and Mary W. Sullivan. 1993. The measurement and
determinants of brand equity: a financial approach. Marketing
science 12(1): 28–52.
Sinclair, Roger Neville, and Kevin Lane Keller. 2014. A case for brands
as assets: acquired and internally developed. Journal of Brand
Management 21(4): 286–302.
Sisodia, R., D. Wolfe, and J.N. Sheth. 2003. Firms of endearment:
How world-class companies profit from passion and purpose.
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Smith, N.Craig, Minette E. Drumwright, and Mary C. Gentile. 2010.
The new marketing myopia. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 29(1): 4–11.
Sony, Alisa, David Ferguson, and Rian Beise-Zee. 2015. How to go
green: unraveling green preferences of consumers. Asia-Pacific
Journal of Business Administration 7(1): 56–72.
Srinivasan, Venkatachary. 1979. Network models for estimating brandspecific effects in multi-attribute marketing models. Management
Science 25(1): 11–21.
Srinivasan, V., C.S. Park, and D.R. Chang. 2005. An approach to the
measurement, analysis, and prediction of brand equity and its
sources. Management Science 51(9): 1433–1448.
Sriram, Srinivasaraghavan, and Manohar U. Kalwani. 2007. Optimal
advertising and promotion budgets in dynamic markets with
brand equity as a mediating variable. Management Science 53(1):
46–60.
Srivastava, Rajendra K., and Allan D. Shocker. 1991. Brand equity:
a perspective on its meaning and measurement. Massachusetts:
Marketing Science Institute.
Srivastava, R.K., T.A. Shervani, and L. Fahey. 1998. Market-based
assets and shareholder value: A framework for analysis. Journal
of Marketing 62(1): 2–18.
Stohl, C., M. Stohl, and L. Popova. 2007. A new generation of global
corporate codes of ethics. In Annual conference of International
Communication Association, San Francisco, CA.
Suder, Gabriele, and David A.C. Suder. 2013. The effect of macroeconomic threats on brand value and ranking: insights from 10 years
of fluctuations. Journal of Brand Management 20(4): 309–324.
Swait, Joffre, Tulin Erdem, Jordan Louviere, and Chris Dubelaar. 1993.
The equalization price: a measure of consumer-perceived brand

M. I. Ishaq, E. Di Maria
equity. International Journal of Research in Marketing 10(1):
23–45.
Szekely, Francisco, and Marianna Knirsch. 2005. Responsible leadership and corporate social responsibility: metrics for sustainable
performance. European Management Journal 23(6): 628–647.
Theodoulidis, Babis, David Diaz, Federica Crotto, and Elisa Rancati.
2017. Exploring corporate social responsibility and financial performance through stakeholder theory in the tourism industries.
Tourism Management 62: 173–188.
Thorndike, E.L. 1920. A constant error in psychological ratings. Journal of Applied Psychology 4(1): 25–29.
Tolba, A., and S. Hassan. 2009. Linking customer-based brand equity
with brand market performance: a managerial approach. Journal
of Product & Brand Management 18(5): 356–366.
Tzschentke, N., D. Kirk, and P. Lynch. 2008. Ahead of their time?
Barriers to action in green tourism firms. The Service Industries
Journal 28(2): 167–178.
Van de Velde, Liesbeth, Wim Verbeke, Michael Popp, and Huylenbroeck Van Guido. 2010. The importance of message framing
for providing information about sustainability and environmental
aspects of energy. Energy Policy 38(10): 5541–5549.
Vázquez, Rodolfo, A.Belen Del Rio, and Victor Iglesias. 2002. Consumer-based brand equity: development and validation of a measurement instrument. Journal of Marketing management 18(1–2):
27–48.
Veloutsou, C., and G. Christodoulides. 2010. Brand equity: does personality congruency matter?
Veloutsou, Cleopatra, George Christodoulides, and Leslie de Chernatony. 2013. A taxonomy of measures for consumer-based brand
equity: drawing on the views of managers in Europe. Journal of
Product & Brand Management 22(3): 238–248.
Veloutsou, Cleopatra, Cleopatra Veloutsou, Francisco Guzman, and
Francisco Guzmán. 2017. The evolution of brand management
thinking over the last 25 years as recorded in the Journal of Product and Brand Management. Journal of Product & Brand Management 26(1): 2–12.
Voss, K.E., and B.S. Gammoh. 2004. Building brands through brand
alliances: does a second ally help? Marketing Letters 15(2–3):
147–159.
Washburn, Judith H., and Richard E. Plank. 2002. Measuring brand
equity: an evaluation of a consumer-based brand equity scale.
Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 10(1): 46–62.
WBCSD. 2000. Corporate social responsibility. Available at https​://
www.wbcsd​.org/conte​ntwbc​/downl​oad/1746/21728​. Retrieved
on July 23, 2015.
Winters, Lewis C. 1991. Brand equity measures: some recent advances.
Marketing Research 3(4): 70.
Yadav, Manjit S. 2014. Enhancing theory development in marketing.
AMS Review 4(1–2): 1–4.

Yoo, B., and N. Donthu. 1997. Developing and validating a consumerbased overall brand equity scale for Americans and Koreans: an
extension of Aaker’s and Keller’s conceptualizations. In AMA
summer educators conference, Chicago.
Yoo, Boonghee, and Naveen Donthu. 2001. Developing and validating
a multidimensional consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal
of Business Research 52(1): 1–14.
Yoo, B., N. Donthu, and S. Lee. 2000. An examination of selected marketing mix elements and brand equity. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 28(2): 195–211.
Zhang, Jing, Yanxin Jiang, Rizwan Shabbir, and Mingfei Du. 2015.
Building industrial brand equity by leveraging firm capabilities
and co-creating value with customers. Industrial Marketing Management 51: 47–58.
Zhang, J., Y. Jiang, R. Shabbir, and M. Zhu. 2016. How brand orientation impacts B2B service brand equity? An empirical study
among Chinese firms. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing 31(1): 83–98.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Muhammad Ishtiaq Ishaq is working as Assistant Professor at Imperial
College of Business Studies Lahore, Pakistan. He completed his Ph.D.
from University of Padova, Italy. His area of interests are corporate
social responsibility, sustainability, sustainable consumption, green
branding, and ethical behavior.
Eleonora Di Maria, Ph.D. in Organization and Business management,
Associate Professor in Business Management, University of Padova,
Department of Economics and Management “Marco Fanno” - DSEA,
Padova (Italy). From November 2017 Director of the Master program
in Entrepreneurship and Innovation at DSEA. Her research focuses on
innovation and digital transformation of firms, internationalization and
sustainability strategies of firms and local economic systems, as well as
on evolutionary trends of knowledge-intensive business services. She
has been involved in many national and international projects as principal investigator or research partner. Her research has been published
in international books (Routledge, Oxford University Press, Palgrave)
and journals such as Research Policy, Industry & Innovation, Business Strategy & the Environment, Journal of Knowledge Management,
International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, European
Planning Studies.

