114

Building a Brand:
The Saturn Story

David A. Aaker

On January 7 of 1985, Saturn Corporation was announced by General

Motors' Chairman Roger Smith, who called it "the key to GM's
long-term competitiveness, survival, and success as a domestic pro 

ducer.'" Its mission, in part, was to market compact vehicles "developed
and manufactured in the U.S. that are world leaders in quality, cost, and
customer satisfaction."! Saturn was not only an ambitious undertaking for
General Motors, but a critical one in light of the major inroads that imports
had made, especially in compact vehicles. The import competitors, who
had relentlessly increased their quality over time, represented a significant
challenge to General Motors. The Saturn project was pursued at a time
when many felt that U.S. manufacturers had no chance to make world-class
compact cars and GM had itself aborted several efforts to do so.

After two years on the market, the initial results of the Saturn project are

in. Saturn has built from scratch one of the strongest brands in the U.S.,
suggesting comparisons with the Ford Mustang of the 1960s, the Ford Pinto
of the 1970s, and the Ford Taurus of the 1980s. However, building a brand
may not be as difficult as maintaining its momentum tactically and man 
aging it strategically. In Saturn's case, success creates its own problems
and options.

Saturn: A Strong Brand?

There are no generally accepted measures of brand equity. However, several
brand equity conceptualizations do have measurement implications. One is
that a strong brand should demonstrate market leadership as measured by
sales or market share. Two leading brand equity researchers, Jean-Noel
Kaupferer in Europe and Larry Light in New York, both use market leader 
ship as a basis of a brand strength definition. 3 The editors of Brandweek

Building a Brand: Till' Saturn Story

115

support this perspective by using sales as the measure of brand strength in
their annual SuperBrands analysis.

In terms of sales, it can be argued that Saturn achieved a leadership posi 

tion. Saturn sold 196,126cars during its second year, 1992, which made it
the tenth highest selling brand out of some 200 plus brand names-the
fourth highest if fleet and cash rebate sales are excluded. Sales would have
been substantially higher had there not been production limitations. At the
end of the 1992 model year, there was a five-day Saturn inventory in a
market where virtually all other brands were awash with cars and shouting
about deals and promotions. Further, because Saturn sold substantially
more cars per dealer in 1992 than competitors (Saturn had 225 dealers vs.
approximately 800 for Honda, 1,000 for Toyota, and many more for Ford
and Chevrolet), it can be argued that Saturn was the leading brand in
regional and local markets.

A second common perspective on brand equity is that it reflects the price
premium that people are prepared to pay for the brand name. Peter Farquhar
is among several who have defined brand equity as the added value that a
brand endows a product. 4 One operationalization of this perspective is to
estimate the price premium associated with the brand usually based upon
some variant of conjoint analysis.' The issue is whether the brand is buying
sales by discounting or is able to maintain a price premium with respect to
its direct competitors.

There are several indicators that Saturn was strong with regard to the
price premium measure. First, first-year showroom visitors, intercepted
before they saw the sticker price, estimated the Saturn price would be three
to five thousand more than it actually was. b Second, two studies found that
Saturn was either the most valued franchise in the industry or second only
to Lexus.' This appraisal by dealers would have been unlikely if Saturn had
not achieved above average margins. Third, with a sticker price comparable
to the competition, Saturn successfully eliminated price haggling, dealing,
discounts, and rebates-an incredible achievement given the times. Of
course, this policy was one of the factors behind the Saturn brand strength.
However, the fact that the policy was successfully implemented was an indi 
cator that Saturn had developed a strong brand-the policy would not have
been feasible otherwise.

To appreciate this achievement, it is useful to view it in perspective.
In virtually every industry from airlines to pet food, brands-even strong
brands with few competitors (e. g., Coke and Pepsi)-have been unable to
break out of a price-promotion, price-dealing environment. The automobile
industry has long suffered from pervasive price haggling in the dealership,
which has focused attention on price at the point of decision. During the
past ten years, company-sponsored debilitating price discounts and rebates
have worsened. In 1992, for example, over 60% of the Taurus sales were
made with a cash discount or involved heavily discounted fleet sales. Only

116

CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

a few years ago, nobody would have predicted that a major automobile
brand would step away from this practice. Further, no one would have
expected that the brand that did would not be a European or upscale brand.
In fact, it was not Lexus, BMW, Acura, Lincoln, or Cadillac, but rather a
General Motors compact.

In the book Managing Brand Equity, I have suggested that brand equity
is based upon four sets of assets-perceived quality, brand loyalty, brand
awareness, and brand associations (e.g., economical, for the young, a
friend)-and that each needs to be measured in context. H

The J.D. Power measures of customer response to their new car purchase

reflect both perceived quality and customer loyalty. Saturn was fourth (be 
hind Lexus, Infinity, and Cadillac) in the 1992 J.D. Power Sales Satisfac 
tion Index, which measures reactions to the salesperson, delivery activities,
and initial product condition. Further, Saturn was third in the 1992 J.D.
Power Customer Satisfaction Index, the CSI, which examines product
quality and dealer service after one year of ownership. The two brands that
exceeded Saturn on the 1992 CSI, Lexus and Infinity, had sticker prices
substantially higher than that of Saturn."

Another measure of perceived quality comes from the resale market.
The suggested retail price of a 1991 Saturn in the Fall of 1993 averaged 5%
above the original list price, whereas those of the Honda Civic averaged
5% below their original list price. The resale prices of the 1991 Toyota and
Nissan models reflected substantially more depreciation. 10

In-house customer surveys provide more direct measures of loyalty. Over

95% of the Saturn buyers said they would enthusiastically recommend the
car and the retailer to others, a percentage higher than that found for owners
of Lexus, Mercedes, or Infinity. II A similar percentage believed the car was
superior or equal to the Japanese imports.

A series of anecdotes suggests that some Saturn owners felt intense loy 
alty toward their car. One dealer attached Polaroid pictures of car owners to
the wall. Car owners who bought the car before the picture program began
insisted that their picture be added to the rest. One couple got married in
their Saturn. Saturn owners have volunteered their time to show Saturns
at car shows. There is a Saturn Groupies interest group on Prodigy.
Such anecdotes are reminiscent of the VW Beetle phenomenon of the
1960s.

Saturn was successful at building awareness and associations. The aided

awareness among the target segment started at under 1%, went to 40% a
few months after launch and reached 79% a year later. Unaided awareness
was at 14% at the end of 1992, just behind Dodge and Pontiac and ahead of
Mazda, Mitsubishi, and Geo. After one year, the percentage reporting
agreement that Saturn had one of five target associations among the target
audience ranged from 30% to 40%. In mid-1993, the percentage that indi 
cated that Saturn was a "friendly company" passed Toyota and exceeded

Building a Brand: Tile Saturn Story

117

the other Japanese brands by a comfortable margin. Considering that the
image building began from zero in the face of a host of direct competitors
and a cluttered media environment, these numbers should be considered
healthy.

Thus, a wide range of perspectives and measures support the proposition
that Saturn succeeded in creating a strong brand during its initial two years.
It should be noted that Saturn was not profitable until 1993. However, it can
be argued that the indicators discussed above better reflect brand strength
than profitability which is influenced by product design, manufacturing.
and production capacity. In particular, expanding the capacity would
dramatically increase profitability.

How Saturn Built a Brand

There are seven areas of strategy that contributed to Saturn's becoming
a strong brand after only two years. However, it was the synergy of the
total program, rather than the power of any single element, that led to its
success.

The Mission: A World-Class Product-From the beginning, the driving
concept behind Saturn was to create a world-class compact car that could
match or exceed the Japanese imports such as the Honda Civic and the
Toyota Corolla. The car needed to have the reliability, safety, feel, appear 
ance, and overall quality that people expected in the top imports while
remaining price competitive. This quality imperative was one of the
defining dimensions of the Saturn corporate culture.

Too often there is the illusion that brands can be created by advertising,

without a product and service that really deliver quality and value-that
image is a "problem" of advertising. The reality is that the product drives
the image. The Edsel of the 1950s would have been a symbol of quality
today if Edsel had built quality products in that key first year. Some very
good Edsel advertising and marketing were wasted because of a shoddy
product. The Beetle phenomenon of the 1960s very likely could have been
transferred to the Rabbit in the mid-1970s if it were not for the initial
mechanical problems that plagued the Rabbit during its early years. These
problems doomed the effort to use advertising and the rabbit symbolism to
transform the Beetle equity to the Rabbit. In fact, VW has lived in the
shadow of those days ever since.

Saturn did not make the mistake of the Edsel or the Rabbit. The product

was good from the outset. Reviews in car magazines provided objective
judgments that the car was well designed and built and that there was sub 
stance behind the customer surveys.

One visible example of the quality emphasis was the decision to offer

a money-back guarantee. Within the first thirty days or 1,500 miles,

liS

CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

whichever comes first, the original purchaser may return their Saturn for a
full refund or for a replacement car. The guarantee not only reassures the
buyer about the purchase decision, but also places a substantial economic
penalty on reduced quality output and provides an internal signal about the
quality level that is needed and expected.

A graphic example of the quality culture was the way that a problem
involving a defective coolant was handled. Because the coolant might have
caused some unrepairable damage, the 1,800 involved cars were never recy 
cled and became one of the symbols of the Saturn quality commitment.
Another example was a seat recall that was implemented for a customer in
a remote Alaska island by having an engineer hand deliver a seat.

The Team Approach: A Different Kind of Company-The basic premise
was that a world-class compact car with a supporting strong quality culture
could not be created within the confines of an existing General Motors divi 
sion. A new company was formed and given freedom to create not only a
product, but a whole new organization free from the restrictive contract
and confrontational culture of the UAW, free from the constraints caused
by an existing brand family, and free from the inhibitions of an existing
way of doing business. People who joined Saturn broke ties with their prior
GM unit and often moved to Spring Hill, Tennessee where a "green field"
manufacturing facility was built. This new organization was integral not
only to creating the product, but also to the broader challenge of creating a
brand and communicating its identity.

A group of 99 people drawn from the ranks of labor and management
throughout GM, now reverently called the "99 club," was charged with
deciding what type of organization was needed. After visiting 60 bench 
mark companies to see how successful organizations operated, they devel 
oped a teamJpartnering approach to designing and manufacturing Saturn, a
very different approach from anything at General Motors. This partnering
concept was ultimately extended to all elements of the business, from
engineering to marketing to dealers to suppliers to the advertising
agency.

There are now cross functional teams of people assigned to modules
within Saturn that stimulate change, maintain the standards, and provide
the basic organizational structure. A team focus pervades the organization
and provides a sense of empowerment. It is behind the partnering relation 
ship with the UAW, unique within GM. The extensive training effort, 5%
of work time, contains a heavy dose of team-building exercises. Objectives
and rewards are based upon team and organizational goals. For example,
manufacturing people have 20% of their compensation based upon quality
and productivity of the plant. This team orientation is part of the "different
kind of company" that emerged.

Building a Brand: The Saturn Story

119

Creating Perceptions by Selling the Company Not the Car-Having a
world-class car is not enough to create a strong brand. It is customer per 
ceptions that matter, and perceptions do not automatically follow reality.
Audi, for example, has found that spending a billion dollars to create what
may be the best car in its class is not enough to attract buyers who are skep 
tical of the Audi name. The VW Rabbit was a quality car one or two years
too late; the perceived damage to quality caused by the early problems
could not be overcome. Schlitz beer, a strong number two brand in the mid 
1970s, shortened the production process and began using cheaper ingre 
dients in order to reduce costs. 12 The resulting damage to perceived quality
caused Schlitz to virtually disappear from the shelves by 1984 even though
they had returned to the original way of making Schlitz within a year after
the perception problem emerged.

Given that you have created a world-class car, how do you convince
people of that fact? The obvious tactic, used by all car makers, would be
simply to tell them why it is world class-the relentless pursuit of perfec 
tion or the ultimate driving machine. The story would build upon specifics
such as safety features, exterior design, fuel economy, acceleration per 
formance, comfort, road tests, endorsements by car magazines, guarantees,
how nimble and quick it handles, and its finish. The focus would be on the
car, using unrelenting logic and mind-numbing facts. In fact, plenty of facts
existed had that option been exercised.

A logical, product-oriented approach would have been almost surely
doomed to fail in part because others had already been there in ways that
had been loud and/or convincing. Ford had been "Quality is Job I" for over
a decade. Buick was the "symbol of quality." Honda owned the J.D. Power
index. For at least half a decade, Lee Iacocca has been saying that Chrysler
cars are just as good as Japanese cars. Consider the task of claiming that a
U.S. compact car made by General Motors is world class. People would
find it difficult to believe such a claim even assuming that the advertising,
which would surely look like a dozen others, would be noticed. Further,
price would quickly become a focus.

The solution was to sell the company-its values and culture, its

employees and its customers-not the car. The initial advertising showed
the employees as people with personalities and deep commitment to Saturn
quality and its teamwork approach. The advertising of Hal Riney provided
consumers with a window into the emotional attachment of employees to
the car and to the company. One commercial, for example, described the
role of cars in their childhood. Another showed the sacrifice and risk of
moving to a new area and beginning with a new company; and a third
showed the pride in seeing the first car come off the line. A print ad telling
the story of a powertrain technician at Saturn began with a scene of a
Spring Hill farm house on a misty morning with the line "I remember

120

CAUFORNIA MANAGF.MENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

standing here in the middle of nowhere, no sign of an automobile plant in
sight and thinking,
much of the advertising focused upon customers and their experience
with the car and the Saturn retailer, still a departure from product-oriented
advertising.

'What the heck am I doing here?''' During year two,

Prospective car buyers were made to feel that Saturn and its employees
would not design and build anything less that a world-class car. The percep 
tion was not based upon facts or logic, but on getting to know and understand
the people involved in Saturn. Further, the story was told in a believable,
true-to-life style. This believability undoubtedly was transferred to
the implicit product claims. In contrast, a prime problem of most product 
oriented car advertising is a believability gap based in part by conflicting
claims, all of which simply cannot be true. The judgment that some ads are
puffery or false casts a shadow over all. Further, the fact that Saturn took a
very different tack was helpful in breaking through the clutter of automobile
advertising.

The visual imagery of the employees, teamwork in action, and the Spring

Hill plant helped to support the whole concept of a new kind of American
company. The company obviously started fresh with a new plant in the
middle of a border state not associated with automobile manufacturing.
Clearly, the Spring Hill plant had the potential to be different, to start over
from scratch and to do things the right way. It was literally a breath of fresh
air. The employees also provided strong imagery. Think of Pontiac and
your mind might visualize a car that generally looks like any other car.
However, when you mention Saturn, the picture is more likely to be of
people, either employees or customers.

Two important name decisions are noteworthy. First, the Saturn was dis 
tanced from GM. Early concept research made it clear that cueing the GM
name resulted in a substantially lower quality perception and credibility
whereas cueing an Asian name such as Sony did the reverse. Further, the
whole concept of Saturn is that it was a fresh start at building an organiza 
tion and car. Linking the effort to GM would have undercut it.

Second, the option of naming models like the Honda Civic, Prelude, and

Accord was resisted. The focus was to be on Saturn the company and the
product. A model can provide a useful sub-brand when it distinguishes
something very different like the Mazda Miata or when it offers something
completely different such as the Ford Taurus. However, in this case models
would have drawn attention to relatively unimportant variations and away
from the main story.

The Retailer Strategy-Automobile customers are used to high-pressure
salesmen pouncing on them as they arrive at the showroom and immedi 
ately pressuring them into a test drive and a purchase decision. The classic
line is "If I can get this car to you for x dollars, would you buy it?" Focus

Building a Brand: The Saturn Story

111

groups, simple logic, and a dealer-involved team told Saturn that such an
approach is intensely disliked by customers.

Saturn chose to sell their product very differently. The customer would
not be pressured by a commission salesperson as they enter the showroom
of the retailer (not a "dealer"). A salaried salesperson, called a "sales con 
sultant" at Saturn, is likely to wander over and ask if the browser has any
questions. Further, the consultant is trained not only to answer questions,
but to explain in detail the design philosophy of the car and company, as
well as point out features. And most importantly, the hated price haggling
was eliminated. A price is set (by the retailer) that allows for a comfortable
but not excessive margin (around $1,400 per car) and that's that.

Several aspects of the retail program made it successful. Going outside
the industry for sales consultants-so that old habits would not get in the
way-was helpful, as was the extensive sales consultant training involving
the car, the company philosophy of treating the customer intelligently,
team-building skills, and linking the retailer to factory teams was another.
The most important ingredient, however, was the market area concept.
Early in the development phase, dealer team members pointed out the
debilitating effect of having competing dealers nearby that would have every
incentive to reduce price. The suggestion, perhaps self-serving at the time
but briIJiant in retrospect, was to find retailers who would take responsi 
bility for a broad market area and open up to six dealerships in that area.
Thus, price competition among adjacent dealers, a driving force behind
price competition, was eliminated.

Team-building and empowerment were a key to the development of
the retailer concept and systems. At the outset, a small group of hand 
picked retailers wrote their own franchise agreements and set up extensive
screening programs for new retailers wanting to join so as to maximize the
probability that all would be marching to the same drummer. They devel 
oped a set of objectives which provided team incentives and priorities so
that sales consultants would not focus on meeting a monthly quota.

Saturn developed several assets and skills, but the retail system is prob 

ably the most sustainable advantage in the Saturn arsenal. Ironically, the
car itself, which in terms of investment may have been the most difficult
asset to create, was probably the easiest to copy by competitors. Quality
perceptions are undoubtedly more long lasting. The focus of the advertising
on the company and Spring Hill was unique. However, it is the retail
strategy that will be most difficult to duplicate.

The Saturn system of low-pressure selling by salaried sales consultants
is based upon the total organization-its people, systems, structure, and
culture. In particular, there was a mix of sales consultants from outside the
industry, a very different compensation and incentive system based more
upon group efforts to satisfy customers than individual sales results, a cul 
ture that emphasizes treating customers intelligently, and links to the rest

122

CALU"ORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

of the organization. At Ford, Chevrolet, and Toyota, the whole organization
is set up to push cars through the system. Copying the Saturn selling system
without changing the whole organization will not be successful. And
changing the organization is most difficult.

Nordstrom is an example of a firm that has shaken up the retail market in

several major markets. Upscale department stores, in particular, have
attempted to respond by copying the "Nordstrom style" of doing business.
However, they have largely been unsuccessful because the elements of the
organization, especially employees used to another approach, are simply
not capable of adapting. Competitors of Saturn will find similar problems.

Further, it will be virtually impossible for competitors of Saturn to dupli 

cate the market area dealer network, a critical ingredient behind the no 
haggling price policy. Other brands are committed to a set of dealers who
cannot be terminated without cause and lawsuits. There are some 50 Chev 
rolet dealers in the Detroit area, for example. Thus, other brands, stuck
with the old dealer concept put into place in different times, will find it
virtually impossible to implement the area-wide dealer network.

Creating a Relationship between Saturn and Its Customer-Most
brands, particularly car brands, focus upon attributes such as safety, econ 
omy, handling, or comfort in developing a brand identity. Such positioning
strategies are weak bases for loyalty because they are relatively easy to copy
or surpass. Strong brands often move beyond attributes to a brand identity
based upon a brand personality and a relationship with customers. Saturn
is in that category. An important part of its brand identity is the concept
that its customers be treated intelligently, with respect and like a friend.
This relationship-and the brand personality that underlies it-have the
potential when properly implemented to create brand loyalty with intensity
and endurance.

Along with the quality imperative and the team orientation, treating cus 
tomers intelligently-with respect and like a friend-is a defining dimen 
sion of the Saturn corporate culture. The retail experience, for example,
follows from this relationship. Haggling over price and playing negotiation
games is not compatible with the Saturn customer relationship. It seems
incredible that nearly 50 years after the marketing concept appeared on the
scene, treating the customer intelligently was a breakthrough in the automo 
bile industry. But it was.

To understand the nature of a brand-customer relationship, it is useful to

consider the metaphor of a brand as a person, with a personality and with
interpersonal relationships (with customers). For example, Volvo personi 
fied might be perceived as a dependable and reliable man with a European
accent, but somewhat stodgy and lacking a sense of humor. The customer
relationship might be characterized by feelings of being secure and comfort 
able. In sharp contrast, "Mercedes" as a person might be elegant, upscale,

Building a Brand: The Saturn Story

123

The 1993 Recall

In June of 1993, Saturn identified that a repair was needed on all
350,000 cars made before April, 1993 to insure that a wire was prop 
erly grounded. The initial publicity was negative but was gradually
replaced by more positive reports as more news emerged. First, the
recall was voluntary, not mandated by the government. Second, the
recall was handled expeditiously. After two weeks, 50% of the cars
had been repaired, in part because of the contact that retailers had
with their car owners. In contrast, a major recall of a competitor man 
dated by the government was only 33% complete after 12 months.
Third, retailers handled the event positively. One chartered a bus to a
baseball game. When the bus returned, the cars had been repaired
and washed. Another had a barbecue that customers could attend
while their car was being fixed. A third offered theater tickets.

In all, the Saturn customer relationship was reflected in the way that

the recall was handled. Tracking studies indicated that the Saturn
image on the "takes care of customers" dimension was not affected
and it actually improved on the "good dealer" dimension.

successful, formal, and perhaps a bit stuffy and aloof. Its customer relation 
ship might then be based on the customer aspiring to become associated
with the status of belonging to the "Mercedes" group.

Saturn personified might be viewed as young, humorous, and lively but

also as down-to-earth and reliable and as someone who cares about indi 
viduals (whether they may be clients, patients, or customers) and treats
them intelligently, with good taste, with respect, and like a friend. The
brand-customer relationship would be based upon a perception of mutual
respect, a lively humorous interchange, intelligent, honest discourse, and,
most of all, friendship. The head of the Saturn engineering team talks of
perceiving Saturn as a person who is "thoughtful and friendly" and who
"won't let you down and won't outshine you."!' The personalized Saturn
would not speak about safety with an accent, would not speak condescend 
ingly to you (as might a VW who thinks you don't get the Fahrvergnugen
concept), but would speak with respect and as a friend. The task, of course,
is not only to conceptualize such a relationship but to consistently imple 
ment it.

Another aspect of the brand-customer relationship, according to Saturn
dealers, is a sense of pride that is different than the product centered pride
felt by many new car buyers. It involves pride in Saturn (a U.S. company
which has beaten the Japanese firms at their own game), pride in the employ 
ees for their commitment and achievement, and the customers' own pride
in themselves for being part of it all by not buying a Japanese car. The

124

CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

purchase and use of a Saturn becomes a way to express a customer's values
and personality. Customers are buying more than functional characteristics.
A key to the pride are the U.S. symbols that have been associated with
Saturn, notably the plant at Spring Hill, Tennessee and the American em 
ployees with their intense loyalty to Saturn. Ironically, Saturn was not the
"Heartbeat of America." If it had been, the pride level may not have been
as strong because it would have had less chance to emanate from within.
From that perspective, Saturn probably was right in deciding to appeal to
quality rather than patriotism during the height of anti-Japan sentiment.
Saturn has much in common with other charismatic brands such as
Apple, Harley, and the VW Bug, which have developed relationships that
are the basis of intense loyalty levels. Each is an underdog to a larger com 
petitor, each has a strong user group with an identity of its own, each has
users who encourage others to buy, and each has strong symbols.

A Different Kind of Company, A Different Kind of Car-A slogan can
capture the essence of a brand and become an important part of the brand
equity. If a brand is "packaged meaning," the slogan can be a tie and ribbon
that seals the package and provides an extra touch. Consider the famous
Avis slogan: "We're Number 2. We try harder." It clearly positions the
brand with respect to the competition (e.g., the leader Hertz) and captures
the thrust of the strategy. Addressed to the employees as much as the cus 
tomers, it helps to crystallize the values and culture of the firm. Finally, it
provides an umbrel1a concept which provides a construct to organize and
communicate specific features and programs that otherwise would be dis 
jointed and confused.

The slogan, 'i\ different kind of company, a different kind of car," pro 
vides the same kind of functions for Saturn and is an important part of its
brand equity. It serves to position the car against the other U.S. cars and
suggests that, unlike other Detroit cars (and especially unlike GM cars),
Saturn is a world-class car comparable to the best Japanese imports. The
"different company" position captures the differentiation based upon the
fact that Saturn operates and interacts with its customers in a new way that
is unique in the automobile industry. However, it also lends credence to the
different car position-only because the company is different could the car
be different. If Saturn would have claimed directly a world-class car, it is
highly unlikely that they would have achieved the desired perceptions.

The slogan provides a core meaning while allowing a host of specific
features and programs to be introduced without becoming lost or creating
confusion. A prospective customer may not recall exactly how the company
and its car are different, but the impression of being different remains. The
slogan also provides a center of gravity for the employees, suppliers, and
retailers. An important part of the culture, it helps people enforce norms
by saying: "That is not done here, we are different."

Building a Brand: The Saturn Story

125

Gateway 2000

Gateway 2000, a mail order computer firm from North Sioux City,

South Dakota is remarkably similar to Saturn. It might be called a
different kind of company, a different kind of computer. Like Saturn.
they have been concerned about delivering a product that is reliable
backed by a service organization that is imbued with a strong, com 
mitted customer culture. Also like Saturn, they have taken a very differ 
ent tack with respect to communicating themselves to their customers.
Ads for mail order computers all look the same. They show product

and specifications and shout price: "We've pumped up the power
and cut the price!" "Lightweight convenience, heavyweight savings!"
"Price, the new PC revolution!" "What's a good computer go for these
days? Usually a lot more." Even the industry leader Dell runs ads
claiming that their price is "news for you."

In contrast, the first Gateway ads in 1988 ran a picture of a Gateway
engineer sitting at a desk with cows seen out the window talking to a
customer. In between are snaps of their boys, both in Junior High.
The headline "You've got a Friend in the business" has become the
company slogan. These ads were followed by a campaign in which
Gateway customers and applications were profiled. One showed a
computer helping a Cape Smythe Air Service accountant in Barrow,
Alaska. "You got to know those customers and their link to Gateway."
These ads were followed by a host of offbeat ads completely different
from those of its competitors. One had a picture of Gateway employ 
ees playing poker in a Deadwood bar. Another had a picture of an
Elk and a Walrus. Others had themes around Robin Hood, magic
carpets, a 1950s cafe, a zoo, and apple orchards.

Gateway's approach is to be perceived as a different kind of mail
order computer company, one with a distinct personality. Their image
is of a solid, reliable South Dakota friend, someone who keeps over 
head low, puts energy and resources into products and people, and
is willing to do things differently. A prominent Gateway visual is their
distinctive black and white pattern (inspired by the Holsteins from a
local cattle ranch) that appears on all the packages and printed
materials.

In 1992, Gateway was the nation's No.7 personal computer com 
pany (with sales of 1.1 billion) and the NO.1 direct marketing company
(outselling Dell). 14 Their success bred problems as their customer
support fell behind, a serious problem for someone who is a friend
rather then a vendor. In retrospect, they probably should have
charged more for the equity they had created and had more con 
trolled growth so that their capabilities would have kept up with the
demand. However, the signs are that the problem was addressed in
part by investing heavily in technical support before it had serious
consequences.

126

CAUFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

Integrated Communication-One practical problem in building and main 
taining brand equity is the development of effective communication that is
consistent over different media and over time. The automobile industry has
been characterized by: product-focused Detroit advertising that has a same 
ness to it; a temptation to react to price appeals; dealer advertising that is
usually off-strategy; and the involvement of a host of communication organ 
izations. The result too often has been ineffective and inconsistent
communication.

At Saturn, a very different approach was taken. A West Coast agency,

Hal Riney, was selected as a "communications partner." It was charged
with being involved in all the Saturn communications efforts-including
brochures, retailer advertising, and the design of the retail showroom-
in order to make sure that the message was consistent across media and
through time. The Riney shop was experienced with a broader scope. They
had created the life-size story display for the Bartles & Jaymes wine cooler
spokesmen Frank and Ed, a logo for Mirage Resorts, a package design for
Stroh Brewery, and a 7-minute entertainment film for Alamo Rent-A-Car
customers to watch while waiting in line.

Early on, Riney produced a 26-minute film, "Spring, in Spring Hill," a
documentary in which Saturn team members explained the excitement and
challenge of being part of Saturn. The piece captured the emotion and feeling
of Saturn, it was shown to employees, suppliers, the press, local banks,
and zoning boards and, eventually, was even broadcast as an infomercial.

Riney worked to ensure that the retailer effort was on-strategy. Print ads

for retailers were designed that were very different from local automobile
newspaper advertising. With a large picture of the car and considerable
white space, the series of ads captured the spirit of Saturn. One asked:
"Gosh, what if we all came back as cars?" Riney had to resist the inclina 
tion of retailers to fill the white space with used-car prices or maps showing
directions to the retailer.

Perhaps the most telling example of consistency occurred when a group
of retailers was considering a car give-away to generate store traffic when
awareness and interest was at a low point. Riney insisted that such a promo 
tion would damage the huge investment in brand equity and would be espe 
cially damaging to those relatively new to the Saturn concept. When the
retailers persisted, Riney designed a promotion that would enhance the
equity rather than damage it. In the resulting promotion, winners went to
Spring Hill and participated in building their car. The focus was then on
Spring Hill and the committed employees building quality cars and not
simply on giving away cars to entice people to a retailer.

In the same spirit, a 1994 Saturn "homecoming" is planned. All 700,000

Saturn car owners are to be invited to a festival at the Saturn Tennessee
plant to partake in a barbecue, plant tours, and other entertaining activities.
This "Saturnstock" event is modeled after the festival that Harley-Davidson

Building a Brand: Tire Saturn Story

127

held for its products' owners that drew over 100,000 bikers to Milwaukee.
Again, the focus is on Spring Hill and the people there and the tone of the
event is very Saturn.

Creating Brand Equity-Figure I summarizes how brand equity was
created at Saturn. The figure shows five dimensions of brand equity; the
retail system is added to the four conceptualized in the book, Managing
Brand Equity:" Also shown are the principal drivers of each of the brand
equity dimensions. (Note that some eighteen different decisions and
programs are mentioned as drivers and that the list is not meant to be
comprehensive. )

There was not one driver of the Saturn results. Rather, it seems clear that
it was the totality of the effort and the synergy and fit of the various pieces
that combined to create the brand. However, four elements of the strategy
stand out as being crucial: the ability to design and build a quality car; the
relationship-based brand identity; the decision to focus on the company and
its employees and customers rather than the car; and the retail experience
based upon the brand identity values and the market area concept. The last
three represent a real difference in automobile brand management.

Challenges Facing Saturn and General Motors

Several questions surface. Can Saturn keep it going? What should General
Motors do with its market success? It is a bit like the dog who chased the
truck and caught it. What now? There are several issues and problems
facing both General Motors and Saturn.

Keeping It Going-One set of issues facing GM involve managing the
beast. In some respects, it is actually easier to create Saturn than to keep it
going and maintain the intensity of the culture. The excitement of inventing
something from the ground up and of being involved in an aggressive new
strategy, and the excitement and reinforcement of pulling it off, provide
considerable motivation and momentum.

What happens when competitors copy or appear to copy some of Saturn's

key aspects, such as no price haggling? When the marriage with the UAW
(United Auto Workers) falters? When the product gets old and the heady
days of no backlog are gone? When the product quality gets surpassed
by competitors who are taking dead aim at Saturn? When Saturn fails to
get priority for GM resources? There is a real management challenge in
keeping it going when adversity sets in, managing the norms of behavior,
communicating values, and creating and nurturing symbols and role mod 
els. It will not be easy for Saturn.

Figure I summarizes some of the key operational challenges facing Saturn.

First, Saturn must maintain awareness levels. As the brand matures, there

128

CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

Figure 1: Saturn Brand Equity, Drivers and Challenges

Primary Drivers
of Brand Equity

Brand Equity
DImensions

Challenges to
Maintain Equity

• Advertising
• Retail Presence
• Publicity,

Word of Mouth

• Advertising
• Slogan/Position
• Spring Hill Plant
• Retail Experience
• Integrated

Communication
• Relationship Based

Brand Identity

Awareness

• Maintain awareness in

the face of reduced news
value and competitive
clutter

Brand Associations

• Employees
• Real People Customers
• Springhill Plant
• Different Company/Car
• Retail Experience
• Liking/Friend
• U.S. Car in Civic Class

• Need to communicate
the Saturn message to
those new to the brand
in the face of pressures
to talk product not
company.

• Product Design
• Manufacturing Commitment
• New Organization/Culture
• Empathy with Employees
• Empathy with Customers
• Slogan/Position
• Money-Back Guarantee

• Friendship Relationship
• Retail Experience
• Pride in U.S. Company

• Market Area Concept
• Corporate Culture

Perceived
Quality

• Maintaining actual quality
after the initial excitement
is over and in the face of
competitive efforts to
improve their position

• Keep relationship strong

Loyalty

over time

Retail
System

• Keep the retail culture in
place in the face of slow
sales and imitation.

will be a tendency for the brand to fade into the clutter of the marketplace.
A real challenge will be to keep the brand fresh, interesting, and visible.

A second challenge will be to continue to communicate the message of

Saturn as a "different kind of company." Unfortunately, the introductory
phase lacked a strong visual image capturing the company spirit and commit 
ment. There is no lingering image with the potential of a Marlboro country,
a lonesome Maytag repairman, a Michelin man, or even the Apple logo.
(The Saturn logo and name was stimulated by the Saturn rocket and is
hardly helpful in this regard.) A clear visual image that represented Spring
Hill, for example, could be used to cue efficiently much of what Saturn
stands for as an organization. A glimpse of the Maytag repairman cues the
whole Maytag philosophy. In the absence of such a visual image, Saturn
must find ways to provide the Saturn feel to the market, particularly to new 
comers who were not exposed to or have forgotten the early advertising.

Building II Brand: The Saturn Story

129

Maintaining perceived quality is perhaps the most important task facing
Saturn. The excitement in the factory will fade and the team concept will
come under pressure as it has elsewhere. Keeping the faith. either under
prolonged success or under downturns and setbacks, is not easy. In addi 
tion, Saturn must also manage quality signals, most especiaJIy the 1.0.
Power index. The elements that drive the key indexes (such as initial cus 
tomer satisfaction with the car, satisfaction with the dealer experience)
require constant focus. A host of competitors will be targeting the lofty
Power index Saturn scores and it may be unrealistic to assume that they can
be maintained. Yet the 1.0. Power numbers represent the key quality cue.

Another challenge is to nurture and foster the pride factor and the charis 
matic brand characteristics that drive the loyalty levels achieved by Saturn.
Nintendo, Harley, Apple, and the fabled VW Beetle all sustained high loy 
alty levels over time by maintaining strong personalities and by providing a
sense of group involvement. Some Saturn retailers have arranged group
events for the owners and have provided other mechanisms for involvement.
However, the Saturn loyalty is based largely on the concept that the product
and the organization are different. Thus, maintaining that reality as well as
finding ways to express it will be critical.

The retail experience involves a strong culture that will be challenged. A
strong culture works best when there is frequent success and reinforcement.
When an organization goes through the inevitable hard times, it is more
difficult to sustain the culture. Further, there will be many competitors who
will attempt to imitate Saturn. Some of these imitators will involve dealers
who are also Saturn retailers and will thus have first hand experience at the
Saturn approach. Even the unsuccessful will confuse the positioning of
Saturn. making it harder for Saturn to stand out.

The Saturn Relationship to GM-A second set of issues surround the
relationship of General Motors to Saturn. General Motors must make some
enormous and difficult decisions. Most basic, should Saturn be supported
by investing in additional production capacity? The current plant will pro 
duce at most 300,000 vehicles and it is estimated that Saturn should sell
over 500,000 cars to be a real profit asset to GM. The original plant cost
approximately $1.9 billion, so the investment will not be trivial to a firm
with many demands on its resources." A less expensive alternative might
be to convert another GM plant, but there is the real risk that the Saturn
methods, culture, and relationship with its union cannot be transferred to
another plant. Perhaps even more momentous is the decision as to whether
to provide Saturn with a midsize competitor to cars such as the Honda
Accord and Ford Taurus.

In many respects, it seems like a no-brainer. The project worked. General

Motors took on Honda, Toyota, and Nissan and won. In the process, they
developed some advantages that are likely, given proper management and

130

CAUFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

investment, to be sustainable. The obvious course is to back the winner and
run with it. The result could be long-term success over Toyota, Honda, and
Nissan. If GM were to back away, the likely result is that the Japanese
juggernaut will regain its growth trajectory and relegate GM and perhaps
the other U.S. firms to niche players in the U.S. automobile market.

However, it is not so simple for General Motors. Saturn has been slow to

tum the profit comer in part because it is competing in an inherently low
margin business area, in part because its volume is still inadequate, and in
part because it is still low on the experience curve. Although 1993 was pro 
fitable for Saturn, there is still a long road before a satisfactory return on
the Saturn will be achieved. With a relatively weak profit picture, it is diffi 
cult to fight tough internal battles for resources and new products within
General Motors.

Further, there is Chevrolet, long positioned as the entry level car for GM,
to consider. With its car sales falling in the early 1990s, Chevrolet was des 
perate for new products and resentful of the investment that went into
Saturn. Chevrolet management naturally believed that Saturn should have
had a Chevrolet nameplate. The consensus of more objective observers,
however, is that the Saturn miracle simply would not have happened at
Chevrolet. Chevrolet is internally powerful and important to General
Motors. It needs to be a healthy survivor and receive investment especially
in the midsize car area. lts presence casts a large shadow over Saturn's
future. Of course, Saturn was developed to fight the imports and has been
successful. Surveys indicated that over 70% of the sales came from buyers
who otherwise would not have bought GM products and over half from
those who otherwise would have bought imports. 17

Another GM strategy could be to exploit Saturn not by expanding it, but

by transferring the "Saturn approach" to other GM divisions in keeping
with its mission to "transfer knowledge, technology, and experience
throughout General Motors." Indeed, Oldsmobile's strategy is to "Saturn 
ize" itself to capture the appeal of the Saturn brand and to become the
choice of the Saturn owner who wants a bigger car. Saturnizing other GM
divisions is on the drawing board but will not be easy and may in some
cases be impossible. The problem is that the Saturn magic will be difficult
to transfer because it is not based strictly on programs, which can be easy
to duplicate, but on the whole organization, systems, structure. people,
and culture. The other divisions would have to change everything. For
example, it is instructive to note how futile it was for the many retailers
who attempted to imitate Nordstrom's service levels without changing their
total organization.

The ingrown, insular General Motors organization would need to change

dramatically and that seems difficult if not impossible. The labor manage 
ment contracts and confrontational style seem firmly in place. GM could
not transfer the Saturn market area dealer system to other brands for at least

Building a Brand: The Salurn Story

I3l

a generation because getting dealers to sell or combine would be difficult
and prohibitively expensive. Efforts to export the manufacturing methods
used at the highly successful NUMMI plant run with Toyota in California
have been disappointing and there is no reason to think that the Saturn style
would be any more acceptable. Even generating the motivation to Saturnize
other divisions will not come easily. There is considerable resentment
within General Motors that Saturn has received resources that were needed
elsewhere and there is a tendency to attribute the Saturn success to money
rather than to how that money was spent.

It is not easy for any organization to change, and General Motors is
not just any organization. There is a real question as to whether they can
develop the motivation and ability to change. Ironically, it may be the
Japanese companies who will be best at Saturnizing themselves, with Ford
and Chrysler ahead of General Motors in the parade.

Central to how GM handles Saturn is the definition of success that is
applied to Saturn. If success is defined as return on the $5 billion invest 
ment that GM made in the Honda Civic class Saturn, the project may be
doomed. By the same measure, incidentally, Honda would be classified a
failure during the whole of the 1970s despite its sales success during that
period. However, there are other perspectives. Saturn could be viewed as
the brand platform to take on not only the compact Honda Civic and com 
parable imports but the higher margin midsize Honda Accord. It could be
the vehicle to revitalize GM. Regis McKenna talks about silver bullets,
products within a product line that create a reputation for the company
which then makes its money on the rest of the line. IS A lesson for GM?
Saturn could also be viewed as a vehicle to create a new way of com 
peting for General Motors. In that respect, the financial return performance
of the compact line would not become so central.

When, if ever, should General Motors attach its name to Saturn? There
is a temptation to move too quickly in order to transfer the Saturn equity to
General Motors and thus to the other divisions. However, there will come a
time when Saturn can lend its equity to GM. Two conditions are necessary.
First, Saturn needs to be firmly established in its own right as a distinct
brand and organization. Second, the other divisions need to be capable of
actually delivering Saturn-level quality. At that point, an association of
Saturn with GM might help the other divisions without harming Saturn.
However, if such a move is made prematurely there is a risk that the Saturn
name will be damaged and GM will receive little benefit. The familiar and
strong GM image might drown out the Saturn image.

In Conclusion

The Saturn story is thus not only about how GM created a strong brand
under adverse circumstances, but, strangely, about how to handle success.

132

CAL.IFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW

Winter 1994

How can Saturn keep maintaining the Saturn equity past the initial thrust
and success? How should GM manage the strategic fit of Saturn with the
rest of the GM family?

Postscript-1994

In early 1994, Saturn was still delivering customer satisfaction (trailing
only Lexus and Infinity according to J.D. Power) and had the lowest defect
rates of any U.S. brand. However, sales since September of 1993 were
averaging 15,000 per month, sharply down from the peak of 25,000 in
June 1993.

The problem can in large part be attributed to a decision by a cash-short
GM to cut back on Saturn. In 1993, they cut advertising in half-virtually
eliminating it during the boom time. In addition, plans to add dealers were
scaled back (Saturn has only 285 outlets serving about 60% of the U.S.
market) and a new face-lift including passenger air bags was delayed from
the 1994 model year to 1995. As a result, Saturn was at a disadvantage to
rival Toyotas, Hondas, and Neons on which dual air bags are standard. GM
further pushed back a major makeover with a quieter engine to 1996. An
aggressive lease program, a renewed dealer expansion, and new advertising
with a greater focus on price is part of Saturn's program to recover sales.

These events graphically underline the challenges facing Saturn and GM.

Will the Saturn culture, retail system, and relationship with its customers
survive in the face of the market softness, active competitors, and a more
price-oriented posture? Will GM, with many demands on its limited
resources, provide the needed support so that Saturn can compete?

References

I. Roger B. Smith. Statement at the Saturn News Conference. January 8, 1985. Thanks

are due to Bob Ellis of Hal Riney, Tom Shaver now at Volkswagen. and Roberto Alvarez
who all made helpful comments on earlier drafts. The material for this article was drawn
in part from discussions with Saturn executives. retailers, and agency people and from
secondary sources such as Richard LeFauve, "One More Chance:' Mrr Management
(Spring 1992), pp. 2-7: David Woodruff, "Saturn," Business Week, August 17, 1992, pp.
85-91: Richard G. Lefauve and Arnoldo C. Hax, "Managerial and Technological Inno 
vations at Saturn Corporation," Mrr Management (Spring 1992), pp. 8-19: Raymond
Serafin, "The Saturn Story," Advertising Age, November 16. 1992, pp. I, 13; Alice Z.
Cuneo and Raymond Serafin, "With Saturn, Riney Rings Up a Winner," Advertising
Age, April 14, 1993, pp. 2-3; T. W. Shaver, Remarks to San Diego Advertising Club,
November 6, 1991: Don Hudler, Address to the Adcraft Club of Detroit. January 17,
1992; 1991 Brochure introducing the Saturn.

2. Lefauve and Hax, op cit.
3. Jean-Noel Kaupferer, "How Global are Global Brands?" The Challenge of Branding

Today and in the Future, Brussels, Belgium, ESOMAR, p. 209; Larry Light, '~t the
Center of It All Is the Brand," Advertising Age, March 29, 1993, p. 22.

Building a Brand: The Saturn Storv

133

4. Peter H. Farquhar, "Managing Brand Equity," Journal of Advertising Research (August/

September 1990), p. RC-7-12.

5. See, for example, Joel Axelrod who describes how and why price premiums are meas 
ured in Joel Axelrod, "The Use of Experimental Design in Monitoring Brand Equity,"
The Challenge ofBranding Today and in the Future, Brussels, Belgium. ESOMAR,
pp.

\3-26.

6. Hudler, op. cit.
7. One by the NADA (National Automobile Dealers Association) and the other by the J. D.

Power Company. See Don Hudler, op. cit.

8. David A. Aaker, Managing Brand Equity (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1991). These
dimensions are reflected in the major efforts to measure brand equity across brands by,
for example, Landor's Image Power which uses awareness and perceived quality to
measure brand equity and Total Research's EquiTrend which uses measures of aware 
ness, perceived quality and loyalty. Stewart Owen, 'The Landor ImagePower Survey: A
Global Assessment of Brand Strength." in David A. Aaker and Alexander L. Biel, eds ..
Brand Equity & Advertising (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 1993). pp.
11-30; "Wave II EquiTrend Findings." unpublished paper, Total Research, 1992.

9. Lefauve and Hax, op. cit.
10. 1993 Kelley Blue Book Official Price Guide, Western Edition September-October 1993.
II. Hudler, op. cit.
12. Aaker, op. cit., Chapter 4.
13. Charles J. Murray, "Engineer on a Mission," Design N('Ws, February 22, 1993, pp.

102-111.

14. Brandley Johnson, "PC service problems plague Gateway 2000," Advertising Age.

February 22, 1993, p. 4.

15. Aaker, op. cit.
16. Shaver, op. cit.
17. Hudler, op. cit.
18. Regis McKenna, The Regis Touch (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1985), p. 93.