The  Role  of  Brand  Personality 
in Charitable  Giving: 
An Assessment  and  Validation 

Beverly T. Venable 
Columbus State  University 

Gregory  M. Rose 
University  of Washington,  Tacoma 

Victoria  D. Bush 
University  of Mississippi 

Faye W. Gilbert 
Georgia  College  & State  University 

Marketing  concepts such as corporate  identity, image, and 
branding  are important strategies for nonprofit organiza- 
tions. In particular,  brand personality has been advocated 
by practitioners but has not been empirically investigated 
in  the  nonprofit  context.  According  to  social  exchange 
theory and trust,  the authors argue  that  nonprofit  stake- 
holders perceive  nonprofit  organizations  at  an  abstract 
level because of the organizations'intangibility and social 
ideals.  This  study  develops  and  refines  a  parsimonious 
measure of brand personality specifically for the nonprofit 
context.  The authors conduct a series of six multimethod 
studies  of nonprofit  stakeholders  to  validate  the  role  of 
brand personality  in nonprofit  organizations.  The  results 
yield four dimensions of brand personality for nonprofits: 
integrity,  nurturance,  sophistication,  and  ruggedness. 
Thus,  current  and potential  donors  ascribe  personality 
traits to nonprofit organizations  and differentiate  between 
nonprofits  on the  basis of the  organizations'personality. 
Finally, nonprofit  brand personality may influence poten- 
tial donors' likelihood  to contribute. 

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. 
Volume 33, No. 3, pages 295-312. 
DOI:  10.1177/0092070305276147 
Copyright (cid:14)9 2005  by Academy of Marketing Science. 

Keywords:  nonprofit  marketing;  brand  personality; 
measurement;  social  exchange;  charitable 
giving 

Since their introduction in the United States in the late 
1700s,  nonprofit organizations have provided many criti- 
cal services (e.g., education, arts,  social services; Hawks 
1997).  Several recent trends have renewed interest in non- 
profit marketing. First,  substantial reductions in  govern- 
ment funding have placed pressure on nonprofit organiza- 
tions to finance their operations through private donations 
(Bendapudi,  Singh,  and  Bendapudi  1996).  Second,  the 
number of nonprofit organizations in the United States has 
substantially  increased.  Currently,  there  are  more  than 
1.23 million nonprofit organizations in the United States, 
compared  with  only  12,000  such  organizations in  1940 
(Boris  1999).  Third,  individual or  household  giving has 
not kept pace with the increased number of nonprofit orga- 
nizations (Sargeant 1999), which has resulted in increased 
competition  for  donations.  Finally, a  new  generation  of 
donors  has emerged that increasingly perceives the non- 
profit  sector  as  a  "big  business"  that  should  be  held 
accountable  for  the  effectiveness  of  its  operations  and 

296 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

services, as should any other operation with access to bil- 
lions  of dollars  in  monetary contributions and volunteer 
hours (Blum 2002;  Morley, Vinson, and Hatry 2001). 

Given  these  trends,  marketing  strategy has become  a 
fundamental tool in the nonprofit sector.  Indeed, both the 
application of marketing concepts to nonprofit organiza- 
tions and the understanding of donor behavior have been 
discussed  for  more  than  three  decades  (e.g.,  Arnett, 
German, and Hunt 2003;  Burnett and Wood 1988;  Kotler 
and Levy 1969; Mindak and Bybee 1971). Nonprofit orga- 
nizations  have  aggressively  pursued  strategies  such  as 
market  segmentation  (see  Harvey  1990;  Nichols  1991), 
relationship and  database  marketing  (Arnett et  al.  2003; 
Nichols  1995;  Peltier,  Schibrowsky,  and  Schultz 2002), 
branding  (Nucifora  1998;  Tapp  1996;  Wray  1994),  and 
distinctive and positive image development (Grounds and 
Harkness  1998). 

Although these  strategic issues  are  important to non- 
profit  researchers  and  practitioners,  exploration  of  the 
unique  nature  of  nonprofits  and  how  key  stakeholders 
differentiate, evaluate, and choose to enter into a relation- 
ship  with  such  organizations is  an  important and  under- 
researched area. Much of the research in relationship mar- 
keting,  and  almost  all  of  the  research  in  branding,  has 
focused  on  for-profit  firms.  For  example,  Amett  et  al. 
(2003)  stated that  "much of the research  on relationship 
marketing success has examined relationships that (1) are 
primarily  economic  in  nature,  (2)  involved business-to- 
business  marketing,  and  (3)  involved  for-profit  firms" 
(p.  89).  Similarly,  research  conducted  in  branding  and 
brand personality has been based on for-profit brands. 

We contend that brand personality differentiates non- 
profit organizations in a competitive charitable market and 
thus is beneficial to nonprofit practitioners and research- 
ers.  Our  examination  of  brand  personality  in  the  non- 
profit context aims to extend prior research on both brand 
personality  and  charitable  giving  (e.g.,  Buruett  1981; 
Cermak,  File,  and  Prince  1994;  Harvey  1990).  Of  key 
interest to our study is the examination of whether and how 
brand personality manifests in the nonprofit sector.  Thus, 
we  aim  to  answer  the following questions:  (1)  Do  non- 
profit  organizations  possess  brand  personalities?  (2)  If 
they do, what kind of personalities are they? (3) Are non- 
profit  brand  personalities  related  the  charitable  giving 
intentions? and (4) How can brand personalities help non- 
profit marketers? 

Because  of the  intangible,  service-oriented  nature  of 
nonprofit organizations, we posit that social exchange and 
trust  play  an  important  role  in  consumers'  decisions  of 
whether to donate money, time,  or in-kind goods  or  ser- 
vices  to  such  organizations. Thus,  in  this context,  brand 
personality and its dimensions may not be consistent with 
previous  research  on  brand  personality. The  purpose  of 
this research  is  to  investigate the applicability, measure- 
ment,  and  validation  of  brand  personality  in  nonprofit 

organizations. Thus, our objectives are threefold: first, we 
examine the nature of exchange, trust, and brand personal- 
ity in the nonprofit context. Second, on the basis of a series 
of  qualitative  and  quantitative  studies  among  nonprofit 
stakeholders, we refine and develop a parsimonious mea- 
sure  of  brand  personality  for  nonprofit  organizations. 
Third, we assess the predictive validity of nonprofit brand 
personality on  consumers'  likelihood  to  contribute,  and 
we discuss the implications of our findings for both theory 
and nonprofit marketers. 

CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION 

Charitable Giving: 
Key Nonprofit Stakeholders 

In marketing, research on charitable giving has focused 
primarily  on  the  study  of  donor  characteristics  (e.g., 
Cermak  et  al.  1994;  Harvey  1990).  However,  several 
authors  (e.g.,  Burnett  and  Wood  1988)  have  developed 
models of donor behavior that incorporate the impact of 
antecedent states such as personal traits (e.g., self-esteem, 
empathy,  guilt),  demographic  characteristics  (e.g.,  age, 
gender,  education),  situational  factors,  and  perceived 
rewards on evaluation and behavioral intentions (i.e., gifts 
of cash, time, goods, or donor loyalty). Of particular inter- 
est to this study are nonprofit stakeholders' evaluation of 
and intention to give to nonprofit organizations. 

As do their counterparts in government, public, and pri- 
vate institutions, nonprofit organizations have many stake- 
holders with whom they work on  an  ongoing basis.  The 
two largest groups  are the people who contribute to non- 
profit organizations and the beneficiaries of the  services 
that the organizations provide. Often, the two groups over- 
lap because people who contribute also may benefit. For 
example,  a  person  may  contribute  time  or  money  to  an 
organization  such  as  the  Nature  Conservancy  and  also 
benefit  from  his  or  her  efforts  to  save  environmental 
resources.  Employees are  another group  of stakeholders 
who  are  crucial  to  nonprofit  organizations'  success.  In 
addition to these stakeholders, the relationships between 
nonprofit organizations, for-profit firms, and government 
agencies  also  are  important.  Partnerships  between  these 
stakeholder groups  provide a  means to  address complex 
social  problems,  with  the  ultimate goal  of helping  non- 
profits' beneficiaries. 

In this study, we focus on current and potential contri- 
butors  of time,  money, and  in-kind  goods  or  services  to 
nonprofit organizations. Research  on nonprofit contribu- 
tors in the United States has indicated that approximately 
89 percent of all households contribute monetarily to non- 
profit  organizations  and  44  percent  of  adults  volunteer 
(approximately 9  million fuIl-time employees, valued at 
$239  billion) for nonprofit organizations (Weitzman and 

Jalandoni 2001).  In addition, we focus on individual con- 
tributors to be consistent with prior research that measures 
brand  personality in  the for-profit sector, in  which  sam- 
piing is at the individual consumer level. 

Social  Exchange and Trust 

The  issues  of how  and  why people  choose  to  give to 
charity  have  been  widely  debated  (Wispe  1978).  The 
concept  of  charity  has  been  examined  in  many  diverse 
disciplines,  including  classical  economics,  clinical  psy- 
chology, and  anthropology. Thus,  the  theoretical under- 
pinnings of donation behavior range from social exchange 
and equity theory to prosocial and helping behavior (for a 
review,  see Burnett and Wood 1988). 

From a marketing perspective, in most transactions, the 
nature of exchange for nonprofits differs from the  more 
typical monetary-based exchange. The  act of giving to a 
nonprofit organization tends to be more  social than eco- 
nomic  in  nature.  Thus,  social  exchange  theory  (e.g., 
Bagozzi  1975;  Blau  1964;  Homans  1958) can  aid  in 
explaining  why  donors  give  (Burnett  and  Wood  1988). 
Here, the economics of giving may be limited to benefits 
such as  tax breaks,  whereas the social benefits of giving 
can be far more important and range from personal satis- 
faction and  self-worth to humanitarianism and  spiritual- 
ism  (Arnett  et  al.  2003;  Cermak  et  al.  1994).  Arnould, 
Price,  and  Zinkhan  (2004)  referred  to  generalized  reci- 
proci O,  as  donors'  choosing  to  give  of  their  own  time, 
money,  or  services  with  little economic  expectations  in 
return.  Thus,  nonprofit organizations tend to  emphasize 
the social benefits of giving (i.e.,  social approval, respect, 
and humanitarianism). This is not to imply that for-profit 
organizations do not focus on social benefits. However, the 
social  benefits  of giving  to  a  nonprofit organization  are 
more  salient than those of giving to for-profits. Because 
social benefits have been  deemed to be  important in  the 
nonprofit  setting  (Arnett  et  al.  2003),  it  follows  that  to 
develop  potentially  successful  and  trustworthy  relation- 
ships, nonprofit organizations must be able to identify and 
communicate benefits to their stakeholders. 

Social exchange theory has often been used in the rela- 
tionship and service marketing literature as the theoretical 
foundation for developing trust (Arnett et al. 2003;  Berry 
and Parasuraman  1991; Doney and Cannon  1997; Dwyer, 
Schurr, and Oh  1987;  Morgan and Hunt  1994;  Smith and 
Barclay  1997).  Trust in marketing has been defined as "a 
willingness to rely on an exchange partner in whom one 
has  confidence"  (Moorman,  Deshpandr,  and  Zaltman 
1993:82).  Morgan and Hunt (1994)  built on this definition 
and conceptualized trust as "existing when one party has 
confidence in an exchange partner's  reliability  and integ- 
rity" (p. 23, emphasis added). This suggests that reliability 
and integrity play a central role when current and potential 
donors  evaluate  nonprofit  organizations  because  of  the 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  297 

intangibility of the  services  that nonprofits offer and the 
social nature of exchange in the donor-nonprofit relation- 
ship.  Current  and potential donors  must  be  able  to  trust 
that  the  nonprofit  organization  will  use  their  donations 
of  time,  money,  or  in-kind  goods  or  services  responsi- 
bly.  Thus,  these  stakeholders  may  search  for  cues  that 
symbolize reliability and integrity. A cue that many non- 
profit marketers have recently focused on is the nonprofit 
brand  (Tapp  1996).  We  now  discuss  branding  in  terms 
of nonprofit organizations' corporate identity, image, and 
personality. 

Developing a Nonprofit Brand 

The  use  of  brands  as  a  "distinguishing name  and/or 
symbol (such  as a  logo, trademark,  or package  design)" 
(D. A. Aaker 1991:7) continues to evolve. Initially, brands 
were  used  to  identify  and  distinguish  between  specific 
manufacturers  of  consumer  goods.  Today,  brands  are 
widely  recognized  as  important  vehicles  for  differen- 
tiating  among  services,  people,  ideas,  and  organiza- 
tions. Examples of the increasing proliferation of brands 
include  the  branding  of  previously  invisible  compo- 
nents  and  ingredients,  such  as lntel  Inside  and  Splenda, 
and the branding of government entities and destinations 
(O'Shanghnessy  and  O'Shaughnessy  2000).  Moreover, 
the days of a brand's power being viewed as relevant only 
to tangible goods are over (Berry 2000). 

Nonprofits  are  primarily  service  organizations  that 
desire to help people. Whether it is finding a way to cure a 
disease  (i.e.,  American  Cancer  Society),  to  protect  the 
environment  (i.e.,  Sierra  Club),  or  to  promote  artistic 
endeavors (i.e., National Endowment for the Arts), in gen- 
eral,  nonprofit organizations do  not offer tangible  prod- 
ucts for sate but rather offer intangible services and ideals. 
Because nonprofits are primarily  services,  the organiza- 
tion  offering the service becomes the focal point for con- 
sumers  (Berry  2000).  "With services,  the  company  not 
the product  is the primary brand...  and  brand develop- 
ment is crucial in services, given the inherent difficulty in 
differentiating  products  that  lack  physical  differences 
(Zeithaml  1981)  and the intense competition within ser- 
vice markets" (Berry 2000:128-29).  Thus, because of the 
vast number of nonprofit organizations and the increased 
competition  for  donation  dollars,  it  follows  that  devel- 
opment  of  a  strong  nonprofit brand  occurs  at  the  orga- 
nizational  level  and  may  provide  a  distinct competitive 
advantage. 

Previous  research  has  explored  a  series  of  concepts 
related to the meaning, value, and effective use of brands. 
Brand  equity  refers to the inherent value of a name, sym- 
bol,  or product/service design.  Although brand  equity is 
often examined in the context of for-profit organizations, 
it also can be viewed as the value of the name, symbol, or 
perceived  service  offerings  of  a  nonprofit  organization, 

298 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

such  as the  American Red  Cross  or  the American Heart 
Association (Burnett 2002). 

Because the organization is the central focus in services 
and  nonprofit  marketing,  an  important  component  in 
building brand equity is the development of a strong cor- 
porate  identity.  Corporate identity is  the  collective  way 
that  an  organization  identifies  itself.  In  other  words,  it 
is the ideal image that an organization wants its public to 
hold (Johnson and Zinkhan 1990).  Corporate identity in- 
volves not only the mere recognition of a name, symbol, or 
other distinguishing feature but  also knowledge of what 
the company represents  or the functions that it performs. 
As  Johnson  and  Zinkhan  (1990)  noted,  "The  company 
articulates through its words, symbols, and actions, what it 
is, what it stands for, and what it does" (p.  1 I0). Although 
previous  descriptions  of corporate  identity have focused 
generally on consumer goods, it is important for nonprofit 
organizations to develop a corporate identity because peo- 
ple who elect to donate need to understand the functions of 
the nonprofit organization before they commit or entrust 
their  resources  to  it.  Thus,  in  accordance  to  social  ex- 
change  theory,  donors  must  be  able  to  understand  the 
social benefits of contributing to a nonprofit organization. 
Although organizations strive to project  a  strong  and 
positive  corporate  identity,  people's  perception  of  this 
identity is  critical.  Thus,  corporate  image  is  the  overall 
impression that various stakeholders have of the company 
(Johnson  and  Zinkhan  1990).  Researchers  in  marketing 
have  recognized  the  importance  of the  "human  need  to 
simplify buying decisions by creating symbolic represen- 
tations" (Stem, Zinkhan, and Jaj u 2001:201) and thus have 
conducted  image  research  for  many  years.  A  person's 
image of an organization can be viewed as a preliminary 
heuristic  for  deciding  whether  to  become  involved  with 
the organization. A negative corporate image discourages 
consumers  from  becoming  involved (Webb,  Green,  and 
Brashear  2000),  whereas  a  positive  image  provides  an 
impetus  and  rationale  for  involvement.  Thus,  the  im- 
age that key stakeholders have of a nonprofit organization 
may influence their intent to give money, time, or in-kind 
services. 

In summary, because the characteristics and benefits of 
becoming  involved  with  a  nonprofit  organization  are 
largely intangible, branding can facilitate a donor's under- 
standing and support of a  charity (Dixon  1997;  Sargeant 
1999).  Indeed, many nonprofit organizations practice var- 
ious components of branding. As Tapp (1996) pointed out, 

Charities do not describe much of what they do  as 
organizations  have  long 
"branding";  however, 
been concerned with maintaining a consistent style 
and tone of voice and conducting periodic reviews 
of both  policies  and  actions  to  ensure  that  a  con- 
sistent personality is  projected to  important stake- 
holders. (P. 335, emphasis added) 

Nonprofit Brand Personality 

A closely related concept to corporate image is that of 
corporate personality. Indeed, some researchers have used 
the wordpersonaIity to define corporate image. For exam- 
ple, Sethi (quoted in Stem et al. 2001:212)  defines corpo- 
rate image as the "image of the corporate personality held 
in  the  minds  of  various  publics."  Thus,  we  argue  that 
research  in  brand  personality  that  has  predominantly 
focused on for-profit consumer products provides an im- 
portant starting point for understanding brand personality 
both at the corporate or organizational level and of non- 
profit organizations. 

Jennifer  Aaker  (1997)  defined  brand  personality  as 
"the set of human characteristics associated with a brand" 
(p.  347).  To develop a conceptual framework to measure 
the  personality  of  consumer  brands,  Aaker  adapted  the 
work  of personality researchers  in  psychology who  ex- 
amined the "Big Five," or five-factor, model (John  1990; 
McCrae  and  Costa  1989;  Norman  1963;  Tupes  and 
Christal  1958).  This stream of research provides a means 
for measuring the perceptions of a brand, a method for dif- 
ferentiating a brand from its competitors, and a common 
denominator  for  marketing  brands  across  market  seg- 
ments and subcultures (J. L. Aaker 1997).  Aaker used the 
personality trait approach  to  study the perceived human 
characteristics of brands and measure the valence of these 
traits among subjects. The end result of Aaker's study was 
a measure of brand personality that consisted of 42 traits 
and  five dimensions:  sincerity, excitement, competence, 
sophistication, and ruggedness. Follow-up analyses indi- 
cated that this five-factor structure was a reliable and valid 
measure  of the  symbolic attributes  of brand  personality 
across product categories and of the brands  within a par- 
ticular category (J. L. Aaker 1997). 

In subsequent research, Jennifer Aaker (1999) used her 
brand personality dimensions in two different experiments 
to examine the  self-expressive use  of brands  and how  a 
person's  self-concept  and  situational  influences  affect 
brand  preference.  The  results  indicate  that  consumers' 
preference for brands that had personality traits consistent 
with their own self-schema was moderated by their degree 
of "self-monitoring" (J. L. Aaker  1999:47)  or propensity 
to conform to what was deemed socially acceptable in dif- 
ferent situations. Jennifer Aaker (2000) also examined the 
accessibility and diagnosticity of persuasive associations 
in a series of experiments in a cross-cultural setting. She 
determined that both situational accessibility and cultural 
differences influence individual perceptions of the person- 
ality of a brand. 

The specific dimensions of brand personality have been 
examined among French (Ferrandi, Valette-Florence, and 
Fine-Falcy 2000),  Japanese,  and  Spanish  (Aaker,  Benet- 
Martinez, and Garolera 2001) consumers. Table 1 summa- 
rizes  the dimensions  that have been  found in  studies  of 

i 

. 0  

.~  E 

~,.., 
m 

0 %  

~ ' ~ , _  

r  

"F. 
t~ 

I::: 

0 

g 

r  

g ~  

o 

r_..,. 

= ,  

,% 

~ = . ~  
~ . , ~  

, , - , -  
.:.;  ~ 

" 

= ~   = 
~ 

r,.j 

r.,0 

u0 

.=_  g 

N 

. <  

< 

< 

299 

300 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

brand  personality.  Using  an  exploratory  approach, 
Ferrandi et al. (2000) found partial structural and semantic 
correspondence with Jennifer Aaker's (1997)  scale. They 
reduced the number of traits from 42 to 33 and found five 
dimensions: sincerity, dynamism, femininity, robustness, 
and conviviality. As we depict in Table 1, sincerity among 
French respondents was the only common dimension that 
Ferrandi  et  al.  (2000)  found  with Aaker's  (1997)  study. 
The  dimensions  that  Jennifer  Aaker  (2000)  and  Aaker 
et al. (2001) found among Japanese consumers were more 
similar to Jennifer Aaker's  (1997)  original study: excite- 
ment, competence, sincerity, and sophistication. However, 
peacefulness  emerged  as  a  separate  dimension  in  both 
studies using Japanese samples. Finally, whereas the com- 
mon  dimensions  found  among  Spanish  consumers  were 
excitement,  sincerity,  and  sophistication,  peacefulness 
and passion also emerged among this sample (Aaker et al. 
2001).  Thus, although specific dimensions, such as peace- 
fulness, conviviality, and passion, have occurred in one or 
more  specific  cultures,  previous  replications  and  exten- 
sions of brand personality have found a relatively consis- 
tent set of dimensions (i.e., sincerity, excitement, sophisti- 
cation, and competence). Moreover, previous studies have 
focused on exploring the dimensions of brand personality 
in for-profit products  and have examined brand  person- 
ality in cross-cultural settings. 

To our knowledge, previous research has not examined 
the extension of brand personality to the nonprofit sector. 
Thus,  we  seek to  integrate existing  knowledge of brand 
personality in  the  for-profit  sector  with  social  exchange 
theory  and  trust  to  identify  the  specific  dimensions  of 
brand personality in nonprofit organizations. First, we rec- 
ognize that nonprofit organizations are primarily intangi- 
ble  services  and  thus  are  themselves  the  focal  point  for 
consumers. Second, because the benefits of giving to non- 
profits are primarily social rather than economic, we be- 
lieve that the  salient dimensions  of nonprofit brand  per- 
sonality  reflect  the  social  nature  of  nonprofits  and  the 
importance of trust in terms of reliability and integrity. 

METHOD 

Because prior research has not examined brand person- 
ality specifically in the context of nonprofit organizations, 
we developed a  six-study, multimethod design. The first 
three studies used a discovery approach  and consisted of 
three qualitative methods: nominal groups, focus groups, 
and depth interviews of current donors and nonprofit pro- 
fessionals. We designed each qualitative study to explore 
two questions:  (1)  Do  nonprofits have personalities? and 
(2) If they do, what are the contents and dimensions of the 
personalities? After we  incorporated  the results  of these 
three studies, we conducted a fourth and fifth study among 
current donors to explore quantitatively the measurement 

of  brand  personality  and  to  determine  its  dimensions 
among nonprofit organizations in a parsimonious and reli- 
able manner. Finally, we conducted a sixth study of poten- 
tial donors to assess the predictive validity of our measure 
by examining the effect of nonprofit brand personality on 
intent to donate. 

QUALITATIVE STUDIES 

We employed a multimethod approach that used a mod- 
ified  focus  group  forum,  traditional  focus  groups,  and 
depth  interviews.  First,  we  conducted  modified  focus 
group sessions (i.e.,  nominal groups). We then conducted 
two traditional focus groups and 18 depth interviews. The 
participants in these studies were students, working pro- 
fessionals, and nonprofit practitioners. All studies incor- 
porated  the use  of individual "worksheets," were  audio- 
taped, and were subsequently transcribed. 

Stimuli Selection 

To  enhance  the  scope  and  comprehensiveness  of  the 
qualitative research,  we believed that it was important to 
select nonprofit organizations that might represent a broad 
spectrum of personality types. First, we chose three major 
classifications  of  nonprofit  organizations  from  The 
National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (American Associ- 
ation of Fundraising Council 2001):  health, environment/ 
fights, and arts/humanities. These classifications represent 
the largest groups or segments of nonprofit organizations 
in  the  United  States  (excluding  education  and  religious 
charities), have the same requirements for filing with the 
Internal Revenue Service,  and are required to make their 
financial  information  available  to  the  public  (American 
Association  of  Fundraising  Council  2001).  From  these 
classifications, we  selected  specific nonprofits that were 
somewhat  homogeneous  in  size,  scope,  and  financial 
structure.  Additional  criteria  that  we  used  to  select  the 
nonprofit organizations were that they were well-known; 
national in scope; and had the potential to identify, attract, 
and retain donors (see Webb et al. 2000).  A faculty panel 
reviewed the final selections to provide an initial assess- 
ment of each organization's national scope and distinctive- 
ness. Table 2 provides a list of the selected nonprofit orga- 
nizations (by classification). 

Study 1: 
Student Donor Focus Groups 

In the first qualitative study, we used a modified form of 
the focus group, termed a nominal grouping session. This 
method  allows  for  participation  of  larger  groups  in  the 
exploration  of a  construct  and  incorporates  independent 
responses  that  are  completed  before  group  discussions. 

Health 

American Cancer Society 
United Cerebral Palsy 
National Kidney Foundation 
March of Dimes 
AIDS Society 
Arthritis Foundation 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  301 

TABLE 2 
Stimuli Brands 

Environment/Rights 

Sierra Club 
Save the Whales 
National Audubon Society 
Greenpeace 
National Rifle Association 
American Botanical Society 

Arts/Humanities 

Literacy Council of America 
Public Broadcasting Services 
Southem Dance Works 
National Academy of Fine Arts 
National Symphony Association 
National Historical Society 

Before we facilitated the discussion with the entire group, 
each participant was provided with a worksheet that listed 
the six nonprofit organizations in each of the three classifi- 
cations (health, environment, or arts and human services). 
Participants were instructed to select two nonprofit orga- 
nizations  from  each  of  the  three  classifications  and  list 
at  least  five  adjectives  to  describe  their  choice  "as  if  it 
were a person." This procedure was followed by an open 
discussion. 

Sample.  The  participants  for  the  first  two  nominal 
groups  were  junior  and  senior  undergraduate  students 
who were enrolled in the business  school of a large, pub- 
lic,  southeastern  university  and  who  were  active donors 
to  some  type  of  nonprofit  organization  in  the  past  12 
months  (78%).  Research has  shown  that  during  the  past 
few  years,  more  young  adults  are  participating  in  char- 
itable giving (Marchetti 2003). Of the participants, 56 per- 
cent were male,  44  percent were female,  and  96  percent 
were between 20 and 23 years of age. The purpose of this 
initial  step was  to test whether donors could ascribe per- 
sonality traits to nonprofit organizations and to obtain ini- 
tial feedback on the specific choices of nonprofit organiza- 
tions in each category. 

Results.  The most frequently selected nonprofit orga- 
nizations provided initial insight into student donors' per- 
ceptions of the most well-known organizations. The orga- 
nizations included the American Cancer Society, March of 
Dimes, National Rifle Association, Greenpeace, National 
Academy of Fine Arts,  and the Public Broadcasting  Ser- 
vice (PBS). Each participant was asked to use at least five 
adjectives to describe the personality of his or her selected 
nonprofit. The distinctiveness of the most frequently men- 
tioned words  suggested that student donors attribute dis- 
tinctive  traits  to  nonprofit  organizations.  Many  of  the 
descriptive terms resembled those used in Jennifer Aaker's 
(1997)  study  of consumer brands.  However, participants 
also frequently mentioned words such as loving, kind, car- 
ing, helpful,  reliable, and compassionate,  which were not 
frequently identified in previous research. This implies the 
possibility of additional personality traits  among percep- 
tions of nonprofit organizations. 

Study 2: 
Community  Donor Focus Groups 

At this  stage  of discovery, it was  important to recruit 
nonstudent participants who represented different demo- 
graphic  profiles and  provided greater depth  and  breadth 
of discussions of nonprofit brand personality. In addition, 
in  the  marketing  and  nonprofit literature, Weitzman  and 
Jalandoni  (2001) have identified age as an important fac- 
tor in people's motivation, ability, and opportunity to be- 
come involved with nonprofits. Participants were asked to 
select  two  of the  six  nonprofit organizations  from  each 
classification  and  to  describe  the  organizations  with  at 
least five adjectives as if they were a person. Again, a dis- 
cussion followed the written exercise. 

Sample.  We  recruited  participants  for  two  separate 
focus  groups.  One  focus  group  was  recruited through  a 
notice that was posted on a board in an office complex in a 
medium-sized city. The other focus group sought recruits 
from  an  announcement  in  the  monthly  newsletter  of  a 
retirement  community  in  a  smaller city.  The  reward  for 
participation in both groups was  a meal and door prizes. 
These efforts resulted in 16 respondents. Of participants in 
both  focus  groups,  the  majority  were  female  (75%), 
ranged in age from 30 to older than 60, and were contribu- 
tors to a wide variety of nonprofit organizations (100%). 

Results.  In general, the community donor focus groups 
selected the same nonprofit organizations and used a simi- 
lar list of descriptive adjectives as the student donor sam- 
ple. Participants also used words such as caring, kind, and 
compassionate,  which further implied additional person- 
ality  traits  uniquely  associated  with  nonprofits.  In  addi- 
tion, the community donors identified personality charac- 
teristics  that  did  not  emerge  in  the  student  donor  focus 
groups.  The  participants  appeared  to be  concerned  with 
the efficiency or effectiveness of nonprofit organizations, 
and  thus  words  such  as  organized,  reputable, forward- 
thinking, and reflective emerged. Participants embellished 
the  symbolic  traits  typically  associated  with  brand  per- 
sonality  studies  with  additional  reliability  and  integrity 
aspects  (i.e., trustworthiness)  that might be related to the 

302 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

efficient use  of funds  and the  effective provision of ser- 
vices. We pursued these findings further by conducting the 
next qualitative step:  depth interviews. 

TABLE  3 
New Items  Generated From  Qualitative Studies 

Thoughorulness 

Integrity 

Reliability 

Study 3: 
Depth  Interviews: 
Donors and  Nonprofit  Professionals 

The depth interviews began with participants filling out 
the same worksheet as was used for the focus groups. After 
participants spent a few moments describing the personal- 
ity of two nonprofits, we used a  semistructured protocol 
for  in-depth  discussions  that  lasted  a  little  more  than  1 
hour. 

Sample. We conducted a total of 18 depth interviews. In 
addition to motivation and ability to contribute, we intro- 
duced an additional criterion for recruiting: at least half of 
the  people  interviewed  must  be  professional  nonprofit 
practitioners. We did this to explore perceptions of brand 
personality among nonprofit organization employees. Of 
the 18 interviewees, the majority were between the ages of 
50 and 59 (51%), were female (61%),  and had personally 
contributed to nonprofit organizations (78%).  For partici- 
pants who were nonprofit practitioners, personal contribu- 
tions were independent of professional employment. The 
nonprofit practitioners were also either senior vice presi- 
dents or executive directors, who had been in the nonprofit 
arena  for  an  average  of  20  years.  Each  interview  was 
audiotaped and subsequently transcribed. 

Results.  After careful review of the transcripts and the 
participants'  worksheets,  we  concluded  that  the  depth 
interviews further supported the unique brand personality 
attributes  for  nonprofits.  For  example,  one  respondent 
mentioned,  "I  would  say  that  particular  nonprofit,  as  a 
person, is big and tough, the bully on the block. However, 
they  have  vision  for  where  they  want  to  go."  Another 
respondent mentioned,  "When  thinking  of the  nonprofit 
as  a person,  I  saw  someone who was caring,  aggressive, 
passionate." 

In addition, the importance of the reliability and integ- 
rity of a nonprofit organization emerged just as it had in the 
community donor focus groups. One interviewee who was 
a  nonprofit  practitioner  commented,  "Volunteers  today 
demand  accountability. They  want to  see  outcome mea- 
sures." Another respondent stated, "There is a tremendous 
pressure on nonprofits regarding accountability where our 
boards want sound cash management and financial projec- 
tions." The importance of integrity also emerged from the 
interviewees  who  were  not  practitioners.  These  people 
repeatedly emphasized that they "wanted to know where 
their money  was  going." As  we  discussed  previously, it 
appears  that trust in  a nonprofit to manage contributions 
responsibly is important not only among donors but also 

Reputable 

Loving 
Compassionate  Committed to public good 
Kind 
Helpful 
Caring 

Purposeful 
Accessible 
Long-term orientation 

Cost-effective 
Financially stable 

among nonprofit professionals. In summary, participants 
stressed nonprofit organizations' service orientation, need 
to help others, and trustworthiness in soliciting and using 
funds to achieve their mission. 

Summary of the Qualitative Studies 

Overall,  some  of  the  terms  that  participants  used  to 
describe  nonprofit  organizations  were  similar  to  those 
used for consumer brands  (J.  L.  Aaker  1997).  Sincerity, 
excitement, competence,  sophistication,  and  ruggedness 
all were viable dimensions for describing nonprofit orga- 
nizations. However, two other important findings based on 
the qualitative studies emerged: (1)  the social importance 
of nonprofits being kind, caring, and compassionate, and 
(2) the trustworthiness of nonprofits. 

The  new  descriptive  words  we  discovered  in  our 
study's  qualitative  phase  are  related  to  the  salience  of 
social  exchange  and  trust  in  the  nonprofit  context  (see 
Table 3). We organize these descriptive words under three 
new dimensions: thoughtfulness (loving, compassionate, 
kind, helpful, and caring), integrity (reputable, committed 
to the public good, purposeful, accessible, and long-term 
orientation), and reliability (cost-effective and financially 
stable). 

QUANTITATIVE  STUDIES 

There were two primary objectives of the quantitative 
phase  of  the  research:  (1)  to  examine  empirically  the 
dimensions of brand personality in the nonprofit context 
and (2)  to assess the reliability and validity of the dimen- 
sions among nonprofit donors. We conducted the research 
in the quantitative phase in a two-step process.  First, we 
conducted exploratory factor analyses among faculty, staff 
(Study 4),  and  student  (Study  5)  donors  to  develop  par- 
simonious  brand  personality  measures  for  nonprofit  or- 
ganizations. Second, we conducted a confirmatory factor 
analysis (Study 6) among a more nationally representative 
sample, which was designed to reflect the U.S. population 
along several demographic and donor characteristics. 

For this quantitative phase, we chose samples to reflect 
a range of existing and potential donors for nonprofit orga- 

nizations. Initial efforts (Studies 4 and 5) focused on two 
convenience samples (faculty/staff and students) that rep- 
resented current and future donors to nonprofit organiza- 
tions.  The use of these two  samples  enabled  us  to deter- 
mine and cross-check the dimensions of brand personality 
among  two  separate  samples  independently.  Additional 
efforts (Study 6) focused on assessing and confirming the 
generalizability of the dimensions among a nationally rep- 
resentative sample of potential donors patterned after the 
national study that Jennifer Aaker (1997) conducted. 

In  each  quantitative  study,  we  took  care  to  maintain 
consistency  with  the  nonprofit  stakeholders  included  in 
the sample.  Classification questions  enabled  us to ascer- 
tain  respondents'  involvement  with  nonprofit  organiza- 
tions.  All  samples  exhibited high levels of experience or 
current involvement (more than 70%), as evidenced by the 
high percentage of respondents who reported committing 
money, time,  or goods  or services to nonprofit organiza- 
tions in the past  12 months. 

Studies 4 and 5: 
Exploratory  Analysis of Factor Structure 

Stimuli.  We used the same nonprofit classifications that 
we employed in the qualitative studies in Study 4 (health, 
environment/fights, and  arts/humanities).  However, each 
product  category  was  represented  by  only one  exemplar 
brand (i.e., March of Dimes, Greenpeace, or PBS). These 
brands were the most salient and the most frequently cho- 
sen  in  their category from  the  original  choices provided 
in  the  qualitative  phase.  The  use  of exemplar  nonprofit 
brands  was  important  to  minimize  respondent  fatigue. 
Each  respondent  was  asked  to  evaluate  how  descriptive 
the  brand  personality  traits  were  for  one  of  these  three 
organizations. 

We selected a separate set of exemplar brands in Study 
5 to increase the generalizability of the results.  We exam- 
ined a total of five nonprofit organizations, one from each 
of the top  five product  categories  of nonprofit organiza- 
tions in the National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities:  arts, 
culture,  and  humanities;  health  related;  environmental; 
human  services;  and  public  and  societal  benefit  (Urban 
Institute 2002). After reviewing a list of the organizations, 
we used the top organization in terms of revenue from each 
of the five categories (Jones 2002) to ensure that the orga- 
nizations  selected were national in scope, were represen- 
tative of their category, and provided a diverse and recog- 
nizable  set  of  stimuli.  The  specific  organizations  were 
Habitat  for  Humanity,  American  Heart  Association, 
Nature Conservancy,  and  American  Red  Cross.  We  ran- 
domly  assigned  each  participant  to  one of the  organiza- 
tions and asked them to evaluate its brand personality. 

Samples.  The sampling frame for Study 4 included full- 
time  faculty and  staff from  a  large,  public,  southeastern 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  303 

university. Surveys were distributed through campus mail, 
and we used a drawing  for a  monetary prize as an incen- 
tive. Of the  1,380 surveys distributed, 403 were returned, 
for a  response rate  of approximately 29  percent.  On  the 
basis of the criteria of percentage of completion, two inde- 
pendent  reviewers  excluded  17  of the  returned  surveys, 
which yielded an effective response rate of 27.2 percent, or 
376 usable responses. 

As a whole, the sample for this quantitative phase was 
between the ages of 25 and 54 (77%), female (64%), rela- 
tively educated (47% held a graduate degree), and middle- 
class (64% earned between  $20,000 and $74,999); it also 
consisted predominantly of staff (66%) rather than faculty. 
The  vast  majority  of  respondents  (89.3%)  reported  in- 
volvement  with  a  nonprofit  organization  in  the  past  12 
months. 

The sample for Study 5 consisted of 355 undergraduate 
business  majors  from two  large public  universities.  Stu- 
dents were made aware of the survey through an electronic 
bulletin  board  used  by  large  introductory  marketing 
classes; participation was on a voluntary basis. Of the par- 
ticipants,  54.2  percent were  male  and  45.6  percent were 
female; their average age was between 18 and 24 (95.8%), 
which  we expected in  this population.  We asked  partici- 
pants two questions to assess  their degree of involvement 
with  nonprofit organizations.  The first asked  about prior 
experience  with  nonprofit organizations  on  a  scale  of  1 
(none)  to 5 (a lot), of which 69 percent of participants indi- 
cated  their  experience level  of  3  or  higher.  The  second 
asked  about  the  number  of  nonprofit  organizations  the 
respondents had been involved with in the past 12 months. 
Approximately 45.1  percent  indicated  their involvement 
with between two and five organizations. Thus, as a whole, 
the  sample  had  experience with,  and  at least  some  prior 
involvement with, nonprofit organizations. 

Measures.  We developed survey instruments for Stud- 
ies 4 and 5. We included a qualifying question in the sur- 
veys to ensure that respondents were involved with one or 
more  nonprofit organizations  in  the  past  12  months.  As 
we previously mentioned, an additional question inquired 
about  how  many  different  organizations  participants 
might  have  contributed  to  and  in  what  form  (i.e.,  time, 
money, or in-kind  goods or services). 

Another section of the survey began with 54 items that 
we  designed  to  assess  brand  personality.  We  combined 
Jennifer Aaker's  (1997)  original 42  items  with  12 newly 
developed  descriptors  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  the 
qualitative studies. As we show in Table 3, the new items 
were added to address two important themes that emerged 
from the qualitative phase of our research. First, we added 
several items to measure the potential social nature of non- 
profits. Second, we added items to capture more precisely 
the trust aspects (i.e., integrity and reliability) of nonprofit 
organizations that were identified in the qualitative work. 

304 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

Results: Exploratory factor analysis.  A factor analysis 
of  the  brand  personality  items  resulted  in  a  four-factor 
solution for both Studies 4 and 5, based on interpretation 
and a scree plot. As we show in Table 4, we retained two of 
Jennifer Aaker's  (1997)  original five factors (sophistica- 
tion and ruggedness). Items for sincerity, excitement, and 
competence  did  not  form  distinct dimensions,  and  they 
cross-loaded  on  other factors. Two new factors based  on 
the additional traits generated from the qualitative studies 
emerged as distinct brand personality dimensions of non- 
profits: integrity and nurturance. Integrity focused on the 
reputation,  honesty,  and  reliability  of  the  organization. 
Nurturance  focused  on  the  extent  to  which  a  nonprofit 
organization was perceived to be  loving, compassionate, 
and caring. 

In  summary,  the  factor  analysis  for  both  samples 
resulted in a four-factor solution of integrity, ruggedness, 
sophistication,  and  nurturance.  Of the  original  54  items 
(traits),  we  retained  15,  which  resulted  in  a  more  par- 
simonious  measure  of  brand  personality  for  nonprofit 
organizations. 

Reliability.  We found that all four of the symbolic per- 
sonality  dimensions  demonstrate  sufficient  reliability 
(Churchill  1979;  Nunnally  1979).  We  assessed  integrity 
with five items, resulting in alpha coefficients of .86  and 
.91 for the student and faculty/staff samples, respectively. 
We measured ruggedness using four items that produced 
alpha  coefficients of  .87  and  .84,  respectively. We mea- 
sured  sophistication  using  three  items,  yielding  alpha 
coefficients of .84  for both samples. Finally, we assessed 
nurturance  with  three  newly  developed  items--loving, 
caring,  and  compassionate--that  we  derived  from  the 
qualitative  work,  which  resulted  in  alpha  coefficients 
of  .82  and  .81  for  the  student and  faculty/staff samples, 
respectively. 

Personality  differentiation.  The  measures  we  devel- 
oped in this phase were intended to differentiate the per- 
sonalities  of  nonprofit  organizations.  We  compared  the 
results  of  a  multivariate  analysis  of  variance  to  assess 
whether  the  mean  scores  for  the  exemplar  nonprofit 
brands differed across the dimensions of brand personality 
for the three organizations in  Study 4  (see Table 5).  The 
nonprofit  organizations  exhibited  distinct  personalities. 
Participants  viewed PBS  and March  of Dimes  as having 
more  integrity than  Greenpeace,  which  was  rated  as  the 
most rugged and the least nurturing  of the three organiza- 
tions. Whereas PBS was viewed as the most sophisticated, 
March of Dimes was viewed as the most nurturing. Thus, it 
appears that current and potential donors not only ascribe 
personality traits to nonprofit organizations but also differ- 
entiate between organizations on the basis of personality. 
We discuss this finding further in the Discussion and Im- 
plications section. 

Study 6: 
Confirmatory  Analysis  of Factor Structure 

Stimuli.  Before  we  began  Study  6,  we  conducted  a 
check  of  the  exemplar  brands  used  in  Studies  4  and  5. 
Ninety-four people were contacted by telephone during a 
period  of  10  days  and  asked  about  their  recognition  of 
eight brands from the same three product classifications. 
March of Dimes (94.4%),  Greenpeace (38.9%),  and PBS 
(88.9%) were again the most frequently identified organi- 
zations in each of their respective categories; therefore, we 
used them in Study 6. 

Sample.  Using  the  2000  U.S.  Bureau  of  the  Census 
guidelines,  we  stratified  the  sample  to  represent  five 
demographic  dimensions  of  the  U.S.  population  (sex, 
household  income,  age,  ethnicity, and  geographic  loca- 
tion). We took this approach in an effort to contact a cross 
section of people who would be representative of the aver- 
age  U.S.  household  and  to  be  consistent  with  Jennifer 
Aaker's (1997)  original study, which was based on a simi- 
lar national sample of individual consumers. As with each 
of our  prior  samples,  we  asked  respondents  about  their 
involvement with any nonprofit in the past  12 months. Of 
the respondents, 80.3 percent indicated that they had con- 
tributed  to a  nonprofit during that period.  Prior research 
has consistently shown that, on average, approximately 80 
to 90 percent of U.S. households contribute to nonprofits 
in any given year (Weitzman and Jalandoni 2001). 

Of  a  total  of  7,952  eligible  telephone  numbers,  the 
number of completed interviews was  1,029,  for an effec- 
tive response rate of 12.9 percent. Of the respondents, 60 
percent were  female, 26.8  percent had  a  college degree, 
and  17.3 percent  had  graduate  or  professional  degrees. 
Approximately  32.7  percent  of  respondents  reported 
income between  $20,000  and $50,000,  and 27.8  percent 
reported  income  between  $50,000  and  $100,000;  10.4 
percent  of respondents  reported  an  income  of less  than 
$20,000,  and  11.2 percent reported an income of greater 
than $100,000. 

Procedure.  We collected data by telephone.  The con- 
tacts were  identified by means of modified random digit 
dialing to include the 48 contiguous states. The interview- 
ers  were professionally trained and experienced in  using 
the  computer-assisted  telephone  interview  (CATI),  an 
automated  system  for  contacting  and  interviewing  that 
captures  responses  in  a  database  during  interviews.  The 
instrument was pretested in a series of small samples (10- 
12), and on the basis of the results, we made refinements to 
it  before  initiating  the  full  study.  Each  interview  lasted 
approximately  12  minutes.  The  primary  calling  times 
were between 6:00 p.m.  and 9:00 p.m., Monday through 
Friday. To minimize selection bias, we took the following 
two measures: (1) for each successful household contact, a 

.

~

~

~

~

@ 

2- 

O 

_o "; 

- I  

"13 
m 
0 
. J  

f,.) 

i ,  

"13 

N 

( n  

~  ~" 

( 

( 

~ .

.

.

.

.

~  m 

. 

. 

i . -  

~  ~ 

.

.

.

.

.

.

I

I

I

.

.

.

.

.

.

v 

U 

t j  

~ 8  

II  " ~  

~.~ 

o 

; ~ ' . . ' ~  

c:u 

"~ 
" ~ . , ~  

~ . ~  
"~ 

- 

s 

3 0 5  

~ 

. ~  
~.~ 
(cid:12)9 - 

= 
~ =   ~  o-~  o  ~  ~ o  

~ 

~; 
~ 

 
 
 
 
 
306 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER  2005 

TABLE 5 
Mean  Differences  in  Brand  Personality Dimensions  Across Three Nonprofit  Organizations ",b,c 

Dependent  Variable 

Integrity 
Ruggedness 
Sophistication 
Nurturance 

df 

2,373 
2,373 
2,373 
2,373 

F  Value 

p Value 

64.6 
43.5 
10.2 
42.9 

<  .001 
<  .001 
<  .001 
<  .001 

PBS 
(1) 

4.13 
2.19 
2.61 
3.22 

Greenpeace 
(2) 

March of Dimes 
(3) 

3.03 
2.83 
2.22 
2.81 

4.04 
1.84 
2.17 
3.92 

Contrasts 

1 &2,  2&3 
1 &2,  3; 2&3 
l&2;  3 
1 &2,  3; 2&3 

a. Wilks's lambda =  .419, F =   50.39,p  <  .000. 
b. All univariate F  values and Bonferroni contrasts were significantly different at alpha =  .05. 
c. We evaluated each brand personality dimension using an average scale  score of the items contained in that dimension (see Table 4), where 1 = not at all 
descriptive  and 5 = very descriptive. 

respondent was randomly selected by asking for the adult 
(18 or older) whose birthday was the most recent; and (2) 
at least five callback  attempts were made for each  active 
number.  Each  respondent  was  asked  about  his  or  her 
awareness  of  the  three  nonprofit  organizations  and  was 
assigned  to  one  of  the  organizations  that  he  or  she 
recognized. 

Reliability.  We  calculated  construct  reliability  esti- 
mates  on  the  basis  of  the  standardized  loadings  for  the 
four-factor correlated model  (Fornell  and  Larker  1981). 
Coefficient alpha reliability estimates  are summarized in 
Table 6. The corresponding construct reliabilityestimates 
were .92 for integrity, .75 for ruggedness, .72 for sophisti- 
cation, and  .88  for nurturance.  In addition, all indicator t 
values  were  significant  (p  <  .001),  and  all  standardized 
estimates exceeded .50 (Hair et al.  1998). 

Discriminant  validity.  We  examined  discriminant 
validity by a test that Fornell and Larker (1981) suggested 
in which the variance extracted within constructs is com- 
pared with the square of the bivariate correlation between 
factors. The variance-extracted statistics for the constructs 
in our model were .70 for integrity, .42 for ruggedness, .46 
for sophisticated, and .71  for nurturing. The square of the 
phi estimates (which reflects the correlation between con- 
structs) was as follows: (1) less than .01 between integrity 
and rugged, (2) .02 between rugged and nurturing, (3) .33 
between rugged and sophisticated, (4). 13 between sophis- 
ticated and nurturing, (5). 19 between integrity and sophis- 
ticated, and (6) .66 between integrity and nurturing. Thus, 
all variance-extracted estimates exceeded the square of the 
between-factor  correlations,  providing  evidence  of 
discriminant  validity.  We  used  another  method,  which 
Anderson  and  Gerbing  (1988)  suggested,  to  assess  the 
discriminant validity of the constructs. In this method, the 
covariance between two latent constructs is set to one, and 
the model is evaluated against a similar model without this 
constraint.  We  used  this  method  to  test  the  discriminant 
validity between integrity and nurturance. Comparing the 
fit between the two models (with the phi estimate between 
integrity and  nurturing  either set to one or allowed to be 

TABLE  6 
Reliability and  Standardized  Loadings: 
Confirmatory  Factor Analysis for Study 6 a'b 

Construct 

Integrity 
ct =  .922 

Ruggedness 
ot =  .749 

Sophistication 

=  .724 

Nurturance 
~t =  .876 

Item 

Item Loading 

Honest 
Positive influence 
Committed to the public good 
Reputable 
Reliable 
Tough 
Masculine 
Outdoor 
Western 
Good-looking 
Glamorous 
Upper class 
Compassionate 
Caring 
Loving 

.86 
.84 
.84 
.82 
.81 
.70 
.68 
.61 
.61 
.75 
.68 
.59 
.87 
.84 
.82 

a. ;(2 = 370.3 with 84 degrees of freedom (p <  .001) with a sample size of 
1,029. 
b. Goodness-of-Fit Index = .947, Incremental Fit Index = .962, and Com- 
parative Fit Index =  .962. 

free)  provided  further  evidence  of  discriminant  validity 
(Zz A =  12.25 with 1 df, p < .01). Finally, none of the phi val- 
ues  (the  covariances  between  constructs)  plus  or  minus 
two  standard  errors  included  1.0,  providing  further evi- 
dence of discriminant validity. 

Overall modelfit.  In an effort to evaluate the scale items 
and  their structure further,  we examined a  series of con- 
firmatory factor models  in Study 6. We evaluated a four- 
factor  model  (integrity,  ruggedness,  sophistication,  and 
nurturance) with the 15 items that remained after Studies 4 
and 5. We modeled all items to load on their corresponding 
factor and allowed all latent variables to correlate. Dimen- 
sion labels, reliability estimates, items, and factor loadings 
appear in Table 6. 

The chi-square value for this model was 370.3  with 84 
degrees of freedom (p <  .001).  Values  for the Goodness- 
of-Fit Index, Incremental Fit Index, and  Comparative Fit 

Index  were  .947,  .962,  and  .962,  respectively, indicating 
an  acceptable  level  of  fit.  Although  no  absolute  cutoff 
value or threshold value exists for interpreting these statis- 
tics, a cutoff value of .90 is frequently used in the literature 
(Bollen 1989; Hair et al.  1998). The root mean square error 
of  approximation  was  .060,  which  is  a  goodness-of-fit 
measure that accounts for model complexity; values of .08 
or lower indicate an adequate level of fit. In short, the four- 
factor model appeared to fit the data relatively well. 

Alternative  models.  We  examined  several  additional 
models to determine the dimensional structure of our data 
better. We estimated all models using AMOS 4.0 and com- 
pared them with the four-factor model  we described pre- 
viously; we  allowed  all  latent  variables  to  correlate.  We 
estimated  the  models  in  the  following  order.  First,  we 
examined  a  one-dimensional  model  for  which  all  items 
were forced to load  as  indicators  on  a  single factor. Sec- 
ond, we examined a four-factor uncorrelated model, along 
with a three-factor model, with (1) ruggedness, (2) sophis- 
tication,  (3) integrity, and  (4)  nurturance.  Finally,  we es- 
timated  an  additional  (four-factor  alternative)  model  to 
assess the discriminant validity between integrity and nur- 
turance. As we described previously, this model was iden- 
tical to the four-factor correlated model, except that the co- 
variance between integrity and nurturance was set to one. 

All models exhibited a significant denigration in model 
fit when compared with the correlated four-factor model. 
Chi-square  difference tests  between  that  model  and  the 
alternative  models  were  as  follows:  for  the  one-factor 
model,  %2~ =  1,826.5  with  6  degrees of freedom; for the 
orthogonal four-factor model, Z2a =  1,026.2 with 6 degrees 
of freedom; for the three-factor model, %2 A = 438.2 with 3 
degrees  of  freedom;  and  for  the  four-factor  alternative 
model with integrity and nurturance set to one, %2 A =  12.2 
with 1 degree of freedom. All of the chi-square difference 
tests were significant at p  <  .01,  indicating a significantly 
worse fit to the data than the correlated four-factor model. 
Thus, all models exhibited some denigration of model fit 
when compared with the correlated four-factor model. 

Predictive validity. We examined the predictive validity 
of the four factors of brand personality for nonprofit orga- 
nizations  (integrity,  sophistication,  ruggedness,  and  nur- 
turance)  by  relating  the  factors  to  the  likelihood  that  a 
person  would contribute to  a  nonprofit organization. We 
combined  the  three measures  of likelihood  to contribute 
(money, time,  and  in-kind  goods  or  services)  to  form  a 
summated scale for each organization. The specific items 
used were as follows: "On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means 
not very likely and 5 means very likely, how likely is it that 
you wiIl, (a) contribute any personal  time,  (b) contribute 
any money, (c) contribute something other than money or 
time?" Each respondent was asked these questions for one 
organization  (PBS,  Greenpeace,  or  March  of Dimes)  to 
minimize  respondent  fatigue.  Alpha  coefficients for  the 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  307 

likelihood of contributing scale were .74 for PBS,  .86 for 
Greenpeace, and  .78 for March  of Dimes. 

The overall correlation between likelihood to contrib- 
ute and each dimension of nonprofit brand personality for 
each  organization  (PBS,  Greenpeace,  and  March  of 
Dimes, respectively) was as follows:  .258,  .432, and  .301 
for integrity; .274,. 106, and  .229 for sophistication; .236, 
(cid:12)9 104, and. 184 for ruggedness; and .268, .392, and .271 for 
nurturance. All the coefficients were significant atp < .0 I, 
except  for  the  correlations  for  Greenpeace  between 
sophistication (r =. 106) and ruggedness (r =. 1 04) and the 
likelihood  to  contribute  to  this  organization.  This  result 
might  be  due  to  a  perceived lack  of connection between 
sophistication and the image of Greenpeace and a lack of 
variance on  the ruggedness  dimension  for this  organiza- 
tion. Thus, likelihood to contribute was related to respon- 
dents' perceptions of the organizations' brand personality, 
in support of the validity of our scale. 

In  summary,  the confirmatory analysis  supported  the 
four-factor correlated solution in which integrity, sophisti- 
cation,  ruggedness,  and  nurturance served as  the  dimen- 
sions of brand personality among nonprofit organizations. 

DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 

This research extends the conceptualization and  mea- 
surement of brand personality to the nonprofit sector. We 
attempted to  answer  four key questions  that pertained to 
nonprofit brand  personality:  (1)  Do  nonprofit  organiza- 
tions possess brand personalities? (2) If they do, what kind 
of personalities are they? (3) Are nonprofit brand person- 
alities  related  the  charitable  giving  intentions?  and  (4) 
How  can  brand  personalities  help  nonprofit  marketers? 
The first three questions relate to the theoretical and mea- 
surement applicability of brand personality. The last ques- 
tion relates to the managerial relevance of our findings. 

Implications for Theory 

We  asked  the  first  question  simply  to  determine 
whether  the  concept of brand  personality  applied  to  the 
nonprofit context.  Thus,  we  conducted  three  qualitative 
studies to determine whether current and potential donors 
could  indeed  ascribe  personality  characteristics  to  non- 
profit organizations.  Our  results  reveal  that  this  was  the 
case. Indeed, respondents easily ascribed human personal- 
ity traits to nonprofit organizations in both the qualitative 
and the quantitative phases of our research. 

For our  second question,  the qualitative research  pro- 
vided a rich understanding of the personality characteris- 
tics that current and potential donors use to describe non- 
profits. Here, we discovered that many of the dimensions 
used to describe the nonprofit organizations are similar to 
those previously found for consumer brands  (J.  L. Aaker 

308 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

1997).  However,  new  words  emerged  in  this  phase  that 
validated the theoretical underpinnings of social exchange 
and trust that are central to the nonprofit context. Words 
such as kind, caring, and compassionate emerged, which 
reflect the social benefits that donors might seek from non- 
profit organizations. Furthermore, the importance of trust 
emerged in terms of integrity and reliability. Here, words 
and descriptions such as reputable,  committed to the pub- 
lic good, and financially stable all emerged from our series 
of qualitative studies. 

In our quantitative phase, two of the four dimensions 
(sophistication and ruggedness) were similar to those pre- 
viously  found  by  Jennifer  Aaker  (1997).  However,  two 
additional dimensions, integrity and nurturance, were also 
established, which again provides relevance to the theoret- 
ical underpinnings of social exchange and trust in the non- 
profit context. Integrity, which was the first factor in our 
quantitative exploratory analysis, represents a particularly 
important or chronic dimension for evaluating nonprofits. 
Integrity captures  the importance that respondents place 
on  commitment  and  reliability,  as  well  as  the  positive 
influence that a nonprofit has on its community. This find- 
ing demonstrates the importance that people place on trust 
and public  stewardship when they evaluate nonprofit or- 
ganizations. Nurturance  demonstrates the social benefits 
that current  and potential donors  search for in nonprofit 
organizations. 

Overall, our results indicate that there are both similari- 
ties  and  differences  between  the  brand  personalities  of 
nonprofit organizations and consumer brands. The emer- 
gence of integrity and nurturance as dimensions represent 
two important aspects of evaluating the brand personality 
of nonprofit organizations. Previous studies of brand per- 
sonality have found several dimensions in different sam- 
ples (J. L. Aaker  1997,  2000;  Aaker et al. 2001; Ferrandi 
et al. 2000). Sincerity is the most commonly found dimen- 
sion,  followed  by  sophistication  (see  Table  1).  Several 
other  dimensions  (e.g.,  ruggedness,  J.  L.  Aaker  1997; 
robustness, Ferrandi et al. 2000; peacefulness, Aaker et al. 
2001) have emerged in specific studies. Our findings build 
on  this  research  by  demonstrating  the  importance  of 
sophistication  and  ruggedness  among  nonprofits.  Al- 
though we did not explicitly find sincerity to be a dimen- 
sion, integrity may encompass a more generalized form of 
trust or unique aspect of sincerity among nonprofits. Both 
sincerity and integrity include honesty as a trait. However, 
integrity appears  to  focus  more  on  the  overall  commit- 
ment, positive influence, and reliability of a nonprofit or- 
ganization, whereas sincerity focuses on a brand's whole- 
someness  and cheerfulness as  well as  its honesty. Thus, 
integrity is  an important and  unique dimension of brand 
personality found for nonprofits. 

Although  integrity  was  the  first  factor  we  studied 
across all three nonprofit classifications, the environmen- 
tal organizations (i.e., Greenpeace; see Table 5) were not 

perceived as possessing integrity to the same degree as the 
other two classifications. This finding reveals two impor- 
tant implications. First, not only do current and potential 
donors ascribe personality traits to nonprofit organizations 
but they also perceive differences in personalities  across 
various  types  of nonprofits.  Second,  knowledge  of this 
aspect of brand personality could prove useful for politi- 
cally charged organizations, such as Greenpeace  and the 
National Rifle Association. 

It is not  surprising  that nurturance  (compassion,  lov- 
ing, and caring) is a particularly salient brand personality 
dimension  for  nonprofit  organizations  across  the  three 
classifications  (health,  environment/rights,  and  arts/ 
humanities). However, as we found in the integrity dimen- 
sion, the degree of importance that people placed on nur- 
turance  when  describing  the  organizations  was  not  the 
same  across  the  classifications  (see  Table  5).  In  other 
words, the mean difference for nurturance was lower for 
Greenpeace than for PBS or March of Dimes. Thus, brand 
personality  dimensions  vary  not  only  among  different 
samples (e.g., cultures, subcultures) but also according to 
the marketing context. This finding again may allude to the 
politically charged orientation of Greenpeace. Additional 
research should be conducted in other marketing contexts, 
such  as  services  or  tourist  destinations,  political  candi- 
dates, educational institutions, or any number of venues. 

With regard to our third question, the results shed some 
initial insight into the ability of nonprofit brand personali- 
ties to influence intent to give.  Across the three nonprofit 
organizations (PBS,  Greenpeace,  and March  of Dimes), 
we found significant correlations between each dimension 
of nonprofit brand personality and intent to give. Thus, this 
finding presents a starting point for further investigation of 
the relationship between nonprofit brand personality and 
important nonprofit outcomes. We discuss the implication 
of this finding further in the Future Research section. 

Implications  for Nonprofit  Practitioners 

With regard to our fourth question, brand  personality 
has  several  implications  for practitioners  in  the  field  of 
nonprofit marketing. Overall, it appears that brand person- 
ality can enhance the image of nonprofit organizations by 
enabling them to harness the power of branding. That is, 
nonprofit organizations can use brand personality to create 
a more specific and unique image by clearly communicat- 
ing their personality dimensions. 

Not only did this  study indicate that across  nonprofit 
classifications  (health,  environment/rights,  and  arts/ 
humanities), there are distinct personality differences, but 
it also introduced the possibility that even within a classifi- 
cation (e.g., health), there may be opportunities for non- 
profits to position themselves more strongly against their 
closest competitors. A clearer understanding of their own 
brand personality dimensions offers nonprofits the poten- 

tial to capitalize on these nuances by developing and im- 
plementing  branding  strategies  across  key  stakeholder 
groups.  For  example,  all  potential  donors  may  be  con- 
cemed  with  integrity  and  nurturance  dimensions,  but 
among professional nonprofit practitioners, integrity may 
be  even  more  important  because  of their  concerns  with 
accountability. These insights may result in better targeted 
messages  and  media placement when  nonprofits address 
different  stakeholder  groups.  Thus,  development  of  a 
strong brand personality may provide an efficient means to 
position  a  nonprofit organization both  within  and  across 
market segments  as  it struggles with the increasing com- 
petition for donors. 

The results of this study demonstrate the importance of 
focusing on several aspects of brand personality that differ 
from for-profit consumer brands.  Nonprofits need to rec- 
ognize the importance of developing a corporate identity 
that  focuses on  nurturance,  or being  perceived as  caring 
and  compassionate  toward  their cause.  In  addition,  non- 
profits  cannot  ignore  the  importance  of  integrity.  Non- 
profits must recognize their responsibility not only to be 
committed  to  the  public  good  but  also  to  be  honest  and 
forthright with how they ask for and handle donors' time, 
money,  and  in-kind  donations,  because  people  evaluate 
their actions and intentions. 

LIMITATIONS 

As  with  all  social  science research,  it  is  important  to 
recognize the limitations of this project. This research rep- 
resents an initial attempt to extend brand personality mea- 
surement  to  the  nonprofit  sector.  The  specific  organiza- 
tions we used as stimuli in this project represent a potential 
limitation.  Although  we  varied  the  organizations  across 
studies  and  selected them for their familiarity and  repre- 
sentativeness, the size and complexity of the nonprofit sec- 
tor necessitates that the stimuli may not be representative 
of  all  nonprofit  organizations.  Future  research  could 
examine the brand personality of other nonprofits in addi- 
tional classification categories. 

The specific samples obtained and the sampling  meth- 
ods used represent another potential limitation to the find- 
ings. In an effort to understand better how people perceive 
and describe nonprofit organizations, in the initial qualita- 
tive research,  we  used  convenience samples  of students, 
community members, and practitioners. We also conducted 
preliminary quantitative studies among two separate con- 
venience samples.  We selected the two samples  (faculty/ 
staff and  students)  to represent current and future donors 
and to provide some demographic divergence across sam- 
ples.  Although  we  triangulated  data  across  samples  and 
incorporated information obtained from previous research 
and the qualitative studies, the specific samples we used in 
the exploratory phase  of our research focused on univer- 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  309 

sity respondents in the southeast and thus may not be rep- 
resentative of individual donors in general. 

The second and confirmatory phase of our quantitative 
research  attempted  to  address  this  limitation  by  using  a 
nationally representative sample  patterned  after Jennifer 
Aaker's (1997) study. However, the use of telephone inter- 
views may have led to a sample composed of respondents 
who  were  more  likely  to  be  at  home  (despite  repeated 
callbacks) and more highly involved in nonprofits than the 
population in general. Future research might examine bar- 
riers to participation among noncontributors. However, all 
our  samples  exhibited a  relatively high  level of involve- 
ment in nonprofit organizations. 

Further research  is  also  needed  to  demonstrate  more 
definitively the impact of brand personality on contribu- 
tions to nonprofit organizations. Although this study pro- 
vides a preliminary association between brand personality 
and  likelihood  to  contribute,  additional  research  could 
vary the levels of specific brand personality dimensions to 
assess their effects on likelihood to contribute. This type of 
experimental approach would better demonstrate the rela- 
tionship between brand personality and giving in the non- 
profit  sector  and  be  less  susceptible  to  the  problem  of 
common-method bias than the correlational approach we 
used in this study. 

In short, despite the use of different methods and sam- 
ple  groups,  this  study is  limited  by the  specific samples, 
the  specific traits,  and the specific organizations  studied. 
Further exploration and description of key personality fac- 
tors and  terms to describe a  broad array of organizations 
and  situations  are  needed  and  are  an  important  topic for 
future research. 

FUTURE  RESEARCH 

The concept of brand personality in the nonprofit sector 
can be explored further in several ways. First, our measure 
of  brand  personality  should  be  replicated  in  other  non- 
profit contexts for further validation. Different dimensions 
of brand  personality have been  found  by Jennifer Aaker 
(1997,  1999)  in  her examination  of brand  personality in 
different cultures. Similarly, differences may occur across 
stakeholder  groups  and  cultures  when  nonprofit  brands 
are  assessed.  Future research  could  examine  the  specific 
characteristics of nonprofit donors and further test the effi- 
cacy  and  robustness  of  our  measures  among  different 
samples and in different contexts. 

Further  research  is  also  needed  to  demonstrate  more 
definitively the  impact of brand  personality  on  contribu- 
tions to nonprofit organizations. This study provides a pre- 
liminary association between brand personality and likeli- 
hood  to  contribute, but  it  does  not  directly  examine  the 
impact  of brand  personality on  actual contributions  over 
time. Future research could longitudinally track measures 

310 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

of brand personality over time and directly link changes in 
the measures  to changes in donations. 

Multidimensional  scaling  and  positioning  studies 
could also determine  the perceptual  proximity  of specific 
nonprofit  categories  and  examples  of  nonprofit  brands. 
Here,  a  nonprofit  organization  could  learn  the  extent  to 
which it occupies a unique competitive position and iden- 
tify  specific patterns  of competition  and  contributions  in 
its own category or across nonprofit categories. 

Research could also experimentally manipulate the sit- 
uational  or message salience of specific brand personality 
dimensions  and  assess the  effects of varying  the accessi- 
bility  and  diagnosticity  of  various  brand  personality 
dimensions  on  a  person's  motivation  to  contribute  (see 
J. L. Aaker 2000). Historical analysis examining the prom- 
inence  of  various  themes  in  the  advertisements  of  non- 
profits over time would also be of interest. 

As we mentioned previously, additional  research could 
be conducted on nonprofit organizations'  political orienta- 
tion  and  its  impact  on  brand  personality.  Because  some 
nonprofits  (e.g.,  National  Rifle Association,  Greenpeace, 
political parties)  are more politically charged than  others, 
it would be of interest  to investigate  how these organiza- 
tions' personalities  are perceived and whether dimensions 
such as integrity and nurturance  help or hinder donations. 
Research that links donor characteristics to perceptions 
of brand personality and contributions to nonprofit organi- 
zations  is  also  needed.  Studies  could  link  demographic 
characteristics,  values, and personality data to measures of 
brand  personality  and  prior  contributions  to  nonprofit 
organizations.  The  trust-oriented,  social-exchange  nature 
of the relationship  between people and  nonprofits  should 
provide  a  worthwhile  and  fruitful  context  for  examining 
the importance  of self-brand congruence. 

Additional  research  could also examine how personal- 
ity perceptions  of nonprofit organizations  are formed and 
shift  over  time.  To what  extent  are  people  influenced  by 
direct  experience,  advertising,  and  media  portrayals? 
Qualitative research  could attempt to explore this issue by 
longitudinally  interviewing  potential  donors  over  time. 
Quantitative  research  could  experimentally  manipulate 
mock  news  articles  and/or  advertisements,  assessing  the 
impact of these stimuli on potential contributions.  Finally, 
quasi-experimental  methods  that opportunistically  exam- 
ine the impact of specific events on specific organizations 
may also be of value. 

CONCLUSION 

Our  study  has  attempted  to  integrate  existing  knowl- 
edge  of  brand  personality  in  the  for-profit  sector  with 
social  exchange  theory  and  trust  to  identify  the  specific 
dimensions  of brand personality  among  nonprofit organi- 
zations. We conducted a series of six studies to investigate, 

measure, and validate the role of brand personality in non- 
profit  organizations.  Our  multimethod  design  revealed  a 
parsimonious  measure of nonprofit brand personality that 
consists of four dimensions:  integrity,  sophistication,  rug- 
gedness,  and  nurturance.  Thus,  despite  our  aforemen- 
tioned limitations, we extend brand personality research to 
nonprofit  brands  and  establish  that  stakeholders  can  and 
do differentiate  between  nonprofits  on  the basis of brand 
personality. 

Finally,  this  study  offers potential  new  ways for  non- 
profit organizations  to strengthen  their brands  and market 
position  as  they  vie  with  competing  organizations  for 
donors'  time,  money,  and  in-kind  goods  or  services.  By 
recognizing  that  current  and  potential  donors  can  view 
nonprofits  as  unique  personalities,  nonprofit  organiza- 
tions  may  be  able  to  match  their  personality  better  with 
those of their target stakeholders and to differentiate them- 
selves in  the crowded  nonprofit  marketplace.  Thus,  non- 
profit  brand  personality  could  prove  invaluable  in  the 
brand development of nonprofit organizations. 

REFERENCES 

Aaker, David A.  1991. Managing  Brand Equity. New York: Free Press. 
Aaker, Jennifer L.  1997. "Dimensions of Brand Personality."  Journal of 

Marketing Research  19 (August):  347-356. 

(cid:12)9 1999. "The Malleable Self: The Role of Self-Expression in Per- 

suasion?' Journal  of Marketing  Research  36 (February):  45-57(cid:12)9 

(cid:12)9 2000.  "Accessibility or Diagnosticity? Disentangling the Influ- 
ence of Culture on Persuasion Processes and Attitudes."  Journal  of 
Consumer Research 26 (March): 340-356. 

, Veficona Benet-Martinez, and Jordi Garolera.  2001. "Consump- 
tion Symbols as Carriers of Culture:  A Study of Japanese and Spanish 
Brand  Personality  Constructs?' Journal  of Personality  and  Social 
Psychology  81 (3): 492-508(cid:12)9 

American Association of Fundraising Council. 2001.  Giving  USA: The 
Annual Report on Philanthropy. Indianapolis, IN: American Associa- 
tion of Fundraising Council. 

Anderson, D.  W.  and J.  C.  Gerbing.  1988.  "An Updated  Paradigm for 
Scale Development Incorporating Unidimensionality and Its Assess- 
ment?' Journal  of Marketing  Research  25 (May):  186-192. 

Arnett, Dennis B.,  Steve D.  German, and Shelby D.  Hunt.  2003.  "The 
Identity  Salience  Model  of  Relationship Marketing  Success:  The 
Case of Nonprofit Marketing." Journal of Marketing 67 (2): 89-106. 
Arnould, Eric,  Linda Price,  and George Zinkhan. 2004.  Consumers.  2d 

ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin. 

Bagozzi,  Richard P. 1975. "Marketing as Exchange" Journal of Market- 

ing 39 (October):  32-39. 

Bendapudi, N.,  S. N. Singh, and V. Bendapudi.  1996. "Enhancing Help- 
ing Behavior: An Integrative Framework for Promotion Planning?' 
Journal  of Marketing  60 (July):  33-49(cid:12)9 

Berry, Leonard.  2000. "Cultivating Service Brand Equity." Journal of the 

Academy  of Marketing Science  28 (1):  128-37. 

- - a n d  

A. Parasuraman.  1991. Marketing  Services. New York: Free 

Press. 

Blau, Peter M. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: John 

Wiley. 

Bollen, K.  1989. Structural Equations  With Latent  Variables. New York: 

John Wiley. 

Boris, Elizabeth T. 1999. "Nonprofit Organizations in a Democracy:  Var- 
ied Roles and Responsibilities." In Nonprofit and Government.  Eds. 
Elizabeth T.  Boris  and  Eugene  Steuerle.  Washington, DC:  Urban 
Institute Press,  1-12. 

Blum, D. E. 2002. "Ties That Bind." The Chronicle of Philanthropy 14 

(11):7-10. 

Bumett,  J. J.  1981. "Psychographic  and Demographic  Characteristics  of 
Blood Donors" Journal of Consumer Research 8 (June): 62-66. 

-

-

and V. R. Wood. 1988. "A Proposed Model of the Donation Deci- 

sion Process." Research in Consumer Behavior 3:1-47. 

Burnett, K. 2002. Relationship Fundraisin g : A Donor Based Approach to 
the Business of Raising Money. 2d ed. San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass. 
Cermak, D. S. P., K. M. File, and R. A. Prince.  1994. "A Benefit Segmen- 
tation  of the Major  Donor Market." Journal of Business Research 
29:121-130. 

Churchill, G. 1979. "A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of Mar- 
keting  Constructs."  Journal of Marketing Research 16  (February): 
46-73. 

Dixon,  M.  1997. "Small  and  Medium  Sized  Charities  Need  a  Strong 
Brand Too: Crisis Experience." Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary 
Sector Marketing 2 (1): 52-57. 

Doney, Patricia M. and Joseph P. Cannon.  1997. "An Examination of the 
Nature of Trust in Buyer-Seller Relationships." Journal of Marketing 
61 (2): 35-52. 

Dwyer,  E  Robert,  Paul  H.  Schurr, and  Sejo  Oh.  1987. "Developing 
Buyer-SellerRelationships."JournalofMarketing 51 (April): 11-27. 
Ferrandi,  J.  M.,  P. Valette-Florence,  and  S. Fine-Falcy. 2000.  "Aaker's 
Brand Personality Scale in a French Context: A Replication and a Pre- 
liminary Test of Its Validity." In Proceedings of Academy of Market- 
ing Science, Vol. 23. Ed. Charles  H. Noble, 7-13. 

Foruell,  Claes  and David E  Larker.  1981. "Evaluating  Structural  Equa- 
tion Models With Unobservable  Variables and Measurement  Error." 
Journal of Marketing Research 18 ( 1 ): 39-50. 

Grounds,  J. and J. Harkness.  1998. "Developing  a Brand From Within: 
Involving Employees and Volunteers When Developing a New Brand 
Position" Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing 3 (2): 
179-184. 

Hair, J.,  R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C.  Black.  1998. Multi- 
variate Data Analysis. 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, N J: Prentice Hall. 
Harvey, J. H.  1990. "Benefit Segmentation for Fund Raisers." Journal of 

the Academy of Marketing Science 18 (1): 77-86. 

Hawks, J. K. 1997. "Charity American Style." In For a Good Cause ? How 
Charitable  Institutions  Become Powerful  Economic  Bullies. 
Secaucus, N J: Carol Publishing  Group, 3-13. 

Homans,  George C.  1958. "Social  Behavior  and Exchange." American 

Journal of Sociology 63 (May): 597-606. 

John, O. P. 1990. "The 'Big Five' Factor Taxonomy: Dimensions  of Per- 
sonality in Natural Language and in Questionnaires." In Handbook of 
Personality: Theory and Research. Ed.  L.  A.  Pervin.  New  York: 
Guilford, 66-100. 

Johnson,  Madeline and George M. Zinkhan.  1990. "Defining and Mea- 
suring Company  Image." In Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 
17. Eds. M. Goldberg, G. Gorn, and R. W. Polly. Provo, UT: Associa- 
tion for Consumer Research,  110-119. 

Jones,  Jeff.  2002. "Nonprofit  Times  Top  100." The Nonprofit ~mes, 

November  1, pp. 30-37. 

Kotler, P. and S. J. Levy. 1969. "Broadening  the Concept of Marketing?' 

Journal of Marketing 33 (1): 10-15. 

Marchetti, Domenica. 2003. "The Young and the Generous" The Chroni- 

cle of Philanthropy, January 9, pp. 7-23. 

McCrae,  R.  and  Paul T. Costa.  1989. "The Structure  of Interpersonal 
Traits:  Wiggins's  Circumplex  and  Five-Factor  Model."  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 56 (4): 586-595. 

Mindak, William A. and Malcolm H. Bybee.  1971. "Marketing's  Appli- 

cation to Fundraising"  Journal of Marketing 35 (3): 13-18. 

Moorman, C., R. Deshpande,  and G. Zaltman.  1993. "Factors Affecting 
Trust  in Market  Research  Relationships"  Journal of Marketing 57 
(January):  81-101. 

Morgan,  Robert  M.  and  Shelby  D.  Hunt.  1994.  "The  Commitment- 
Trust Theory  of Relationship  Marketing." Journal of Marketing 58 
(3): 20-38. 

Morley, E., E. Vinson, and H. P. Hatry. 2001. "Outcome Measurement  in 
Nonprofit Organizations: Current Practices and Recommendations." 
In Independent Sector. Washington, DC: Urban Institute,  5-10. 
Nichols, J. E.  1991. Targeted Fund Raising. Chicago: Precept Press. 
- - .

  1995. "Developing Relationships  With Donors."  Fund Raising 

Management 26 (6): 18-47. 

Venable et al. / BRAND PERSONALITY  311 

Norman, Warren T. 1963. "Toward an Adequate Taxonomy of Personal- 
ity Attribute: Replicated Factor Structure in Peer Nomination Person- 
ality Ratings" Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 66:574- 
583. 

Nucifora, Alf. 1998. "Smart Not-for-Profits Learn the Marketing Ropes." 

Business News 11 (18): 17. 

Nunnally, Jum.  1979. Psychometric Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
O'Shaughnessy,  J. A. and N. J. O'Shaughnessy.  2000. "Treating the Na- 
tion as a Brand: Some Neglected Issues." Journal of Macromarketing 
20 (1): 56-65. 

Peltier,  James,  John  Schibrowsky,  and  Don  Schultz.  2002. "Leverag- 
ing  Customer  Information  to  Develop Sequential  Communication 
Strategies: A Case Study of Charitable-Giving  Behavior." Journal of 
Advertising Research 42 (July/August):  23-41. 

Sargeant, Adrian.  1999. "Charitable  Giving: Towards a Model of Donor 

Behaviour." Journal of Marketing Management 15:215-238. 

Smith, J. Brock and Donald W. Barclay. 1997. "The Effects of Organiza- 
tional Differences  and Trust on the Effectiveness  of Selling Partner 
Relationships" Journal of Marketing 61  (1): 3-22. 

Stern, Barbara, George M. Zinkhan, and Anupam Jaju. 2001. "Marketing 
Images:  Construct  Definition,  Measurement  Issues,  and  Theory 
Development." Marketing Theory 1 (2): 201-224. 

Tapp, A.  1996. "Charity  Brands:  A  Qualitative  Study of Current  Prac- 
tice." Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing 1 (4): 
327-336. 

Tupes, Ernest C. and Raymond E. Christal.  1958. "Stability of Personal- 
ity Trait Rating Factors Obtained Under Diverse Conditions." USAF 
WADS Technical  Report  No.  58-61,  U.S.  Air Force,  Lackland  Air 
Force Base, TX. 

Urban Institute. 2002. National Center for Charitable Statistics. Retriev- 
ed from http://nccsdataweb.urban.org/FAQ/index,  php?category=73 
Webb, D. J., C. L. Green,  and T. G. Brashear. 2000.  "Development and 
Validation of Scales to Measure  Attitudes Influencing Monetary Do- 
nations to Charitable Organizations." Journal of the Academy of Mar- 
keting Science 28 (2): 299-309. 

Weitzman, Murray  S. and Nadine T. Jalandoni.  2001. The Nonprofit Al- 
manac and Desk Reference (2001), Independent Sector. San Fran- 
cisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Wispe, L. 1978. Integrity, Sympathy and Helping. New York: Academic 

Press. 

Wray, R. B. 1994. "Branding,  Product Development and Position ng the 

Charity?' Journal of Brand Management 1 (6): 363-370. 

ABOUT THE  AUTHORS 

Beverly  T.  Venable  (venable_beverly@colstate.edu;  Ph.D., 
University of Mississippi)  is an  assistant professor of marketing 
at Columbus  State University. Her research  interests  are in non- 
profit marketing,  branding,  and  ethics.  She has  published  in the 
Journal of Business  Ethics  and  several national  and international 
proceedings. 

Gregory  M.  Rose  (rosegm@u.washington.edu;  Ph.D.,  Univer- 
sity of Oregon) is an associate professor of marketing  at the Uni- 
versity  of  Washington,  Tacoma.  His  research  interests  include 
consumer  socialization  and  cross-cultural  consumer  behavior. 
He has published  articles  in the Journal of Consumer  Research, 
the Journal of Marketing,  the Journal of the Academy of Market- 
ing  Science,  the  Journal  of Business  Research,  the  Journal  of 
Advertising,  and the Journal of Consumer Psychology, as well as 
other journals  and  proceedings. 

Victoria D. Bush (vbush @ bus.olemiss.edu; Ph.D., University of 
Memphis)  is an  associate  professor  of marketing  at the Univer- 
sity of Mississippi.  Her research interests  include cultural diver- 
sity in buyer-seller relationships,  advertising ethics, and Internet 

 
312 

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE 

SUMMER 2005 

marketing. Her research has been published in the Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, the Journal of Advertising Re- 
search, the Journal of Advertising, the Journal of Public Policy 
and Marketing, and Industrial Marketing Management, as well 
as other journals and proceedings. 

Faye W.  Gilbert  (faye.gilbert@gcsu.edu;  Ph.D.,  University 
of  North  Texas)  is  a  professor  of  marketing  and  dean  of  the 

J.  Whitney Bunting School of Business at Georgia College and 
State University. Her research interests are in customer relation- 
ship management, health care marketing, and sales management. 
She has published in the Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, the Journal of Business Research, the Journal of Retail- 
ing, Psychology and Marketing, as well as other journals and pro- 
ceedings. 

i