Journal of Marketing Management

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjmm20

Rethinking non-profit brands through a volunteer
lens: time for B2V
Sarah-Louise Mitchell & Moira Clark
To cite this article: Sarah-Louise Mitchell & Moira Clark (2020): Rethinking non-profit
brands through a volunteer lens: time for B2V, Journal of Marketing Management, DOI:
10.1080/0267257X.2020.1818804
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2020.1818804

Published online: 22 Sep 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjmm20

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT
https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2020.1818804

Rethinking non-profit brands through a volunteer lens: time
for B2V
Sarah-Louise Mitchella and Moira Clarkb
a

Oxford Brookes Business School, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK; bHenley Business School,
Henley-on-Thames, UK
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Many non-profit organisations (NPOs) deliver their services and
mission through volunteers. Brand has been shown to be
a powerful influence on the decision to volunteer. What was not
known was the role that brand plays in volunteer choice between
NPOs. Understanding this enables NPOs to be more effective at
attracting the volunteers they need, particularly given limited bud­
gets. Using Framework Analysis with a large qualitative sample, this
paper contributes to that gap in knowledge. The research identifies
three constructs driving volunteer choice of NPOs, sources of Brand
Knowledge, level of Brand Engagement, and the behavioural pro­
cess of choice, labelled Brand Discovery. Through exploring the
relationship between these constructs, the study points to signifi­
cant implications for NPOs for volunteer recruitment, importance of
brand presence, and competitive set.The study makes several con­
tributions to theory and practice. It extends volunteer motivation
theory to examine non-profit brand choice. It builds on Symbolic
Consumption Theory and Decision-Making Theory to define patterns
of volunteer decision-making behaviour. It describes automatic,
explicit, or considered decision-making despite high-involvement
behaviour. As a result, the research calls for a new perspective on
non-profit brands when seen through a volunteer lens, described as
Business to Volunteer (B2V).

Received 22 November 2019
Accepted 12 August 2020
KEYWORDS

Not-for-profit marketing;
brand equity; interviewing;
volunteer; decision-making;
marketing management

Introduction
Non-profit organisations (NPOs) need to attract resources to survive. These are not simply
financial but, for many organisations, also include attracting and retaining volunteer time
to enable them to deliver their mission. In the UK, 22% of people volunteer formally at
least once a month and 27% informally. The voluntary sector contributes £17.1 billion to
the national economy and spans more than 160,000 organisations (NCVO, 2019). NPOs
compete for these resources directly, with other NPOs with similar missions or roles, and
indirectly, with other uses of people’s time. Knowing how to appeal to potential new
volunteers, often with minimal marketing communication and research investment, is
fundamental to enabling the NPO to attract the resource they need. However, this is not

CONTACT Sarah-Louise Mitchell
smitchell@brookes.ac.uk
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, Oxford OX3 0BP, UK
© 2020 Westburn Publishers Ltd.

Room CLC 3.24, Oxford Brookes Business School,

2

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

just understanding why people volunteer, but particularly why they would volunteer for
one brand rather than another.
Academic understanding of donor choice is well underway (Konrath & Handy, 2018;
Rempel & Burris, 2015). In contrast, research into volunteer choice has been anchored in
motivational literature, interrogating why people decide to volunteer generically (Dury
et al., 2015; Hyde et al., 2016) and the benefits they gain in return (Stukas et al., 2016).
Volunteer choice of NPO is, of course, not just driven by brand – people are attracted to
causes that mean something to them (Henke & Fontenot, 2009), to support roles that
best meet their needs (Finkelstein et al., 2005), and to opportunities at convenient times
and locations (Brodie et al., 2011). However, brand has been shown to be a strong driver
to donate time in the non-profit context (Michaelidou et al., 2015; Michel & Rieunier,
2012). What is not yet understood is the role that brand plays in volunteer choice
between NPOs.
For the first time, this paper contributes a deeper understanding of the way volunteers
learn about non-profit brands (NPB), and how that knowledge impacts their choice of
organisation. It extends our understanding of the role of brand in enabling and driving
volunteer choice between organisations in the non-profit context, so fundamental to
NPOs to sustain service delivery and achieve their mission. The paper argues that given
the importance of attracting volunteer resource, there is a strong case for considering
NPBs through the lens of these volunteers. It identifies that, despite the increasingly
blurred lines between non-profit and for-profit, the sector remains distinctive due to its
values, mission, and volunteer base. It, therefore, calls for an extension of the for-profit
concepts of Business to Business (B2B) and Business to Customer (B2C), to a new concept
of Business to Volunteer (B2V). Through a thematic literature review, it draws upon what is
already known about decision-making, and the role of brand, within the non-profit
context. It identifies the need for exploratory research to better understand how volun­
teers choose between brands. It presents the findings from a large qualitative study,
investigated through Framework Analysis. Finally, it concludes with implications of the
results for theory and practice.

Theoretical background
Context definition and distinctiveness
Widespread variation in terminology adds complexity to the context, with labels including
charity, voluntary organisation, social enterprise, not-for-profit, independent sector, and
third sector. This paper identifies ‘non-profit’ as a description that is widely adopted
within the industry and agrees with the definition of NPBs as existing:
to provide for the general betterment of society, through the marshalling of appropriate
resources and/or the provision of physical goods and services. (Sargeant, 2009, p. 8)

This fundamental difference in purpose is at the heart of the distinctiveness of the sector,
combined with an anchoring of NPBs in the values and beliefs of their stakeholders, both
external and internal (Frumkin & Andre-Clark, 2000). Hankinson (2001) describes the NPB
as ‘organisation plus’, that is the functional attributes of the cause plus their symbolic
values, their beliefs. NPBs that are founded upon, and consistent with, their values enable

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

3

trust to be built with their stakeholders (Sargeant & Lee, 2004). There are three additional,
clearly observable, differences between non-profit and for-profit organisations. The first is
the complexity of the multivalent stakeholder relationships (Mitchell & Clark, 2019), where
the person directly paying for the service is rarely also the beneficiary of the service –
purchase and consumption are detached. The second concerns a tension around compe­
tition, where NPBs with similar missions may practically compete for resources such as
donations and volunteer time but also collaborate to achieve a wider societal impact, such
as Breast Cancer Awareness Week or the Disaster Emergency Committee (DEC). Finally,
many NPOs are characterised by a reliance on volunteer resource to deliver services. The
extensive ‘Pathways Through Participation Report’ (Brodie et al., 2011) identified that
while some people volunteer consistently, ‘others have peaks and troughs in their partici­
pation that often mirror their life stage and critical moments or turning points in their lives’
(p8). The authors identify that people may stop volunteering due to practical factors, such
as changing jobs, family responsibilities, or moving home. This is also echoed in the study
of Red Cross volunteers by Hustinx (2010), which identified that people quit due to time
pressures of work, family, and leisure. They may also stop for experiential reasons, such as
having a negative volunteering experience (Ho & O’Donohoe, 2014). Given this turnover
of volunteers, without effective volunteer recruitment and retention strategies, the very
sustainability of the NPO is under threat (Hyde et al., 2016).
Together, these characteristics make the non-profit sector distinct (Mitchell & Clark,
2019), despite increasing professionalism and adoption of ‘business-like practices’ (King,
2016; Maier et al., 2016; Silard, 2018), including the management of volunteers (Nichols,
2013; Ward & Greene, 2018). This market orientation has brought a growing recognition of
the importance of developing brand differentiation and stakeholder engagement to
attract resources within this increasingly competitive environment (Macedo & Carlos
Pinho, 2006; Randle et al., 2013).

Role of brand within the non-profit context
The importance of brand in driving choice of NPOs has been well documented. In
particular, Michel and Rieunier (2012) identified four distinct components of non-profit
brand image as usefulness, efficiency, affect, and dynamism. Together, they exhibited
a strong relationship with intention to give, accounting for 24% of the intention to donate
time and 31% to donate money. Subsequently, Michaelidou et al. (2015) extended the
non-profit scale to include efficiency and ethicality, strengthening the explanatory power
of brand image on non-profit choice, now explaining 54% of time donations and 51% of
money. However, neither study examined the choice between NPOs. In particular, they did
not consider the importance of brand in attracting volunteers or donors to one organisa­
tion rather than another.
Developing a strong brand generates trust in the ‘invisible purchase’ (Mort et al., 2007).
The brand enables stakeholders to make choices between NPOs with similar missions
(Hankinson, 2001). Randle et al. (2011) subsequently explored volunteer choice of NPBs in
Australia. Their research explicitly defined choice of NPB by volunteers as a consumer
behaviour decision. They identified that volunteers who preferred different NPBs varied
significantly in their self-concept. This resonates with the work of Fournier (1998) who
considered how the relationships people have with brands can ‘reinforce their self-concept

4

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

through mechanisms of self-worth and self-esteem’ (p. 345). Anchored in Self-Identity
Theory (Fang et al., 2012; Schembri et al., 2010), the volunteer is saying something
about themselves, their values and their personality, through their choice of brand with
whom they want to volunteer. In addition, choice of brand reflects the groups to which
they want to belong (Ekinci et al., 2013; Wymer & Samu, 2002). In the non-profit context,
volunteering can strengthen their identification with a particular social tribe, for example,
role in the congregation, role in the community, or role as a parent (Ashforth & Mael, 1989;
Arnett et al., 2003; Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Social ties like these also build trust, reducing the
personal risk of the decision through volunteering for an organisation valued by the tribe
such as the local parents’ association or Christian Aid. Both social- and self-identity
motivations drive the symbolic consumption of the brand; that choices about and
between brands reflect what the person wants to say about themselves and the groups
to which they wish to belong (Wilson & Musick, 1997; Wymer & Samu, 2002). Hoyer et al.
(2012) develop Symbolic Consumption Theory through identifying four constructs, all of
which have direct relevance for the non-profit context. The chosen brand gives the person
a role, both specific and within society (role acquisition). It might indicate a personal link
to brand or mission (connectedness). It says something about the tribe they are identify­
ing with, for example, as a member of a faith community (emblematic). Finally, it
demonstrates what that person values as important (expressive).
An important driver of that symbolic consumption of NPB is the level of brand
awareness. The relationship between brand saliency and brand choice has been well
explored in literature (Ehrenberg et al., 2002; Hoyer & Brown, 1990; Lambert-Pandraud
et al., 2018). However, for NPBs, brand awareness has been found to be ‘the most
significant predictor of an individual’s level of confidence in the performance of non-profit
organisations’ (McDougle, 2014, p. 193). Familiarity is at the heart of non-profit brand
strength (Wymer et al., 2016) and has been shown to directly drive donations (Katz, 2018).
Arnett et al.’s research (2003) into students revealed that the more prestigious the
university, the more salient the ‘university identity’ and subsequent supportive beha­
viours such as donating. The university research (Arnett et al., 2003) also revealed that for
the more prestigious universities the students were more likely to recommend them to
other potential students. Given that word of mouth is the most common way for
volunteers to find out about a NPOs (Brodie et al., 2011), the potential implication is
one of virtuous circle for the more prestigious brands – finding it easier to recruit
volunteers who in turn feel proud and want to recruit more supporters.
Clearly, not all NPBs are prestigious. The level of marketing investment and capability
across the non-profit sector covers a wide spectrum but there is increasing recognition of
the need for a customer-centred approach to access resources such as volunteers and
donors (Andreasen, 2012; Choi, 2014; Liu et al., 2015). Even if the NPO lacks a culture of
branding and marketing, it does not mean they lack a brand (Stride & Lee, 2007). The
brand is the organisation and the overall experience of stakeholders with that brand is
built across touchpoints and over time (Blades et al., 2012). Interestingly, it is not simply
the frequency of interaction with these touchpoints that strengthens the brand but also
the positivity of that experience (Baxendale et al., 2015). In this way, the relationship with
the brand is built upon a series of exchanges, not one-off transactions (Fournier, 1998),
which help people understand the personality of the brands which, in turn, enables them
to differentiate between organisations (Venable et al., 2005). What is less well known is

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

5

how brand touchpoints work in the non-profit context, particularly where people find out
about NPBs.

Decision-making drivers of non-profit brand choice
Stakeholder choice of specific NPBs is anchored in Social Exchange Theory (Venable et al.,
2005); in return for donations of time, money, goods and public support, the personal
needs and goals of the individual are met (Rempel & Burris, 2015). These personal
characteristics influence both the decision-making process and the ultimate choice
of NPB.
Given the minimal literature exploring the non-profit choice process of volunteers, the
wider body of decision-making research was explored to identify relevant insights. One
important strand of theory considers the relationship between breadth of choice and the
decision-making process. On the face of it, the more choice there is, in this case the
number of possible NPBs with whom to volunteer, the better. Certainly, having some
choice has been found to be better for intrinsic motivation than not having any choice
(Iyengar & Lepper, 2000). However, this also depends on the type of decision-maker the
person is, whether they are maximisers or satisficers. Maximisers are described as search­
ing through all the options available to identify the best fit for their needs, in this case
proactively searching all available volunteering roles that meet their requirements of, for
example, location, time commitment and role. In contrast, satisficers search until they find
an option is good enough and then decide (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000), in this case choosing
the first available volunteering role they find that is a good fit with what they are looking
for, including being convenient and the role itself. The implications for the competitive set
of NPBs considered by the potential volunteer are considerable; maximisers are more
likely to evaluate from a longer list, increasing the time and effort required to make
a decision.
Even if the natural tendency of a person is that of maximising decision options, there is
evidence that our ability to process that information is constrained by our limited
cognitive capacity, known as the ‘too much choice effect’ (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000;
Scheibehenne et al., 2009). Within the non-profit context, the plethora of NPBs available
creates its own challenges. Extensive search of NPBs can be problematic as potential
volunteers not only defer the decision but also tend not to go back to deferred decisions
so the opportunity for recruitment is lost (Carroll, 2014). Clustering different organisations,
for example, by cause, might be a way of helping the decision-maker navigate choices but
that partly depends on whether they exhibit maximiser or satisfier behaviour (Mogilner
et al., 2008; Randle et al., 2013).
In addition, the choice of NPB for volunteering is one made infrequently. The choice of
NPB to donate money to is an example of a one-off low-involvement decision: donating
blood is seen as a one-off high-involvement decision (Bagozzi, 1992). Following this logic,
a commitment to volunteer formally and regularly would be a high-involvement, onetime decision. As a result, the level of involvement can be expected to influence the
choice process, for example, time taken and number of attributes compared.
Two other areas of decision-making theory inform our understanding of brand choice
in the non-profit context. Firstly, social risk was found to increase decision-making
complexity (Xiao, 2016), particularly interesting in the light of non-profit research around

6

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

socially risky causes (Body & Breeze, 2016), such as supporting asylum seekers (Hebbani &
Angus, 2016). Where there was the element of social risk, people with low self-confidence
relied more on external information, such as advertising. In contrast, people with high
self-confidence tend to rely on memory and previous judgements, particularly with
respect to brands with low social risk (Xiao, 2016).
Secondly, low self-confidence in the decision-making process may be due to the
person being a ‘novice’ rather than an ‘expert’ on the sector (Mandel & Johnson, 2002;
Mogilner et al., 2008). The effect on the decision-making process is considerable: novices
have been found to collect and evaluate pieces of information about brands separately
rather than the behaviour of experts who ‘chunk’ information together and compare
important attributes with their ideal (Beattie, 1982). The subsequent impact on both the
competitive set needed and the speed of decision-making has significant implications for
how people learn about NPBs (Shocker et al., 1991).
Therefore, brand has been shown to be an important driver of the decision to
volunteer within the sector, underpinned by Symbolic Consumption Theory, especially
the impact on NPB choice on self and social identity. The volunteer choice process is also
informed by Decision-Making Theory including how people build knowledge of brands
over time from a range of touchpoints. However, what remains to be understood is how
brand contributes to that decision process, specifically choice of one NPB rather than
another, and particularly by volunteers, an important but under-researched stakeholder
group. Therefore, this research aims to explore the way volunteers learn about, and
choose between, non-profit brands and in doing so, extend our theoretical understanding
of how brand works in the non-profit context. It also presents a significant opportunity for
practitioner impact, through supporting NPOs to better understand their interaction with
this volunteer stakeholder group, so vital to their future sustainability. The paper identifies
the following research questions to contribute to this important space:
RQ1: How do potential volunteers build knowledge of non-profit brands?
RQ2: What is the decision-making process for potential volunteer choice of non-profit
brands?

Method
The research design considered the particular non-profit sectors to be included in the
sample, the size of organisation, the type of volunteer role, the choice of laddering depth
interviews for data collection, and finally, the use of Framework Analysis to identify the
findings.

Sample selection
Competitive sectors
Two different cause sectors in the UK were chosen to strengthen the generalisability of the
research and enable cross-sector comparison. A preliminary interview round with eight nonprofit sector research specialists was conducted to inform the choice of cause sectors. On
their advice, ‘health’ sectors were excluded from the sample as the brand is often synon­
ymous with the cause, such as Alzheimer’s UK or Cancer Research UK, and motivation for

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

7

support is often deeply personal. In addition, causes were chosen where the services were
delivered through volunteering in the UK, which ruled out Overseas Development NPOs.
The specialists recommended identifying causes where NPBs had to work hard to build
differentiation and support, consistent with research approaches taken by other studies into
NPBs (Michel & Rieunier, 2012; Sargeant et al., 2008). The sectors selected for this research
were 1) children’s and young people’s charities and 2) advice and listening charities.
‘Children and young people’ is consistently one of the largest charity cause sectors in the
UK, both for donations and volunteering. ‘Advice and listening’ charities were chosen as
they are driven by, and well-known for, their volunteer roles. Both these causes depend on
successfully attracting volunteers in order to be able to provide their services.

Big brands
Randle et al. (2011) highlighted an issue within non-profit research; stakeholders, such as
volunteers, could only reflect on a brand effectively if they knew about it, that is if they
were above a threshold level of awareness of a particular NPO. Consequently, this
research focussed on well-known brands, as defined by classification within the top 100
brands of the UK’s Charity Brand Index (Harris-Interactive, 2018). Five well-known, national
NPBs were approached for the research and all agreed to take part. All the charities
achieved their mission by delivering services through formal volunteering roles.
Recent and regular volunteers
The type of volunteer role chosen for the sample was regular, formal, service delivery
volunteering. Regular, formal volunteering is defined as an activity taking place at least
once a month through a charitable organisation or group (Cabinet-Office, 2013). The
rationale for selecting service delivery volunteers was the implied sense of commitment
behind the choice, implying a higher level of involvement than, for example, supporting an
annual fundraising event (Boezeman & Ellemers, 2007; McNamee & Peterson, 2015).
Therefore, it is anticipated that the decision is more likely to be actively considered, and
therefore accurately recollected, rather than lower involvement decision-making which may
be more spontaneous. In addition, the criteria for the selection of volunteers included only
those who had made their choice of NPB less than 12 months prior to the interview, also to
maximise accuracy of recall.
Once participation agreement had been gained at national NPB level, permission was
sought to approach the area managers and local team leaders. The managers then
publicised the project to their teams (with newsletter articles and information sheets
produced by the researcher) and asked for volunteers to take part in the research, who
then contacted the researcher personally. A summary of the research design is shown in
Appendix 1, and the profile of partipants is shown in Appendix 2.
Data collection
Laddering depth interviews were identified as the best fit for answering the research
questions for two reasons. Firstly, depth interviews enable exploration of the decisionmaking process of non-profit brand choice undertaken by the volunteer, an area of theory
development (Gephart, 2004). Secondly, through laddering, the researcher is aiming to
uncover both explicit and implicit reasons for brand choice.

8

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

In total, 51 individual depth interviews were conducted with volunteers from 5 NPBs
and across 16 locations. This enabled each cause sector to have at least 20 interviews,
considered the minimum ‘cell’ size for Framework Analysis (Ritchie et al., 2014). The
interviews were conducted face to face, recorded, transcribed, and manually coded. The
interviews lasted between 40 and 60 minutes. The focus of the discussion was to recollect
and reflect on the context and process of the choice of NPB, including reaction by friends
and family, personal history of non-profit support, and external triggers contributing to
the decision. A semi-structured interview guide was developed, but also a range of
probing techniques were used including: evoking the situational context including life­
stage and any non-profit background, understanding the distinct but parallel behaviour
of charitable donations, and using metaphor to describe organisational values (Reynolds
& Olson, 2001). These prompts helped avoid the continuous use of the ‘why’ question, and
also revealed the subconscious elements of the decision process, as well as the social
context in which the decision was made.
The coding results were strengthened in two ways. Firstly, supporting interviews were
conducted with brand and volunteer managers at each of the five participating organisa­
tions to facilitate accurate coding and interpretation of findings. Secondly, two indepen­
dent secondary coders validated the coding, with match scores of 80% using open coding
and 85% against the existing codebook.

Data analysis
Framework Analysis (‘Framework’) was identified as the most appropriate analytical
method; the matrix format within Framework is attractive as it enables within-case and
cross-case comparison (Ritchie et al., 2014), widely used in applied social policy research
(Srivastava & Thomson, 2009). The five-stage analytical process followed best practice, as
outlined by Ritchie et al. (2014): Familiarisation → Generating Thematic Framework →
Indexing and sorting → Charting → Mapping and interpretation. In particular, this
involves grouping the coded data texts into categories and themes.

Findings
Emergent themes
Three dominant inter-related themes, or constructs, emerged from the Framework
Analysis: the source of the knowledge about the NPB, the level of knowledge about the
NPB, and the way the volunteer makes a decision about the NPB based on that
knowledge.

Theme 1 – source of ‘Brand Knowledge’
Volunteers described the different ways they found out about NPBs. They recollected
brand experiences such as visiting a charity shop, seeing local fundraisers, and/or hearing
about the difference a NPB has made to a family member. Despite the significant size of
these national brands within the sample, volunteers were as likely to offer local or
personal examples as recall major advertising campaigns. These data sources were
clustered, then categorised as national, labelled Macro, local community, labelled Micro

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

9

and personal, labelled Mego. The Macro brand touchpoints include national advertising
or fundraising campaigns, mass communication that tends not to be personalised. The
Micro brand touchpoints are within local communities, the places where people live and
work. There was no evidence of a Meso level, traditionally defined as in the ‘middle’
between macro and micro, so this has not been included. However, people do find out
about NPBs through the personal experience of being supported by a NPB or a family
member or close friend being helped. In this research, in the absence of existing termi­
nology, this is labelled ‘Mego’. Mego is defined as the individual level, with factors
relevant to each person, and builds upon the etymological root of ‘ego’. The sources of
knowledge about NPBs within the data are visualised in Figure 1 as a Charity Brand
Touchpoint Map.

Theme 2 – level of existing ‘Brand Engagement’
Given this wide range in potential brand touchpoints, the second dominant theme
described the level of knowledge that the volunteer had built up about the NPB over
time; specifically, whether they knew about, and had engaged with, the NPB they
ultimately selected. Three distinct levels were observed. At the point of decisionmaking, the volunteer either was unaware/minimally aware of the brand, had some
knowledge of the brand, or was already well engaged with the brand. Table 1 defines
and describes these three levels of Brand Engagement as Brand Ignorant, Brand Aware,
and Brand Wise.
Theme 3 – the process of ‘Brand Discovery’
The final theme concerned the behavioural process of brand choice for volunteering,
subsequently labelled ‘Brand Discovery’. The theme described whether the volunteer
proactively identified a specific brand to support, whether someone at the NPO asked
the potential volunteer if they would be interested, if the choice was made in reaction to
an external stimulus such as an advertisement, or if it emerged from a search shortlist.
These categories of behaviour, within the Brand Discovery theme are defined and

Figure 1. Charity brand touchpoint map.

10

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Table 1. ‘Brand Engagement’ levels.
Brand
Engagement
Engagement
Level 1

Definition
Potential volunteer has knowledge of
charity brand beyond just the name,
often from range of touchpoints.

Engagement
Level 2

Potential volunteer has heard of the
specific charity and generally knows
what it does.

Engagement
Level 3

Potential volunteer had not heard of the
brand before volunteering there (or
using their services prior to
volunteering).

Data example
Label
‘I think it’s because I knew a fair bit about it. BRAND
My sister had done it and really enjoyed
WISE
it, felt it was really fulfiling, things like
that. I just felt that was a better use of
my time than just fundraising for
a random charity.’ Ch2v2
‘I think if you have been involved in children BRAND
helping at school, you hear about it, you
AWARE
kind of pick up on it because it is the kind
of thing I am interested it.’ Ch1v8
‘I didn’t when I first came. She just said
BRAND
there was a baby group on, that was it.
IGNORANT
So obviously when I turned up, I found
out it was the [Brand].’ Ch3v2

described in Table 2. Shorthand labels of Seek, Sought, See (and hear), and Search have
been added to classify the four key behaviour types observed. For clarity, the ‘See’
discovery behaviour was sub-divided into passive, such as seeing promotional material,
for example, an advert on Facebook, or active, such as being recommended by a friend
(word of mouth) (Buttle & Groeger, 2017).

Emergent relationships
Framework methodology protocol, as clarified by Ritchie et al. (2014), then requires intrathematic mapping to understand interactions and relationships between themes. Figure 2
illustrates the three constructs and the relationship between them. People build up levels

Table 2. Description of ‘Brand Discovery’ behaviour types.
Brand
Discovery
Behaviour 1

Behaviour 2

Behaviour 3

Behaviour 4

Definition
Data example
The volunteer seeks out a specific charity
‘Then I decided well, you know, if I can do
brand to find out how to volunteer with
that, if I can become a counsellor maybe
them.
I should think about doing [Charity].’
Ch4v1
The volunteer is asked by someone within ‘We had come to open play day in the
the charity if they would be interested in
summer holidays and they was just saying
volunteering for them.
like if anybody would like to volunteer,
then come and see and I did straight
away.’ Ch3v1
Volunteer learns about the specific charity ‘It’s more about gut feeling for me. And
through seeing some marketing material
through my son’s school attached to
(passive) or hearing through word of
a newsletter one day was a support for
mouth (active).
parent’s leaflet. And it just jumped out at
me and I thought, oh, yeah, that sounds
interesting.’ Ch1v4
Charity search is self-generated, proactive, ‘So I was looking on the internet for just
and wide ranging. It is often online either
mentoring roles and I couldn’t really find
through search engine or volunteering
any, and I came across this role, and I read
portals such as ‘Do It’.
something about it and . . . straight away
I knew that it was something that
I believed in.’ Ch2v8

Label
SEEK

SOUGHT

SEE (AND
HEAR)

SEARCH

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

11

Figure 2. Construct relationships underpinning volunteer choice of NPB.

of knowledge and engagement about NPBs (construct 2) from a range of sources, brand
touchpoints (construct 1). Based on that brand engagement (construct 2), they have
different ways of discovering and deciding (construct 3) one NPB with whom to volunteer.
In particular, within construct 1, the individual sources of Brand Knowledge were not
found to be causally related to construct 2, the level of Brand Engagement. That is, the
volunteers in this sample did not make a direct connection between where they found out
about the NPB and how much they knew as a result, or their subsequent behaviour of
choice.
However, a relationship was identified between construct 2, the level of Brand
Engagement, and construct 3, the process of Brand Discovery for volunteering. The
patterns within this relationship are illustrated in Figure 3. The volunteers are identified
as x/y where ‘x’ is reference for the NPB and ‘y’ is the reference for the individual volunteer.
The mapping process revealed four decision-making patterns within the data.

Pattern 1 - Brand Wise/Seek
The dominant pattern was for volunteers to seek out a brand they already knew well. This
was not behaviour stimulated by a trigger; it was based on prior brand knowledge. The
brand choice was specific and automatic. There was little evidence of alternatives con­
sidered or choice within a competitive set. Brand saliency and reputation at that moment
of decision-making were paramount.

12

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Figure 3. Mapping ‘Brand Discovery’ behaviour type with ‘Brand Engagement’ level.
[They] would always . . . have ticked up first given the choice because I knew what they did . . . so
it’s something that I didn’t have to go and research. Ch5v10

Their brand knowledge had been built over time, from a variety of touchpoints (Beattie,
1982). At the point of decision-making, that knowledge becomes relevant and the
volunteer seeks out the charity they believe will meet their needs.

Pattern 2 - Brand Wise/See
The second pattern was the role of brand to trigger action when prompted, either through
word of mouth (active) or through seeing a leaflet or advert (passive). A decision is then
enabled by the subsequent fact-finding route taken, usually contacting the charity to
assess the role against their needs. Volunteers spoke of a moment of serendipity.
I just saw the ad and then talked to my counsellor who strongly encouraged me. I strongly believe
I saw it for a reason. That it was fate. Ch2v7
It was something that straight away I knew . . . I believed in. Ch2v8

This pattern reveals two behavioural effects. Not only did it stimulate them into making
the volunteering decision but also, they did not consider alternative brands. Their existing
brand knowledge provided a shortcut, effectively reducing information processing through
representing a recognised bundle of functional and emotional attributes. In addition, the
familiar brand acted as a risk reducer, the volunteer believes their time will not be wasted.

Pattern 3 - Brand Wise & Aware/Search
The third observed pattern relates to the role of brand to enable differentiation between
choices, whether within or across categories.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

13

I got on the computer . . . [they] just sort of standout . . . I knew of them and they’ve got their
shops and everything. Ch1v6
The fact that it’s [brand] stuck at the top of the search list as well probably made me think that’s
certainly something worth pursuing. Ch1v7

This is supported by marketing theory that argues that brands are more likely to be
selected from a cluttered choice environment if they have strong brand awareness (Smith,
2011).

Pattern 4 – Brand Ignorant/Sought & Seek
Although the identification of these three relationships is new, the findings strongly
resonate with theory. However, the fourth appears anomalous but can be explained;
where the volunteer has not heard of the brand but still seeks them out for volunteering
or responds positively to being asked. All the responses within this pattern came from one
organisation, charity 3. This major national children’s charity did, like the other four
participating organisations, have national communication campaigns, a high street retail
presence, and delivered local services. However, it also suffered from a lower level of brand
saliency. The Head Office (HO) interviews revealed the organisational policies supporting
this pattern. The first HO policy was to encourage and accept volunteers who needed to
complete a set number of volunteering hours for a further education course.
Why I joined [charity] was because I had to complete 150 hours volunteering work in order to
apply for the midwifery course. That is how I came to finding about the children’s centre. Ch3v9

In the case of children’s centres, it is the cause and role, rather than the specific brand,
which are drivers for them, particularly as external signage branding is often deliberately
low and charity ownership frequently changes which restricts their ability to build local
brand awareness. They are known for what they do rather than who they are.
Engagement is at a local level, rather than with the national organisation.
Another, smaller, volunteer cluster was existing service users. For NPOs that offer
children’s services, such as playgroups, or adult services, such as domestic violence
courses, people are experiencing the brand from within. Across the sample of 51 volun­
teers interviewed, five had previously been service users (within charity 3 and also
charity 1). Even if they had no brand knowledge prior to being a service user, the
perception of the organisation is built through their experience, particularly interaction
with the staff and volunteering team who personify the NPB,
Because I was a regular visitor here, I feel part of my life is in the children’s centre. I feel
comfortable here. I know the staff well, so I thought this is the best place to volunteer because
I know them. Ch3v4

This is facilitated by a second HO policy: one where improving the lives of their
volunteers is part of their charitable mission. This is operationalised through encouraging
service users to become volunteers, and therefore gaining work experience but also
helping with job references and access to higher education courses. It also demonstrates
the importance of harnessing service users as potential volunteers.

14

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Discussion
Brand is clearly not the only driver of non-profit organisational choice; it contributes to the
decision with personal needs and values, role, cause, and local availability (Mitchell &
Clark, 2020). However, brand has been proven to be important (Michaelidou et al., 2015;
Michel & Rieunier, 2012). What remained to be understood was how the decision about
brands and between brands is made when seen through a volunteer lens. Therefore, this
research builds upon the body of literature on volunteering generically, to examine
the second stage of the decision – choice of specific NPB with whom to volunteer. The
large qualitative sample, use of clear laddering technique and rigorous coding process,
including secondary coders, give confidence in this contribution to knowledge.

Research question 1: How do potential volunteers build knowledge of non-profit
brands?
This research contributes a new conceptualisation of brand touchpoints for the non-profit
context. Volunteers build knowledge of NPBs through a combination of three sources:
national labelled Macro, local community labelled Micro, and personal labelled Mego.
Despite brand touchpoint research in other contexts (Baxendale et al., 2015), this was
under-explored for NPBs.
Brands with strong above-the-line budgets and professionally integrated marketing
campaigns obviously have a greatly enhanced ability to communicate at the Macro level.
Likewise, for NPBs with a significant retail component, their visibility on the high street
acts as a constant Micro reminder. However, each potential volunteer will experience the
brand differently and over time, their unique implicit knowledge is built from these
sources (Merrilees, 2016). For example, someone with a strong personal connection to
a particular brand will be anchored in the Mego section but that knowledge may be
reinforced by national advertising and local events.
The second construct identified in the research was the level of brand knowledge and
engagement built up from these touchpoints over time. The implications of strengthening this
understanding are considerable. According to the familiarity heuristic, brands that are more
familiar are chosen more quickly and easily even from a wide range of options (Beattie, 1982;
Sundaram & Webster, 1999). Prior to the decision to volunteer, the dominant pattern from this
research was for people to be ‘Brand Wise’, that is they already had an understanding of the
organisation, beyond simple brand awareness. This degree of familiarity eases their decisionmaking process rather than having to compare and contrast different options. In effect, the
effort of processing information about the brand, the behavioural cost, has been reduced.
Therefore, this research contributes to a more holistic understanding of non-profit brand
touchpoints. It sheds light on the importance of local brand visibility and personal brand
experience, in addition to the much-researched effects of national advertising on brand choice.

Research question 2: What is the decision-making process for potential volunteer
choice of non-profit brands?
For the first time, this research identifies the existence of different patterns of decisionmaking behaviour by volunteers in the choice of NPB. Two key constructs, Brand

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

15

Engagement and Brand Discovery, are identified as driving choice. Through understand­
ing the interaction between these constructs, patterns of volunteer decision-making
behaviour were observed. Three levels of prior brand knowledge were identified, and
described as Brand Wise, Brand Aware, and Brand Ignorant. People who did know about
the brands (Brand Wise and Brand Aware) had accumulated knowledge over time and
from different sources. This builds upon theory on how people make decisions, based on
implicit brand knowledge, built up from a range of sensory signals and touchpoints.
However, with the exception of Hankinson (2001), there has been little academic insight
into the application of this implicit, brand sense theory to NPBs.
The third construct, Brand Discovery, considers the process of choice for volunteering.
From theory, it could be anticipated that the commitment to volunteer would follow the
pattern of a high-involvement decision, particularly given the significant time involved in
regular and service-delivery roles explored in this sample. High involvement implies both
the presence of alternatives, a competitive set from which to evaluate best fit, and also
a measured decision-making process. For the volunteers who exhibited explicit ‘Search’
behaviour, the alternatives either emerged from an internet search or specific volunteer­
ing website such as ‘www.doit.org.uk’ or proactive search of individual charities of
interest. ‘Search’ involved a more considered and time-consuming process.
Two types of volunteers within this sample did follow a pattern that was consistent
with Involvement Decision Theory (Kapferer & Laurent, 1993). These were novices, with
minimal previous exposure to the category, who therefore need to actively seek out
information, and role-seeking volunteers needing to fulfil volunteer hours required for
a college course or to enhance their career through work experience. These volunteers
could not make an automatic choice of organisation as they lacked awareness and
understanding of NPBs. Instead, both groups used a more explicit and rational decisionmaking process developing a conscious competitive choice set, potentially driven by
cause and moderated by local availability and awareness.
However, what is more interesting was the greater number of volunteers whose
decision-making behaviour was one of automatic choice. For the volunteers
exhibiting the three behaviours labelled ‘Seek’, ‘Sought’, and ‘See’ there was no
evidence of a competitive set at the point of decision-making, shown in Figure 4.
Despite the significant time commitment involved in regular service-delivery
volunteering, the process of choice for these three behaviours was surprisingly
quick and easy.
This research contributes two potential explanations for this behaviour: typicality and
connectivity. Strong charity brands leading their sector become an automatic choice,
underpinned by First Choice Brand Effect Theory (Hubert & Kenning, 2008). For these
brands, awareness and understanding has built up over time generating credibility and
embodiment of the generic category goal, for example, supporting underprivileged
people overseas or protecting wildlife from extinction. Michel and Rieunier (2012) refer
to this as typicality. High typicality means the organisation is perceived as representative
of the sector and the more representative the perception, the higher the intention to
donate time or money. For charities synonymous with a particular type of work, the
implied effect is one of automatic choice (Le Roux et al., 2016). Thought-provoking
support for this thesis comes from a different field; Barwise and Meehan (2004) argue
brands win consumers through being ‘simply better’ at delivering the generic category

16

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Figure 4. Brand choice in relation to competitive set.

benefits. This effect is further strengthened through the positive reputational benefits of
high awareness. The more the volunteer has heard of the charity, the more important they
perceive it to be (McQuail, 1985; Zajonc, 1968). The volunteers are, in effect, ‘leaderlovers’. Therefore, despite the personal cost in terms of time commitment, for some
decision-makers the choice of brand is automatic. Given the importance of brand saliency
in consumer choice, there is a significant prize for being category leader; being top of
mind when the category is being considered, enabling an automatic choice rather than
a considered choice amongst alternatives.
Secondly, for brands framed by a specific cause, the brand and/or cause may exhibit
close personal connectivity to the decision-maker (Mogilner & Aaker, 2009). Stakeholder
time is freely given in return for help received in the past, either directly to themselves or
their wider family and friendship group, or as a ‘down-payment’ for help anticipated in the
future. This finding resonates with the connectedness function within Symbolic
Consumption Theory (Hoyer et al., 2012). In this case the decision-making behaviour is
also automatic, made without consideration amongst a competitive set.
Therefore, two patterns of decision-making have been identified through this
research – the automatic choice of cause leaders and personally relevant brands as
well as the explicit search by skill acquisition seekers and novices. In addition, within the
non-profit sector there are a plethora of charity brands that fall outside these two cases.
The type of considered choice these volunteers make will depend on whether they are
maximisers or satisfiers (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000), particularly to avoid the negative
effects of having too much choice (Carroll, 2014). The decision-making process is
complex but illustrated through patterns two and three (shown in Figure 3).
Considered choice builds on personal exposure and experience of the brand across

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

17

a combination of touchpoints. Therefore, one implication of identifying the Brand
Discovery construct is to enable non-profit organisations to be re-classified from
a volunteer perspective. Traditionally, NPBs have been categorised at cause level, for
example, ‘health’, or sub-category level, for example, ‘cancer’, with the implication that
they compete for resource with other non-profits within that cause. There has also been
research on classification at ‘cluster level’, for example, church or leisure (Randle et al.,
2013), with implications for brand consideration. However, building on the work of
Mogilner et al. (2008), there is an argument now for NPBs to be re-categorised by
volunteer decision-making process. Building on the three volunteer behavioural seg­
ments (automatic, explicit search, and considered) identified through this research, and
drawing on decision-making theory (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000; Mogilner et al., 2008), six
volunteer typologies can be developed, shown in Table 3. Volunteers who choose the
sector leader (leader-lover) or have a personal connection will make an automatic
choice. Volunteers who are novices to the non-profit context or looking for
a particular role/number of volunteering hours, make a choice after an explicit search
of options. The remaining volunteers make a considered choice from a competitive set
list, the length of which varies depending on whether they are maximisers or satisficers
in their decision-making style.
The ultimate goal for NPBs is for potential new volunteers to select their brand
automatically. Strengthening the pathways, including through demonstrating typicality
and category leadership or framing through personal connections, will enable that
automatic choice.
Therefore, this research extends beyond traditional theories of rational choice, based
on evaluation within a competitive set, to contribute six typologies of volunteers cate­
gorised by decision-making behaviour, with the subsequent implications for reclassifica­
tion of NPBs.

Implications for practice
This research contributes to practice by considering NPBs through a volunteer lens. The
deployment of marketing theory and practice from the commercial sector to the nonprofit context is increasingly prevalent (Modi & Mishra, 2010) as the competition grows for
resources such as volunteer time, financial donations, service users, and high calibre staff
(Randle et al., 2013). However, there are distinctive characteristics of the sector, such as
Table 3. Re-categorising non-profit brands through volunteer decision-making process.
Volunteer
decision-making
process
Automatic choice
Explicit search
Considered choice

Description
Despite the significant investment of time required for regular
volunteering, the choice of organisation is made quickly and easily
based on prior knowledge or personal connection.
Conscious search of NPB options available due to lack of prior
knowledge.
Implicit knowledge of brand and alternatives is evoked at the point of
decision-making and compared to personal need and local
availability.

Volunteer Typology
Leader-lover
Personally connected
Novice
Role-seeker
Maximiser
Satisficer

18

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

volunteer resource and the non-economic mission, which requires a different mindset.
There has been a tendency for practitioner insight to be geared towards understanding
donor decision-making behaviour, due to the tangible payback on measuring campaign
effectiveness (Bennett, 2007; Faulkner et al., 2015; Rempel & Burris, 2015; Sargeant &
Shang, 2016). Volunteers are an oft overlooked resource for non-profit organisations, but
they are vital for future sustainability. For the NPB constantly needing to recruit new
volunteers, the challenge is not to understand why people volunteer but why they would
choose their brand instead of another.
Therefore, this research calls for practitioner focus to move away from application of
the for-profit models of ‘Business to Business’ and ‘Business to Consumer’ towards
a context-relevant ‘Business to Volunteer’ (B2V) approach: to understand how and why
volunteers make choices between non-profit businesses. Through adopting a B2V mindset
internally, the NPB not only recognises the importance of volunteers as a fundamental
enabler to achieving the mission, but also considers the distinct characteristics of the nonprofit sector within which they operate.
The specific contributions of the research to practice are driven by, and distinctive due
to that volunteer lens. They explore the source and level of brand knowledge at the point
of decision-making and map this against the behaviour of decision-making. Four domi­
nant patterns of behaviour for volunteer choice of NPB were identified. Only one involved
search and choice from amongst a competitive set (‘Search’). NPB knowledge has been
found to build over time to enable instinctive and automatic decision-making behaviour
at the moment of volunteer choice. Automatic decision-making in response to a charityspecific trigger is exhibited where there is strong brand knowledge and/or emotional
connection to the cause or brand. For a sector where discussion about brand still sits
uneasily for some, the research also contributes to theory though identifying the role of
brand in NPB decision-making. The brand acts as shorthand for the bundle of tangible and
intangible attributes, enabling cut through at the point of decision-making.
The data identified that the decision-makers had gathered brand knowledge from
a variety of touchpoints over time. At the moment of choice, the volunteer either sought
out the charity with strong personal meaning for them or responded to a charity-specific
trigger such as seeing a poster or hearing about them. The final behaviour type identified
was decision-making based on simply being asked. The novices and role seeker lack
knowledge about the brand so have to explicitly search for it. For the others, despite the
significant commitment being made, a rapid decision can be made as it accesses a body
of brand knowledge already stored in their subconscious. At the point of decision-making
about the charity with which to volunteer, that knowledge becomes relevant.
The brand behaviour segments (Table 2) and volunteer typologies (Table 3) identified
through this research present practitioners with an alternative to the life-stage approach
to recruitment. It enables them to consider their current brand strength against their
volunteer recruitment needs. In particular, it demonstrates the importance of building
brand awareness over time through a variety of touchpoints.
The fact that it’s a well-known name is very important, because people have confidence in it.
Ch4v5

Considering the B2V approach and framing the marketing challenge of recruitment
through the lens of the individual volunteer, carries significant implications for the

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

19

communication frame around the brand. The research presents a simple segmentation
mapping level of Brand Engagement onto the behaviour of making the volunteering
choice. The segmentation can be used directly to understand current and potential
volunteer behaviour, identifying where future opportunities lie. For example, if current
volunteers talk about the moment of serendipity, as several in this sample did, then lowcost communication techniques such as local posters and leaflets can be just the trigger
that the potential volunteer is looking for. Likewise, understanding the different way that
people found out about the charity brand, over time, and then plotting the information
onto the Charity Brand Touchpoint Map will support charities in identifying where their
marketing budgets are visible and effective.

Limitations and future research
The research focuses on, and is therefore limited by, the non-profit context. Specifically, it
focuses on volunteer choice of NPB and does not explore volunteer retention strategies.
However, these limitations present a rich seam for future research. The research identifies
two key constructs of stakeholder decision-making behaviour, Brand Engagement and
Brand Discovery, and offers significant opportunity for replication with small and mediumsized charities, different volunteering roles, and other non-profit sectors such as health.
In addition, the research develops a new model for understanding the sources of nonprofit brand knowledge, labelled the Charity Touchpoint Map, which lends itself to future
studies to understand how and where stakeholders discover NPBs – and how well that
correlates with marketing investment. The paper argues for the need to develop the
concept of ‘Business to Volunteer’ (B2V), to provide both greater theoretical insight and
practitioner benefit into the behaviour of choice by this important stakeholder group.
Opportunities to extend this B2V concept include the theoretical development of volun­
teer typologies and the development of accessible ‘know-how’ guides for NPBs. In
addition, this paper calls for further research to extend the understanding of automatic
brand choice at the moment of decision-making, based on prior brand knowledge, into
the broader domain of business support for social causes.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

References
Andreasen, A. R. (2012). Rethinking the relationship between social/nonprofit marketing and
commercial marketing. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 31(1), 36–41. https://doi.org/
10.1509/jppm.09.035
Arnett, D. B., German, S. D., & Hunt, S. D. (2003). The identity salience model of relationship
marketing success: the case of nonprofit marketing. Journal of Marketing, 67(2), 89–105. https://
doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.67.2.89.18614
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of
Management Review, 14(1), 20–39. https://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1989.4278999
Bagozzi, R. P. (1992). The self-regulation of attitudes, intentions, and behavior. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 55(2), 178–204. https://doi.org/10.2307/2786945

20

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Barwise, P., & Meehan, S. (2004). Don’t be unique, be better. MIT Sloan Management Review, 45(4),
23–26.
Baxendale, S., Macdonald, E. K., & Wilson, H. N. (2015). The impact of different touchpoints on brand
consideration. Journal of Retailing, 91(2), 235–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2014.12.008
Beattie, A. E. (1982). Effects of product knowledge on comparison, memory, evaluation and choice:
a model of expertise in consumer decision making. Advances in Consumer Research, 9(1),
336–341.
Bennett, R. (2007). The use of marketing metrics by British fundraising charities: a survey of current
practice. Journal of Marketing Management, 23(9–10), 959–989. https://doi.org/10.1362/
026725707X250421
Blades, F., Macdonald, E. K., & Wilson, H. N. (2012). Best practice: Charity sector marketing. Admap,
42–43.
Body, A., & Breeze, B. (2016). What are ‘unpopular causes’ and how can they achieve fundraising
success? International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 21(1), 57–70. https://
doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1547
Boezeman, E. J., & Ellemers, N. (2007). Volunteering for charity: pride, respect, and the commitment
of volunteers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(3), 771–785. https://doi.org/10.1037/00219010.92.3.771
Brodie, E., Hughes, T., Jochum, V., Miller, S., Ockenden, N., & Warburton, D. (2011). Pathways through
participation: What creates and sustains active citizenship. Institute of Volunteering Research/
NCVO.
Buttle, F., & Groeger, L. (2017). Who says what to whom in what channel? A rules theoretic
perspective on word-of-mouth marketing. Journal of Marketing Management, 33(13/14),
1035–1059. https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2017.1325390
Cabinet-Office. (2013). Community Life Survey. UK Government.
Carroll, L. (2014). The effect of choice set size and other choice architectures on decisions to volunteer
[PhD thesis]. Plymouth University.
Choi, S. (2014). Learning orientation and market orientation as catalysts for innovation in nonprofit
organizations. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 43(2), 393–413. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764012465491
Dury, S., De Donder, L., De Witte, N., Buffel, T., Jacquet, W., & Verté, D. (2015). To volunteer or not the
influence of individual characteristics, resources, and social factors on the likelihood of volunteer­
ing by older adults. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 44(6), 1107–1128. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0899764014556773
Ehrenberg, A., Barnard, N., Kennedy, R., & Bloom, H. (2002). Brand advertising as creative publicity.
Journal of Advertising Research, 42(4), 7–18. https://doi.org/10.2501/JAR-42-4-7-18
Ekinci, Y., Sirakaya-Turk, E., & Preciado, S. (2013). Symbolic consumption of tourism destination
brands. Journal of Business Research, 66(6), 711–718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.09.008
Fang, L., Jianyao, L., Mizerski, D., & Huangting, S. (2012). Self-congruity, brand attitude, and brand
loyalty: A study on luxury brands. European Journal of Marketing, 46(7/8), 922–937. https://doi.
org/10.1108/03090561211230098
Faulkner, M., Truong, O., & Romaniuk, J. (2015). Barriers to increasing donor support evidence on the
incidence and nature of brand rejection. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 44(5),
1007–1025. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764014555985
Finkelstein, M. A., Penner, L. A., & Brannick, M. T. (2005). Motive, role identity, and prosocial
personality as predictors of volunteer activity. Social Behavior and Personality: An International
Journal, 33(4), 403–418. https://doi.org/10.2224/sbp.2005.33.4.403
Fournier, S. (1998). Consumers and their brands: developing relationship theory in consumer
research. Journal of Consumer Research, 24(4), 343–373. https://doi.org/10.1086/209515
Frumkin, P., & Andre-Clark, A. (2000). When missions, markets, and politics collide: values and
strategy in the nonprofit human services. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 29(1),
141–163. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764000291S007
Gephart, R. P. (2004). Qualitative research and the academy of management journal. Academy of
Management Journal, 47(4), 454–462. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2004.14438580

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

21

Hankinson, P. (2001). Brand orientation in the charity sector: A framework for discussion and
research. International Journal of Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector Marketing, 6(3), 231–242. https://
doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.149
Harris-Interactive. (2018). Charity Brand Index. Third Sector Research.
Hebbani, A., & Angus, D. (2016). ‘Charity begins at home’: public perceptions of the homestay
initiative for asylum seekers in australia. Australian Journalism Review, 38(1), 83.
Henke, L., & Fontenot, G. (2009). Why give to charity? How motivations for giving predict type of
causes supported. Allied Academies International Conference: Proceedings of the Academy of
Marketing Studies (AMS), 14(1), 16.
Ho, M., & O’Donohoe, S. (2014). Volunteer stereotypes, stigma, and relational identity projects.
European Journal of Marketing, 48(5/6), 854–877. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM-11-2011-0637
Hoyer, W. D., & Brown, S. P. (1990). Effects of brand awareness on choice for a common,
repeat-purchase product. Journal of Consumer Research, 17(2), 141–148. https://doi.org/
10.1086/208544
Hoyer, W. D., MacInnis, D. J., & Pieters, R. (2012). Consumer Behaviour (Sixth ed.). South-Western
Cengage Learning.
Hubert, M., & Kenning, P. (2008). A current overview of consumer neuroscience. Journal of Consumer
Behaviour, 7(4-5), 272–292. https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.251
Hustinx, L. (2010). I quit, therefore I am? Volunteer turnover and the politics of self-actualization.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 39(2), 236–255. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764008328183
Hyde, M. K., Dunn, J., Bax, C., & Chambers, S. K. (2016). Episodic volunteering and retention an
integrated theoretical approach. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45(1), 45–63. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0899764014558934
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of
a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 995. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.79.6.995
Kapferer, J. N., & Laurent, G. (1993). Further evidence on the consumer involvement profile: Five
antecedents of involvement. Psychology & Marketing, 10(4), 347–355. https://doi.org/10.1002/
mar.4220100408
Katz, H. (2018). The impact of familiarity and perceived trustworthiness and influence on donations
to nonprofits: An unaided recall study. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 30(2),
187–199. https://doi.org/10.1080/10495142.2017.1326874
King, D. (2016). Becoming business-like governing the nonprofit professional. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 46(2), 241–260. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764016663321
Konrath, S., & Handy, F. (2018). The development and validation of the motives to donate scale.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 47(2), 347–375. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764017744894
Lambert-Pandraud, R., Laurent, G., & Gourvennec, B. (2018). Investigating brand verbal fluency:
when known brands do not come to mind. International Journal of Market Research, 60(3),
304–315. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470785318757172
Le Roux, A., Thébault, M., Roy, Y., & Bobrie, F. (2016). Brand typicality impact on brand imitations
evaluation and categorization. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 25(6), 600–612. https://
doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-07-2015-0923
Liu, G., Chapleo, C., Ko, W. W., & Ngugi, I. K. (2015). The role of internal branding in nonprofit brand
management an empirical investigation. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 44(2), 319–339.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764013511303
Macedo, I. M., & Carlos Pinho, J. (2006). The relationship between resource dependence and market
orientation: the specific case of nonprofit organisations. European Journal of Marketing, 40(5–6),
533–553. https://doi.org/10.1108/03090560610657822
Maier, F., Meyer, M., & Steinbereithner, M. (2016). Nonprofit organizations becoming business-like
a systematic review. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45(1), 64–86. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0899764014561796

22

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Mandel, N., & Johnson, E. J. (2002). When web pages influence choice: effects of visual primes on
experts and novices. Journal of Consumer Research, 29(2), 235–245. https://doi.org/10.1086/
341573
McDougle, L. (2014). Understanding public awareness of nonprofit organizations: exploring the
awareness–confidence relationship. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, 19(3), 187–199. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1496
McNamee, L. G., & Peterson, B. L. (2015). High-stakes volunteer commitment a qualitative analysis.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45(2), 275-294. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764015581055
McQuail, D. (1985). Sociology of mass communication. Annual Review of Sociology, 11(1), 93–111.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.so.11.080185.000521
Merrilees, B. (2016). Interactive brand experience pathways to customer-brand engagement and
value co-creation. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 25(5), 402–408. https://doi.org/
10.1108/JPBM-04-2016-1151
Michaelidou, N., Micevski, M., & Cadogan, J. W. (2015). An evaluation of nonprofit brand image:
towards a better conceptualization and measurement. Journal of Business Research, 68(8),
1657–1666. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.03.024
Michel, G., & Rieunier, S. (2012). Nonprofit brand image and typicality influences on charitable giving.
Journal of Business Research, 65(5), 701–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.04.002
Mitchell, S.-L., & Clark, M. (2019). Reconceptualising product life-cycle theory as stakeholder engage­
ment with non-profit organisations. Journal of Marketing Management, 35(1–2), 13–39. https://
doi.org/10.1080/0267257X.2018.1562487
Mitchell, S. L. and Clark, M., (2020). Volunteer choice of nonprofit organisation: an integrated
framework. European Journal of Marketing. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1108/
EJM-05-2019-0427
Modi, P., & Mishra, D. (2010). Conceptualising market orientation in non-profit organisations:
Definition, performance, and preliminary construction of a scale. Journal of Marketing
Management, 26(5–6), 548–569. https://doi.org/10.1080/02672570903485113
Mogilner, C., & Aaker, J. (2009). “The time vs. money effect”: Shifting product attitudes and decisions
through personal connection. Journal of Consumer Research, 36(2), 277–291. https://doi.org/
10.1086/597161
Mogilner, C., Rudnick, T., & Iyengar, S. S. (2008). The mere categorization effect: How the presence of
categories increases choosers’ perceptions of assortment variety and outcome satisfaction.
Journal of Consumer Research, 35(2), 202–215. https://doi.org/10.1086/588698
Mort, G. S., Weerawardena, J., & Williamson, B. (2007). Branding in the non-profit context: the case of
surf life saving Australia. Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ), 15(2), 108–119. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1441-3582(07)70047-2
NCVO. (2019). UK Civil Society Almanac.
Nichols, G. (2013). The psychological contract of volunteers: a new research agenda. Voluntas:
International Journal of Voluntary & Nonprofit Organizations, 24(4), 986–1005. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11266-012-9294-9
Randle, M., Dolnicar, S., & Bennett, R. (2011). Self-congruity and volunteering: a multi-organisation
comparison. European Journal of Marketing, 45(5), 739–758. https://doi.org/10.1108/
03090561111120019
Randle, M., Leisch, F., & Dolnicar, S. (2013). Competition or collaboration and quest; the effect of
non-profit brand image on volunteer recruitment strategy. Journal of Brand Management, 20(8),
689–704. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2013.9
Rempel, S. R., & Burris, C. T. (2015). Personal values as predictors of donor-versus recipient-focused
organizational helping philosophies. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 44(1), 181–191.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764014555989
Reynolds, T. J., & Olson, J. C. (2001). Understanding consumer decision making: The means-end
approach to marketing and advertising strategy. Psychology Press.
Ritchie, J., Lewis, J., Nicholls, C. M., & Ormston, R. (2014). Qualitative research practice: A guide for
social science students and researchers. Sage.

JOURNAL OF MARKETING MANAGEMENT

23

Sargeant, A. (2009). Marketing management for nonprofit organizations (Third ed.). Oxford University
Press.
Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., & Hudson, J. (2008). Charity brand personality: the relationship with giving
behavior. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 37(3), 468–491. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0899764007310732
Sargeant, A., & Lee, S. (2004). Trust and relationship commitment in the United Kingdom voluntary
sector: Determinants of donor behavior. Psychology & Marketing, 21(8), 613–635. https://doi.org/
10.1002/mar.20021
Sargeant, A., & Shang, J. (2016). Outstanding fundraising practice: How do nonprofits substantively
increase their income? International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 21(1),
43–56. https://doi.org/10.1002/nvsm.1546
Scheibehenne, B., Greifeneder, R., & Todd, P. M. (2009). What moderates the too-much-choice effect?
Psychology & Marketing, 26(3), 229–253. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20271
Schembri, S., Merrilees, B., & Kristiansen, S. (2010). Brand consumption and narrative of the self.
Psychology & Marketing, 27(6), 623–637. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20348
Shocker, A. D., Ben-Akiva, M., Boccara, B., & Nedungadi, P. (1991). Consideration set influences on
consumer decision-making and choice: Issues, models, and suggestions. Marketing Letters, 2(3),
181–197. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02404071
Silard, A. (2018). Emotions for a cause: how the emotion expression of nonprofit leaders produces
follower engagement and loyalty. Nonprofit & Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 47(2), 304–324. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0899764017737383
Smith, T. (2011). Brand salience not brand science: a brand narrative approach to sustaining brand
longevity. Marketing Review, 11(1), 25–40. https://doi.org/10.1362/146934711X565279
Srivastava, A., & Thomson, S. B. (2009). Framework analysis: A qualitative methodology for applied
policy research. Journal of Adminstration and Governance, 4, 72–79.
Stride, H., & Lee, S. (2007). No logo? No way. Branding in the non-profit sector. Journal of Marketing
Management, 23(1/2), 107–122. https://doi.org/10.1362/026725707X178585
Stukas, A. A., Hoye, R., Nicholson, M., Brown, K. M., & Aisbett, L. (2016). Motivations to volunteer and
their associations with volunteers’ well-being. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 45(1),
112–132. https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764014561122
Sundaram, D. S., & Webster, C. (1999). The role of brand familiarity on the impact of word-of-mouth
communication on brand evaluations. Advances in Consumer Research, 26(1), 664–670.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel & W.
G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 7–24). Nelson-Hall.
Venable, B. T., Rose, G. M., Bush, V. D., & Gilbert, F. W. (2005). The role of brand personality in
charitable giving: An assessment and validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33
(3), 295–312. https://doi.org/10.1177/0092070305276147
Ward, J., & Greene, A.-M. (2018). Too much of a good thing? The emotional challenges of managing
affectively committed volunteers. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 47(6), 1155–1177.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764018783276
Wilson, J., & Musick, M. (1997). Who cares? Toward an integrated theory of volunteer work. American
Sociological Review, 62(5), 694–713. https://doi.org/10.2307/2657355
Wymer, W., Gross, H. P., & Helmig, B. (2016). Nonprofit brand strength: What is it? How is it
measured? What are its outcomes? Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit
Organizations, 27(3), 1448–1471. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-015-9641-8
Wymer, W. W., Jr, & Samu, S. (2002). Volunteer service as symbolic consumption: gender and
occupational differences in volunteering. Journal of Marketing Management, 18(9–10), 971–989.
https://doi.org/10.1362/0267257012930358
Xiao, N. (2016). How non-consumption goals (elicited by competitive setting or social risk) and
self-confidence influence the importance of trivial attributes in product evaluation. European
Journal of Marketing, 50(9/10), 1746–1766. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM-05-2014-0272
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
9(2 Part 2), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0025848

24

S.-L. MITCHELL AND M. CLARK

Appendix 1: Research design summary

Research Characteristic
Sample size
Contrasting clusters
Face-to-face interviews
Critical mass of brand
awareness
Service delivery
volunteers
Regular, formal
volunteers
Personal voluntary
decision to volunteer
Recent volunteers

Research Design
20 volunteers for each “cluster”
recommended for Framework Analysis
(Ritchie et al., 2014)
Two
All (to build trust)
All five within top 100 UK Charity Brand
Index (Harris-Interactive, 2018)
All volunteers in sample to be delivering
services rather than fundraising or
working in retail
Defined as volunteering at least once
a month through an organisation or
group
Volunteering as community service,
learning disability work programmes or
employer placement schemes excluded.
Volunteers joined in last 12 months

Research Reality
Achieved – 51 volunteers, cluster size 20+
Achieved – 1) Children & Young People 2)
Advice & Listening
Achieved
Achieved
Achieved
Achieved
(majority volunteered weekly)
Achieved
Achieved but re-defined as 12 months since
accepted/started training due to long lead
times on training and recruitment.

Appendix 2: Sample profile

Category 1: Children & Young
People
Fieldwork Classification
Number of interviews completed
Number of women
Number of different towns/cities
Youngest volunteer
Oldest volunteer
Number 55 years old +
Average age of volunteer

Charity 1
8
8
2
26
68
4
51.9

Charity 2
11
7
3
18
63
1
40.3

Charity 3
9
9
3
23
70
2
40.0

Category 2: Advice &
Listening
Charity 4
13
10
3
25
54
0
37.5

Charity 5
10
8
5
25
65
7
54.2

Total NPOs
5
51
42
16
n/a
n/a
14
44.1

