This article was downloaded by: [Universite De Paris 1]
On: 14 August 2013, At: 00:55
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/wnon20

The Concept of Brand Personality as an Instrument for
Advanced Non-Profit Branding–An Empirical Analysis
a

Dr. Markus Voeth PhD & Uta Herbst PhD
a

b

University of Hohenheim, Schloss Osthof-Ost, 70593, Stuttgart, Germany E-mail:

b

University of Hohenheim, Schloss Osthof-Ost, 70593, Stuttgart, Germany E-mail:
Published online: 08 Sep 2008.

To cite this article: Dr. Markus Voeth PhD & Uta Herbst PhD (2008) The Concept of Brand Personality as an Instrument for
Advanced Non-Profit Branding–An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 19:1, 71-97, DOI:
10.1300/J054v19n01_04
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J054v19n01_04

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

The Concept of Brand Personality
as an Instrument for Advanced
Non-Profit Branding–
An Empirical Analysis
Markus Voeth
Uta Herbst

ABSTRACT. In order to remain distinct and to build up strong relationships with their contributors in an increasingly competitive environment, an increasing number of non-profit marketers are attempting to
exploit the profiling potentials of branding. For this reason, the paper addresses the use of the concept of brand personality for the brand management of NPOs. It reports on the development of a non-profit brand
personality scale to assess the brand image of a non-profit organisation.
Potential dimensions and items are drawn from relevant literature and
from primary research. A number of research propositions are empirically tested, which present both a framework for theoretical discussion
and practical implications for the non-profit sector. doi:10.1300/J054v19
n01_04 [Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery Service: 1-800-HAWORTH. E-mail address: <docdelivery@haworthpress.
com> Website: <http://www.HaworthPress.com> Ó 2008 by The Haworth
Press. All rights reserved.]

KEYWORDS. Non-profit organisations, brand management, brand personality scale, factor analysis

Dr. Markus Voeth is Professor of Marketing (E-mail: voeth@uni-hohenheim.de),
and Uta Herbst is a PhD student (E-mail: herbst@uni-hohenheim.de), both at University of Hohenheim, Schloss Osthof-Ost, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany.
Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 19(1) 2008
Available online at http://jnpsm.haworthpress.com
Ó 2008 by The Haworth Press. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1300/J054v19n01_04

71

72

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

INTRODUCTION
Why does a liquorish-brown coloured carbonated drink sell billions
of bottles each year? Why do a handful of daring environmental activists who cross a whaling ship’s route in their rubber dinghy receive annual donations that easily exceed 100 million euro? (Greenpeace,
2004). The liquorish-brown coloured drink is Coke, which is currently, according to Interbrand, the most expensive brand in the world,
with a market value of over 54 billion euros (Business Week, 2004).
The environmental activists in their rubber dinghy are members of
Greenpeace, the financially strongest ecology group in the world. Examples such as these show that non-profit organisations, like any large
commercial enterprise, possess strong brands.
But whereas branding has long been an essential marketing tool of
for-profit firms, driven primarily by the need to remain distinct and
successful in an increasingly competitive environment, non-profits
only began to discuss the strategic use of brands in their sector in the
mid 1990s (Hankinson, 2001). Arguably, this development resulted
from the severe competition non-profits began to face during the last
decade: On the one hand substantial reductions in government funding
exerted pressure on them to finance their operations from private donations (Webb et al., 2000). On the other hand an increasing number of
non-profit organisations let competition for individual donations mount
even higher. As a consequence, Greenpeace for example licensed its
brand for products from different producers to increase income and
popularity, and UNICEF recently undertook several activities related to
branding in order to provide a well-defined image for their brand
(Rusch, 2001; Rusch, 2002b).
However, despite such activities, it must be stated that most nonprofits are still under-using their potentials for branding and that the use
of brand-inherent profiling opportunities is often only a product of coincidence, as the charitable organisations do not consciously control this
valuable asset (Tapp, 1996). In this sense, they fail, for example, to explore the specific traits and characteristics of their brands, the so-called
brand personality, as key determinants as to why stakeholders choose to
enter into a relationship with them and support their organisations.
This is not surprising, given the fact that research conducted in
branding in general, and more specifically on brand personalities, has
also mainly been based on for-profit brands. Additionally, in view of
the rather more beneficial than economic nature of transactions in the
non-profit sector, this research can and should not be applied to

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

73

non-profits without major adaptations (Arnett et al., 2003; Hankinson,
2001; Ritchie et al., 1999).
Given the above illustrations, the objectives of our paper are twofold.
1. We aim to examine brand personalities in the non-profit sector in
order to extend prior research on this prominent concept. Of key interest
to our analysis here is what kind of brand personalities non-profits possess and how these can be measured. The purpose of this research is to
present a brand personality scale that is directed towards the distinct
characteristics of the non-profit sector.
2. We intend to provide a foundation for a more systematic use of
branding strategies in the non-profit sector. Therefore we will analyse
various non-profit brand personalities in order to assess their predictive
validities on donors’ likelihood to contribute. To achieve these goals
our paper is organised as follows:
Section 2 defines the importance of non-profit branding as well as peculiarities of brand management in the non-profit sector. Section 3 then
relates the existing research in the field of brand personality, in order to
provide a comprehensive basis for its application to the brand policies
of NPOs. In this connection, it becomes evident that concepts developed for the consumer goods market can be applied to the non-profit
sector in general, but need further adaptations and extensions. Subsequently, the development of our extended brand personality scale for
the non-profit sector is described and empirically tested for an exclusive
set of NPOs (Section 4). We focus hereby on the German non-profit
sector, as this market was until recently characterised by a much greater
vicinity to the state than for example the US sector and therefore financially more secure. This fact lets us assume that the use and implementation of branding strategies differs even more clearly between
for-profits and non-profits in Germany. We discuss the implications of
our findings for both theory and non-profit marketers in Section 5.
BRAND MANAGEMENT IN THE NON-PROFIT SECTOR
Brand Management as a Strategic Tool in Competitive Markets
In markets in which competition is constantly intensifying, performance can naturally no longer differ greatly. This means, however, that
brands gain increasing weight as warranties for performance (Kapferer,
2001). A brand is thereby defined as an associated perception, which is
rooted in the psyche of the target group and retrieved through the dis-

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

74

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

play of symbols that represent the organisation. It both serves as a
means of differentiation and functions as a platform for building meaning into relationships with the stakeholders of an organisation. This is
due to the functions brands execute both for the brand owners and for
their target groups (Hakinson, 2003).
In the eyes of a consumer, brands exert three major purposes: an information purpose, a risk-reduction purpose, and an image purpose.
Brands facilitate orientation among and choice between certain products or services, and thus unburden the consumer. In their risk reduction
function, brands serve as a signal and proof of quality. They serve as a
safety measure, which elicits trust in the eye of the customer. Finally, it
is becoming increasingly important for organisations to acknowledge
the identity-creating effect of a brand. The identity-creating effect is the
result of the projection of a brand’s character onto the personality of the
consumer, which then contributes to the creation of social prestige
(Kapferer, 2001).
For the provider, brands also serve important purposes. Firstly, they
improve the acquisition potential and have a positive effect on sales.
Second, brands develop a positive stereotype in the minds of the customers, therefore creating a higher scope in price policy and protecting
an enterprise from short-term crisis and heightened competition. Furthermore, strong brands also function as a basis to create new products
and help to open up new markets containing new target groups (Kotler
and Andreasen, 2003).
Importance and Peculiarities of Non-Profit Branding
Companies in the for-profit sector have had to fall back on the
purely associative distinguishing characteristics of brands already
several decades ago. With some time delay this development can now
be observed in the non-profit sector. This is due to the fact, that in the
meantime the number of competing organisations has substantially increased facing challenge on charitable organisations to attract and retain
donors (Bendapudi et al., 1996). Furthermore, an expanding number of
NPOs has noticed that a large part of the public no longer knows what
interests it stands for or realises neither the goals nor the values of the
organisation. As a consequence, more and more donors are becoming
indifferent in their donor preferences. The weak emotional bond between the donor and the brand results in a low degree of brand loyalty.
This weak bond is problematic, because it is much more expensive to
acquire new donors than to maintain loyal ones. Given these trends,

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

75

marketing techniques, such as market segmentation, relationship or database marketing, have been intensively applied to the non-profit sector
during the last decade (for an overview see Venable et al., 2005). It is
surprising however, that non-profit marketers still devote few activities
to the development and strategic use of brands.
A first reason for this might lie in the fact that many non-profit practitioners think that their organisations are too complex for the differentiation function of a brand (Hakinson, 2000). This is because the
non- profit brand lacks a direct affinity to products. It refers, instead,
to the company itself in all its multi-layered complexity. It is thus not
a tangible object; it does not possess any possibilities for physical differentiation. However, this “intangibility,” the lack of direct physical
encounters, does not prevent the development of a branding strategy
(Ind, 1997). Such a discussion becomes irrelevant when one considers
that a company, just as products and services, can be a reference unit for
mental images.
The infrequent use of branding strategies in the non-profit sector is,
however, due to a further fact: that is, the specific nature of transactions
in the non-profit sector. In contrast to the typical monetary-based exchange in most for-profit transactions, “the act of giving to a non-profit
organisation tends to be more social than economic in nature” (Venable
et al., 2005, 297). This statement is supported by studies on charitable
giving (Burnett and Wood, 1988), which show that the benefit for donors is mainly defined by a rise in social values. These range from personal satisfaction and approval to respect for humanitarianism (Arnett
et al., 2003). However, as the term “branding” is still considered a commercial approach by many non-profits, they still regard its use as a betrayal of the ethical-social principals of the welfare sector (Saxton,
2002).
In this context we would like to point out that the manner in which a
brand functions is not only independent on the object of reference, but
also on the nature of the respective transaction that takes place. It solely
differs in its different origin as well as type of value added to its stakeholders. In order to provide a better understanding for this point, we will
have a closer look on transactions in the non-profit market.
Non-profits usually have two significant stakeholder groups. These
are the contributors on the one hand and the beneficiaries on the other.
Although there are cases in which these two groups overlap, the contributor usually–in contrast to classic for-profit transactions–only experiences the benefit of supporting an organisation indirectly via the benefit
to the beneficiary, and thus perceives it–regardless of the type of organi-

76

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

sation–as very similar; this is the aforementioned social benefit. As a
consequence, NPOs have also intensified content-related differentiation difficulties, alongside the physical problems. Therewith however it
becomes clear that the functions of brands described above are at least
as important within non-profit transactions as in the for-profit sector,
though partly of a different nature.

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Brand Functions in the Non-Profit Sector
In the growing confusion of the Third Sector, the information function of non-profit brands–similarly to traditional product brands–provide reliable orientation. As an information focus, the brand’s role is to
create points of identification that structure and simplify the task of
finding information for the stakeholder groups. It thus opens up a communication platform for non-profits, from which the values linked to
the organisation are transported and relationships with contributors can
be built up, controlled and maintained.
Moreover, the non-profit brand also serves to reduce risks for donors,
although not in the sense of a traditional quality guarantee. As public
trust in NPOs has constantly decreased because of various scandals, it
should instead function as a seal of trust, which is capable of representing the organisation’s transparency and integrity, as well as responsibility and reliability (Arnett et al., 2003; Morgan and Hunt,
1994). The ethical-social values of a non-profit brand may also have the
effect of bestowing prestige. This helps donors to live out their own
mental values with the brand or to transfer images associated with it to
their own selves. In this sense, studies show that the congruence between the donor’s values and the organisational values determines
which organisation is supported (Bennett, 2003; Dolisch, 1969).
Overall, the illustrations show that non-profits–similarly to the quantity and price benefits in the profit sector–could create identification and
differentiation characteristics in a competitive environment, intensify
trust in their activities and thus secure their volume of donations by a
strategic and targeted use of their brands. However, this also means that
a large number of non-profit organisations have wasted considerable
competitive advantages to date by not controlling the image of their
brand in the public eye. In this context, Bendapudi (1996, 37) confirms,
“that a charity’s brand image may be the single most critical element of
its promotional programme (. . .).”
Building up and maintaining a strong brand image, however, is a difficult task (Bernstein, 1985). In this context both research and practice

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

77

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

have found the use of the “brand as person” metaphor to be an accepted
device of building up successful brands in the for-profit sector (Davis
and Chun, 2003). Therefore we too will introduce the history and further developments of this approach in marketing, and analyse whether it
also presents a suitable instrument for an advanced non-profit branding.
THE CONCEPT OF BRAND PERSONALITY AS A DEVICE
FOR AN ADVANCED BRAND POLICY
IN THE NON-PROFIT SECTOR
History and Concept of Brand Personality
The concept of brand personality is based on the assumption that people tend to personify objects surrounding them. By describing brands in
terms of human characteristics, it serves as a major device in generating
brand attachment and brand awareness, in much the same way as people
bond themselves together (Plummer, 1984). It is therefore seen as an enduring differentiation means in competitive markets (Tan Tsu Wee,
2003). Besides being able to differentiate brands, the personality factor
might also reflect emotions or feelings of the brand, thus encouraging
the target group to perceive the brand as an active, contributing friend
and to enter into a long-term relationship with the brand (Aaker and
Fournier, 1995).
The device of equating a brand with a person is not new: The realisation that people grant lifeless objects human qualities, even give them a
soul, was already discussed in Gilmore’s “Theory of Animism” at the
beginning of the last century (Azoulay and Kapferer, 2003). Since then,
the idea of brands having a personality just as human beings has been
developed. It was practice that was thereby the first to coin the term
“brand personality”: As early as 1958, Martineau applied the expression to the characteristic dimensions of a retail store (Azoulay and
Kapferer, 2003). Further studies followed, aiming to identify the personality factors that could contribute to a positive, strong brand image
(cf. Lindquist, 1974; Berry, 1969).
Researching the concept of brand personality was initially seen as accessible only through qualitative rather than through quantitative data
(Hanby, 1999; Durgee, 1988). The respondent is typically asked to
imagine the brand as person and is questioned to suggest what type of
car this person would drive or in what kind of house it would live, until a

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

78

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

comprehending association is formed of the product or organisation
(Davis and Chun, 2004; King, 1973).
As most of this work, however, was context-specific without providing any generic measurement approach to compare the consumer’s perception of any company with that of its competitors (Markham, 1972),
the quantitative measurement of brand personality was pursued from
the beginning of the 1970s (Hieronimus, 2003). In this endeavour, researchers attempted to find human characteristics that completely describe a brand’s personality. Much of this work was based on translated
theories of human personality (for details see Azouley and Kapferer,
2003). Batra et al. (1993) for example used Anderson’s (1968) human
personality traits in order to measure the image of retail brands. As a result, seven factors entailing 35 items were defined. Comparably, Biel
(1993) used 28 human descriptors to analyse brand image. In 1997,
Aaker (1997) developed a measurement scale called the “Brand Personality Scale.” In the development of her conceptual framework, she
largely followed the steps of the US psychologists Costa and McCrae,
who examined the famous “Big Five” or five-factor model (McCrae and
Costa, 1989). She drew her scale thereby from a much larger list of possible items (114) than previous studies on brand management. To guarantee a universal solution, she explored 37 brands covering various
industries. The end result of her study was a brand personality scale that
consisted of 42 traits and 5 dimensions (see Table 1).
The final scale was tested and re-tested on large samples of American
respondents. This follow-up research proved that Aaker’s solution can
be seen as a reliable and valid construct that analyses the perceived human characteristics of brands and measures the valence of these traits
among subjects (Venable et al. 2005; Davies and Chun, 2003). Aaker’s
study has been directly replicated or variously adapted by many researchers (Davies and Chun, 2003; Aaker et al., 2001; Ferrandi et al.,
2000; Koebel and Ladwein, 1999). As most recent work examining
brand personalities is thus based on the “Brand Personality Scale,” this
measure can be seen as a milestone in the investigation of brand
personality.
Transferability of the Aaker Scale to the Non-Profit Sector
Despite the comprehensive capabilities of Aaker’s Brand Personality
Scale described above, it can not simply be adopted for the purpose of
our study, but needs some specific adaptations and extensions. This is
due to some limitations of Aaker’s work:

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

79

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

TABLE 1. The Brand Personality Scale of Jennifer L. Aaker

As a first reason, the “Brand Personality Scale,” which was developed
and validated only in an US-American context, cannot be generalised in an
intercultural context, making it unsuitable for transferring to the German
non-profit market. In this sense, studies conducted in the French market
(Ferrandi et al., 2000), in the Japanese and Spanish markets (Aaker et al.,
2001) and in the German market (Hieronimus, 2003) indicate that the number of dimensions and their corresponding items vary by culture.
An even greater limitation for our purpose, however, lies in the fact
that Aaker only analysed B2C brands and neglected the evaluation of
both B2B and non-profit brands. To illustrate this better, we recall the
fact that non-profit brands possess certain peculiarities that reveal important differences to the profit sector. In Section 2 we contended that,
contrary to for-profit brands, brand management in the non-profit sector should emphasize the central values of both the organisation and its
supporters. These values are the organisation’s “heart and soul” and establish its right to exist, as they provide for the social benefits the stakeholder group of contributors is looking for. Brands in the non-profit
sector are thus often attributed with traits such as trustworthiness, social
competence, humanity, idealism, solidarity, etc. (Cermak et al., 1994).
Few of these characteristics appear in Aaker’s scale. It is possible that
these traits were not considered relevant for brands of consumer goods
and were therefore excluded in the process of item reduction. In either
case, their absence allows us to assume that it is not advisable to transfer
the “Brand Personality Scale” to the non-profit sector without adaptation. Our presumption is confirmed by the fact that attempts were re-

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

80

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

cently made to remove this insufficiency and to grasp and measure the
entireness of a non-profit brand personality.
In this context, Venable et al. (2003) and a follow-up study of this work
by Venable et al. (2005) analysed brand perceptions in three US nonprofit sectors (environment/rights, health, and arts/humanities) by using
qualitative preliminary studies. In doing so, they found out that people
could very easily characterise NPOs and their brands using personality
traits. The terms the participants used were, on the one hand, similar to
those used for for-profit brands. On the other hand, however, new descriptive words were discovered which were related to the thoughtfulness, integrity and reliability of NPOs. Based on these results, the scholars
analysed the structure of brand personality using factor analysis. Additionally to the new descriptive items derived from their preliminary
study, all items from the Aaker scale were used. The result was a
four-factor scale. As shown in Table 2, two of Aaker’s original five factors (sophistication and ruggedness) and two new factors (integrity and
nurturance) were retained. A subsequent confirmatory factor analysis
supported these four dimensions among US non-profit organisations.
The goal of an earlier study by Bennett and Gabriel was to measure the
influence of brand personalities on consumers’ decision to buy products
of NPOs and, in relation, to evaluate the related potential for a transfer
of a brand (Bennett and Gabriel, 2000). To operationalise the construct
of brand personality, an item list was generated, which was based on
several studies conducted in the sector of non-profit marketing and
non-profit management. According to a resulting list of 26 items, 94 students evaluated two items of their choice from popular non-profit
brands on a five-point scale. This resulted in 188 evaluations for each
item. On this basis, a variety of explorative factor analyses were con-

TABLE 2. Factors and Items of the Venable et al. Scale

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

81

ducted with a different number of factors. The best result was found to
be a four-factor solution that included 19 items as shown in Table 3.
Although both studies constitute important preparatory work for
using the concept of brand personality in the non-profit sector, they
are subject to certain limitations. The scale of Venable et al. was
again examined in the US context only. Bennett and Gabriel’s construct, in addition, was generated solely on the basis of items taken
from the non-profit literature, and does not provide a theoretical
background and context for the “Big Five” of the human personality,
as well as the already discovered dimensions of brand personalities.
To come to a first conclusion, we must state that the understanding
of brand personality in the non-profit sector is still not well developed:
Regarding the US context, there are still only few studies which have
tried to measure non-profit brand personality; concerning the German
non-profit market, as a representative of a late mover market regarding
branding activities, not a single study exists. The next chapter is dedicated to providing a partial solution to this deficit.
CONCEPTION OF A BRAND PERSONALITY SCALE
FOR THE GERMAN NON-PROFIT SECTOR
Method and Objectives of This Research
Because prior research has not examined brand personality in a non-profit
market characterised until recently by a relatively strong support of govTABLE 3. Factors and Items of the Bennett/Gabriel Scale

82

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

ernment funding, such as for example the German non-profit sector, we
chose to use a multi-method design. Firstly, we applied a discovery approach
that consisted of two qualitative methods: in-depth interviews of current
non-profit professionals and content analysis of the mission statements of
German non-profit organisations. After summarising the results of these
studies, we conducted a third and a fourth study, in order to quantitatively investigate brand personalities in the non-profit sector. Altogether, our methodology was designed to address the following research questions:
1. What are the characteristic dimensions of German non-profit
brand personalities and how can they be measured?
2. Do non-profit brand personalities influence charitable giving intentions?
Based on our aforementioned conclusions,
• that Aaker (1997) did not consider any non-profit brands in developing the “Brand Personality Scale,”
• that non-profit brands differ from consumer brands in that they
have to emphasize the comprehensive, long-term values of a charitable organisation, and
• that donors seek social benefits when supporting a charitable organisation,
our specific research propositions were:
P1: Aaker’s Brand Personality Scale is not able to describe brand personalities from the non-profit sector in their entirety and thus cannot
be replicated in this context.
P2a: Contrary to for-profit brands, attributes based on social values present an important dimension of non-profit brand personalities.
They are depicted by a discrete factor in an adapted non-profit
brand personality scale.
P2b: The higher the attributes based on social values are rated for an organisation by an individual, the higher is the potential willingness
to contribute to this organisation.
Qualitative Studies
As we were able to assume, on the basis of the previous theoretical
considerations, that the items of the “Brand Personality Scale” are not

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

83

sufficient for describing brand personalities in the non-profit sector satisfactorily, we conducted preliminary studies for item selection among
non-profit practitioners (study 1). Moreover, mission statements of
German NPOs were analysed (study 2).
Study 1. In the first qualitative study, we conducted in-depth interviews with marketing experts from eight of the largest German NPOs.
In order to assure an adequate sample selection for the purpose of our
study, we analysed the structure of the German non-profit market more
in detail. According to the “International Classification of Non-profit
Organisations” (ICNPO), the non-profit market consists of 12 sectors.
According to Priller and Zimmer (2001) the relevant sectors of the German non-profit market are: culture/arts, education/science, health care,
social services, environment, housing, consumer interests, foundations,
international activities, and industrial unions.
Although all sectors are non-commercial, they dispose of central differences. This heterogeneity becomes most evident when looking at two
dimensions: This is their form of financing as well the relevance of their
activities for the general public.
As illustrated in Figure 1, there is a clear dichotomy of the non-profit
market: On the one hand, there are sectors that are still very closely
linked with the state (arts/science, social services, consumer interests),
which are almost exclusively financed by government funding. On the
other hand, the remaining sectors are characterised by a much more segmented financing structure, which can be subdivided into both government support and private donations, however with a growing tendency
towards the latter. As a consequence, these sectors clearly face a stronger competition for individual donations than the three previously mentioned sectors. It can be assumed that the provision of elaborated
marketing techniques is also of higher relevance in these sectors. Therefore, we believed that it would best suit the purpose of our study to conduct expert interviews in NPOs from the right side of the illustration.
However, we did not include representatives from the lower right
quadrant. This is due to the fact that German NPOs, besides their financing form, can also be distinguished by the degree to which their activities either address the general public or focus on specific market
segments. Similarly to the previous classification, it can be assumed
that brand relevance differs between these two categories and that
branding importance will mount with increasing broad effect.
Following these considerations, we selected marketing experts from
eight German NPOs as interviewees, whose organisations all were rep-

84

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

FIGURE 1. Structure of the German Nonprofit Market

resentatives of the upper right classification quadrant. An overview of
our sample is depicted in Table 4.
All in-depth interviews were conducted by telephone and structured
by guidelines containing the following questions: Firstly, the interviewees were asked to indicate the degree of competition their organisation
faces as well the financing form by which their charity is mainly funded,
in order to assess the validity of our accomplished classification scheme.
We then asked the experts what characteristics they regarded as most
suitable to describe their type of organisation. Here, we instructed the
interviewees to list at least three adjectives that describe their charity
“as if had come to life as a person.”
Study 2. In addition to the in-depth interviews, images and “mission
statements” from a further 22 well-known German NPOs were analysed
by means of content analysis, in order to derive additional items for the
questionnaire. This procedure seems to be particularly appropriate, as
mission statements contain the inherent values und norms of an organisation by displaying the charity’s goals and behavioural maxims. This
time we did not restrict our analysis to the upper right quadrant of our
classification scheme, in order to enhance the comprehensiveness of our
qualitative research.

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

85

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

TABLE 4. In-Depth Interviews: Sample Selection

Results. Overall our qualitative work was able to extract 61 items
found suitable to describe the brand personalities of NPOs. However,
some of these terms were found to be similar to those used by consumer
brands or were synonyms or antonyms of established characteristics.
We therefore reduced the collection by 11 items. Consequently, we attained 50 new descriptive items during our qualitative phase (cp. also
Table 5).
Quantitative Studies
We conducted the research in the quantitative phase in a two-step
process: Firstly, we conducted a pilot study among faculty, staff and
student donors in order to reduce our qualitatively generated item pool
to the relevant items (study 3). Then, during the main survey (study 4),
we examined our proposed research hypothesis by means of exploratory factor analysis.
Study 3. To finally reduce the item pool to relevant items, 50 survey
participants were personally asked to evaluate four non-profit brands
each according to the remaining 50 items. The average age of the participants was 34.7 years; 62% of the participants were male. For stimuli
selection, we used the same non-profit classification scheme that we
employed in the qualitative study. Analogous to the sample selection in
our in-depth interviews, we selected only NPOs belonging to the upper
right category, where the highest brand relevance could be identified.
With the three organisations Greenpeace (environment), German Red
Cross (health) and Unicef (international activities), we selected three
NPOs that possess, according to the German fundraising community,
both a very high degree of recognition and of fundraising revenue. In
addition to these three organisations funded by donations, the AOK–the
market leader among the statutory health insurance schemes–was also

86

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

TABLE 5. Calculation of Item Relevance

included. This appears practical, as the competition between the health
insurers is still in an early phase but the battle for market shares is accelerating at speed. Although the statutory health insurers are financed by
means of payments for services, they may be allocated to the non-profit
market, as they are not permitted to make profits. In total, our four
selected brands can be judged as representative of the brand-relevant
part of the German non-profit sector.
In order to identify items which were considered as appropriate to define a non-profit brand personality, the mean value of all evaluations of

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

87

each item was calculated, and a cut-off was used at “4 = applies somewhat.” As a result, 25 items were rated as relevant and included in the
main survey. These new descriptors as well as the excluded items are
depicted in Table 5.
Study 4. The brand selection of the main study followed the previously conducted pilot study, in order to increase the reliability of our results. However, in order to be able to compare non-profit personality
profiles with international profit brands, Coke and BMW, two of the
most powerful brands in the commercial world, were additionally selected. In order to minimise respondent fatigue, each respondent was
asked to only evaluate how descriptive the brand personality traits were
for two of the NPOs and for one consumer brand. Therefore two versions of the questionnaire were available (cp. also Table 6).
The sampling frame of our main study included students, faculty and
staff of three German universities (University Stuttgart-Hohenheim,
University Duisburg and University Münster) as well as anonymous
self-selected Internet users. This is due to the fact that we chose an online questionnaire as a survey methodology in our main study. This online questionnaire was publicised through links on the homepages of the
three universities’ marketing departments. To ensure high participation
levels, the department chairs were asked to additionally inform their
students, faculty and staff of the survey. During a period of four weeks,
we received 249 usable replies to the online questionnaires. The averTABLE 6. Overview of Usable Replies

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

88

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

age age of the participants was 28.8 years, with a span ranging from 17
to 63 years. With a percentage of 60.6, male participants were slightly
overrepresented. Approximately 50% of all participants were students,
29% were employees and 14% were either self-employed or in managerial positions. The distribution of replies across our two versions of the
questionnaire is depicted in Table 6.
At the beginning of the online questionnaire we placed two qualifying questions. The first was to ensure that the respondents had been involved with one or more non-profits in the past 24 months. The other
was to guarantee that the interviewees knew all the brands included in
their respective questionnaire.
In the next section of the survey, the respondents were asked to evaluate the given brands based on 67 items. These items were the 42 items
from the Aaker scale and the additional 25 items found to be relevant
during the preliminary study. The evaluation of characteristics was
again conducted with the aid of a six-point rating scale.
Test of Research Propositions
In order to test our first research proposition P1, an exploratory factor
analysis on the basis of the original 42 items was conducted to examine
the extent to which our empirical data corresponded with the five-factor
solution of the Aaker scale. The database consisted of all item evaluations for the four non-profit brands. This analysis resulted in a threefactor solution based on interpretation and a scree plot. By examining
this result in detail, it became obvious that from the original five factors
of the Aaker scale, the two dimensions Sincerity and Competence melt
into one new dimension, and the same applies to the dimensions Excitement and Sophistication. In total, 11 items would have to be excluded as
they either show too high cross-loadings or do not load on any factor
higher than 0.5. These findings confirm that Aaker’s scale is insufficient to describe brand personalities in the non-profit sector.
For the development of an extended scale for the non-profit sector
(cf. research proposition P2a), we conducted a further explorative factor
analysis, this time including all 67 items of the questionnaire. In this
analysis we also extracted a three-factor solution. In order to receive a
stable factor structure, we thereby applied, additionally to the scree plot
criterion, the demand that each factor should provide at least four item
loadings of 0.6 or above. As it is a well-known fact that factor loadings
vary by number of extracted factors, we also extracted, besides the
three-factor solution, a four-factor and a five-factor solution. However,

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

89

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

the aforementioned additional demand could not be accomplished.
Only two items loaded on factor 4 higher than 0.6 and none at all loaded
on factor 5. These factors are thus hardly interpretable. Consequently,
we extracted the three-factor solution as final result.
Because in this solution, too, some items did not provide unambiguous loadings, we had to reduce the original item list to 42 items. Both
items from the Aaker scale (22) as well items from our newly generated
item pool (3) (these were present, idealistic and independent) had to be
excluded thereby. The criteria for the item reduction were:
• Factor loading of at least 0.55 on one factor.
• Cross-loading not higher than 0.4 on the other factors.
• No loadings on more than one factor (for this demand, the difference between the highest loading of an item and the closest lower
loading > 0.2).
Thus the generated three-factor solution could explain 60.42% of the
total variance, which we can consider as satisfactory. Because of the
broadness of the factors and in order to facilitate the factor interpretation, we conducted additional factor analysis for the item list of each of
the three factors. Aaker applied the same procedure in order to determine her “facets” which are especially highlighted in Table 1. According to Aaker, these facets are representative enough to the dimension
they load on, in other words they allow a more parsimonious description
of brand personalities (Aaker, 1997). According to the Kaiser criterion,
we can establish two such facets for each of the two larger factors, and
one facet for the smallest factor.
The first of these factors consists of 23 items. It encompasses the majority of the items (17) addressing the discussed peculiarities of the
non-profit market. It thus especially emphasizes social values, which
were said to be of high relevance for NPOs. In addition, this factor includes 4 items from Aaker’s Sincerity factor and 2 from the Competence factor. We will therefore call this factor Social Competence and
Trust. The second factor contains the remaining 5 of our residual item
list. Moreover, it contains 6 items from Aaker’s Excitement factor as
well as 2 items from the Ruggedness factor. We will call this second
factor Emotion and Assertiveness. The third and smallest factor only
consists of one facet. It unifies the remaining 4 characters of Aaker’s
Sophistication factor, and both one item of the Aaker factors Sincerity
and Excitement. Because of the similarity regarding the content of this

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

90

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

factor to the Aaker’s Sophistication factor, we decided to name the third
factor Sophistication and Exclusivity.
The three factors constitute an excellent interpretation of the factor
structures, providing unambiguous and high loadings. We found out
that all three of the symbolic personality dimensions demonstrate high
reliability. In this sense, alpha coefficients of the three factors were
0.965 for “Social Competence and Trust,” 0.935 for “Emotion and Assertiveness” and 0.848 for “Sophistication and Exclusivity.” The adjusted item-to-total correlation provided a mean level of 0.71 and lies
between 0.58 and 0.83. We therefore assume a high level of internal
reliability for the factors.
The stability of this solution was tested with a variety of sample surveys, examining the structure of the factors (Aaker 1997). Explorative
factor analyses were therefore conducted for six different groups of
participants. The same items loaded on exactly the same factors and
the measured loadings were of similar value. Although the stability of
our solution was thus tested only by exploratory means, the exact
replicability of the three factors in every sample survey substantiates
our assumption of a stable solution. The brand personality scale for the
non-profit sector is depicted in Table 7.
As a distinct factor representing the social values was extracted in our
factor analysis and as this factor, moreover, is the largest factor of the
newly generated scale, research proposition P2a can be confirmed, allowing us to go on to test hypothesis P2b.
However, before doing so, we want to compare the distinct personality profiles of non-profit brands with those of consumer brands, in order
to provide one further illustration for the predominant position of the social dimension when analysing brand personalities in the non-profit
sector. In this context, we examined the difference of item means of
both sectors. The results of a t-test showed that 31 of the 42 item-means
differ for non-profit and commercial brands at a significance level of
99.9%. These considerable differences become apparent in the personality profiles in Figure 2. Especially in the top and bottom parts showing
the items of the factors described above, those profiles diverge dramatically. The profiles only intersect in the middle of the table, in the section
of the factor Emotion and Assertiveness.
These results demonstrate once more: non-profit brands are graded
as considerably more trustworthy and with a higher social competence
than for-profit brands. This social dimension could not have been captured by applying scales from the profit sector.

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

91

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

TABLE 7. Brand Personality Scale for the Non-Profit Sector

Many studies have been conducted to examine the determinants of
influence on donors. As already mentioned in Section 2 the results
showed that the efficiency of the organisations and trust in their inherent
values are key determinants (Bennet; Gabriel 2000). As these factors
equal for the most part the factor Social Competence and Trust, we
tested research proposition P2b in the following way:
In our questionnaire, we also examined to which of the organisations (UNICEF, German Red Cross; Greenpeace) the participants
would donate 100 euros if they had them at their disposal for donations. The decision to make a donation to one of the three organisations thereby does not imply that the donation actually has to take
place, but it shows a higher affinity to one brand in comparison to
the two others.

92

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

FIGURE 2. Brand Personality Profiles Profit/Non-Profit in Comparison

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

93

We then compared the factor values of the three organisations of the
factor Social Competence and Trust. Indeed, the number of potential
donors for an organisation increases positively in line with its factor
value, as Greenpeace, with a factor value of 3.65, only has 40 potential
donors, and with a value of 4.37 the GRK has 83 potential supporters.
With a factor value of 4.45, UNICEF even has 126 potential donators.
However, to get a better understanding as to why people are willing
to support an organisation, a comparison between potential donors and
non-donors was conducted on the item level. For this purpose, a t-test
was carried out between donors and non-donors. The goal was to filter
out significant item-mean differences. The result shows a clear picture
of the relevant factors of influence. Table 8 shows all the mean differences with a significant level of at least 99%. When looking at the items,
it becomes evident that all items–except “charming”–belong to the factor “Social Competence and Trust.” Therefore, the hypothesis P2b can
also be confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
Non-profit brand management is still at its starting point. Practice
and research still devote few of their efforts towards branding activities.
This is certainly due to the fact that there is a clear lack of both understanding of the special characteristics of non-profit brands and concepts
that help to build up and maintain a strong brand image in the context of
non-profit markets.
In this context, the adaptation of the concept of brand personality to
the non-profit sector can be seen as a suitable and effective solution, as
it serves as a valuable means of differentiation as well as platform of
identification in an increasingly competitive non-profit sector. Therewith it also influences key targets of NPOs such as the individual’s contribution behaviour. However, it is not advisable to adopt the concept of
brand personality of consumer goods to the non-profit sector without
adaptations, as brand personalities in the for-profit sector usually do not
relate to attributes addressing the social values of their companies. In
this sense our illustrations could prove that the structure of brand personalities in the non-profit sector differs significantly from the structure
of consumer brands.
For this reason, the first purpose of our study was to develop a suitable
measurement for non-profit brand personalities. Hereby, we focused on
the German non-profit market, as no study has yet examined non-profit

94

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

TABLE 8. Significant Item-Mean Differences for Potential Donors

brand personalities outside of the US context to our knowledge, where
initial, though few research activities on non-profit brand personalities
have been undertaken in recent years. Our purpose was confirmed by previous studies that reveal that most existing work examining brand personalities show a lack of intercultural generalisability and thus can hardly be
replicated in other cultures. Regarding the of the growing internationalisation of non-profit activities, this deficient generalisability however indicates a clear starting point for further research to our mind. In this sense
the long-term goal should be the development of a non-profit personality
scale, which can be globally applied. A first starting point towards this
goal could be the comparison and confirmatory validation of the scale developed by Venable et al. (2005) and our scale in an intercultural setting.
A second goal of our study was to give some implications for future advanced brand management in the non-profit sector. In this sense, our study
reveals that non-profit marketers should define their self-perceived state
precisely in the form of a mission statement. The target personality of the

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

95

brand should be derived on this basis. In addition, the brand personality
should be measured as to how it is perceived by the relevant target groups.
In order to do so, the operationalised scale of this study can be used in markets resembling the German non-profit sector. Building on the results, a
target-actual comparison regarding the target group and the actually perceived brand personality must be conducted. The most important question
for this step is whether the current position is desirable and, if not, whether
the target group can be reached at all with the available resources.
Due to the limitations of our study, we would like to mention some
further fields of research that would improve the practical implication
of the discussed concept. These are the provision of a better understanding of the influence of the different dimensions of a brand personality on
key factors such as paying for non-profit products and services. Moreover, insights on brand affinity, brand confidence and brand identification of NPOs must also be gained.
REFERENCES
Aaker, J.L. (1997), “Dimensions of Brand Personality”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. XXXIV (August), 347-56.
Aaker, J.L., Benet-Martinez, V., Garolera, J. (2001), “Consumption Symbols as Carriers of Culture. A Study of the Spanish and French Brand Personality Constructs”,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 81 (3), 492-508.
Aaker, J. and Fournier, S. (1995): “A brand as a character, a partner, and a person:
Three perspectives on the question of brand personality”, Advances in consumer research, Vol. 232, 391-395.
Anderson, N.H. (1968): “Likableness rating of 555 personality trait words”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 9 (3), 272-279.
Arnett, D., Steve, D. and Shelby, D. (2003), “The Identity Salience Model of Relationship Marketing Success: The Case of Nonprofit Marketing”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 67 (2), 89-106.
Azoulay, A. and Kapferer, J.-N. (2003), “Do brand personality scales really measure
brand personality?”, Journal of Brand Management, Vol. 11 (2), 143-155.
Batra, R., Lehamann, D.R. and Singh, D. (1993), “The brand personality component of
brand goodwill: Some antecedents and consequences”, in: Aaker, D.A. and Biel, A.
(Eds.), Brand Equity and Advertising, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ,
83-96.
Bennett, R. (2003), “Factors underlying the inclination to donate to particular types of
charity”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol.
8 (1), 12-29.
Bennett, R. and Gabriel, H. (2000), “Charity affiliation as a determinant of product purchase decisions”, Journal of Product and Brand Management, Vol. 9 (4), 255-70.

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

96

JOURNAL OF NONPROFIT & PUBLIC SECTOR MARKETING

Bendapudi, N., Surendra N. S. and Bendapudi, V. (1996), “Enhancing Helping Behavior: An Integrative Framework for Promotion Planning”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 60 (July), 33-49.
Berry, L.L. (1969), “The components of department store image”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 45 (1), 3-20.
Bernstein, D. (1985), Company Image and Reality - a critique of corporate communications, Holt Rinehard Winston, London.
Biel, A.L. (1993), “Converting image into equity”, in Aaker, D.A and Biel, A. (Eds.),
Brand Equity and Advertising: Advertising’s Role in Building Strong Brands‘,
Lawrence-Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 67-82.
Burnett, J.J and Wood, V. (1998), “A proposed model of the donation decision”, Research in Consumer Behaviour, 1-47.
Business Week (2004), The Global Brand Scoreboard: The 100 Top Brands, August 2,
68-71, http://www.businessweek.com/pdfs/2004/0431_brands.pdf [10/11/2004].
Cermak, D.S.P., File, K.M., Prince and R.A. (1994), “A Benefit Segmentation of the
Major Donor Market”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 29, 121-130.
Davis, G., Chun, R., da Silva, R. and Roper, S. (2004), “A Corporate Character Scale
To Assess Employee and Customer Views of Organization Reputation”, Corporate
Reputation Review, Vol.7 (2), 125-146.
Dolisch, I. (1969), “Congruence Relationships between self images and product
brands”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 6 (February), 80-84.
Durgee, J.F. (1988), “Understanding Brand Personality”, Journal of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 5 (3), 21-25.
Ferrandi, J.M., Valette-Florence, P. and Fine-Falcy, S. (2000), “Aaker’s Brand Personality Scale in a French Context. A Replication and a Preliminary Test of Its Validity”, in: Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 23, 7-13.
Greenpeace (2004), Annual Report 2004, http://www.greenpeace.org/ international_
en/multimedia/download/1/567579/0/ar2004.pdf [10/11/2004].
Hanby, T. (1999), “Brands - Dead or alive? Qualitative Research for the 21st century: The
changing conception of brands”, Journal of the Market Research Society, Vol. 41 (1), 1-8.
Hankinson, P. (2003), “Brand orientation in Charity Organisations: Qualitative Research into Key Charity Sectors”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Marketing, Vol. 5 (3), 207-219.
Hankinson, P. (2001), “Brand orientation in the charity sector: A framework for discussion and research”, International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol. 6 (3), 231-242.
Hieronimus, F. (2003), “Persönlichkeitsorientiertes Markenmanagement - Eine empirische
Untersuchung zur Messung, Wahrnehmung und Wirkung der Markenpersönlichkeit”,
in Meffert, H. (Ed.) Schriften zu Marketing und Management, Band 47, Frankfurt am Main.
Ind, N. (1997): The Corporate Brand, Free Press, New York
Kapferer, J.-N. (2001), Strategic Brand Management - Creating and Sustaining Brand
Equity Long Term, 2. ed., London.
King, S. (1973), Developing New Brands, Pitman, London, UK.
Koebel, M.N. and Ladwein, R. (1999), “L´ echelle de personnalité de la marque de Jennifer
L. Aaker: Adaption au contexte francais”, Decision Marketing, Vol. 16, 81-88.

Downloaded by [Universite De Paris 1] at 00:55 14 August 2013

Markus Voeth and Uta Herbst

97

Kotler, P. and Andreasen, A. (2003), Strategic Marketing for Nonprofit Organizations,
6. Edition, New Jersey.
Lindquist, J.D. (1974), “Meaning of image”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 50 (4), 29-38.
Markham, V. (1972), Planning the Corporate Reputation, George Allen & Unwin,
London, UK.
Martineau, P. (1958), “The personality of the retail store”, Harvard Business Review,
Vol. 36 (January/February), 24-36.
Mc Crae, R.R. and Costa, P.T., Jr. (1992), “Discriminant validity of NEO-PIR facet
scales”, Educational & Psychological Measurement, Vol. 52 (1), 22-237.
Morgan, G. (1983), “More on metaphor: Why we cannot control tropes in administrative science”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 28 (4), 601-607.
Plummer, J.T. (1984), “How personality makes a difference”, Journal of Advertising
Research, Vol. 24 (6), 27-31.
Priller, E. and Zimmer, A. (2001), Der dritte Sektor international - mehr Markt weniger Staat?, Berlin.
Ritchie, R., Swami, S. and Weinberg, C.B. (1999), “A Brand New World For Nonprofits”,
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 4 (1),
February 1999, 26-42.
Rusch, R. (2001), “Greenpeace making waves”, http://www.brandchannel.com/features_ profile.asp?pr_id = 11 [08/07/2004].
Rusch, R. (2002), “UNICEF unites”, http://www.brandchannel.com/features_profile.
asp?pr_id = 102 [08/07/2004].
Saxton, J. (2002), “Polishing the Diamond - values, image and brand as a source of
strength for charities, nfpSynergy”, http://www.nfpsynergy.net/freereports.html [08/
04/2004].
Tan Tsu Wee, T. (2003), “Extending human personality to brands: The stability factor”, Brand Management, Vol. 11 (4), 317-330.
Tapp, Alan (1996), “Charity Brands: A Qualitative Study of Current Practice”, Journal
of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing. Vol. 1 (4), 327-36.
Venable, B., Rose, G., Gilbert, F., Bush and V. and Gilbert, F. (2005), “The role of
brand personality in Charitable Giving: An Assessment and Validation”, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 33 (3), 295-312.
Venable, B., Rose, G. and Gilbert, F. (2003), “Measuring the Brand Personality of
Non-Profit Organizations”, Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 30, 379f.
Webb, D.J., Green, C.L., and Brashear T.G. (2002), “Development and Validation of
Scales to Measure Attitudes Influencing Monetary Donations to Charitable Organisations”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol.28 (2), 299-309.

SUBMITTED: May 11, 2005
FIRST REVISION: July 12, 2005
ACCEPTED: September 22, 2005
doi:10.1300/J054v19n01_04

