International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing
Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark. 20: pp 211–225 (2015)
Published online 30 April 2015 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/nvsm.1520

The Good Samaritan and the Marketer:
public perceptions of humanitarian and
international development NGOs
Irene Bruna Seu1*, Frances Flanagan1 and Shani Orgad2
1

Department of Psychosocial Studies, Birkbeck, University of London, UK
Department of Media and Communications, The London School of Economics and Political Science, UK

2

•

This article reports on a nationwide study investigating public responses to humanitarian communications. Based on focus group data with members of the UK public, the paper discusses two key models
through which NGOs identities and activities are understood and judged, both positively and negatively:
the Good Samaritan and the Marketer. Thematic analysis of the focus groups extracts exposes the salience
of these models in people’s thinking, how they speak to each other and how they inform and affect the relationship between NGOs and public. The paper discusses the themes in relation to current debates on organisations’ image and trust and confidence in nonprofit organisations and humanitarian NGOs. The
data show deep public disillusionment and disappointment deriving from the recognition of the Marketer
model being applied to and employed within the realm of humanitarianism. This suggests that NGOs’
moving away from traditional notions of charity might be counterproductive and in the long-term risky.
Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Introduction
This article reports on a nationwide study conducted in the UK1 to investigate public responses
to humanitarian and international development issues and their communications.2 We focus on

participants’ perceptions of NGOs3 and how these
affect both their relationship with the NGOs and
with humanitarian causes in general. The paper
builds on the extensive literature on public trust

*Correspondence to: Irene Bruna Seu, Department of Psychosocial Studies, Birkbeck, University of London, 30 Russell
Square, London WC1B 5DT, UK. E-mail: b.seu@bbk.ac.uk;
ibruna2010@yahoo.co.uk
1
We are grateful to the Leverhulme Trust for generously funding
this project (grant F/07 112/Y). For further information on this
study, please refer to the project’s website: http://www.bbk.
ac.uk/psychosocial/our-research/research-projects-current/mediated-humanitarian-knowledge-audiences-responses-and-moralactions.

2

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Although there are important differences between humanitarian and international development causes, here, the term ‘humanitarian’ will be used as shorthand to refer to both, for the
sake of brevity, and because participants discussed humanitarian and international development causes (and indeed charities
in general) interchangeably.
3
The specific use of the term NGO in this paper refers to humanitarian and international development NGOs. However,
when referring to relevant research and only when used by
the author, we use the broader term of ‘charities’.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

212

and confidence in charities (Sargeant & Lee, 2004,
2004a, 2002, Sargeant et al. 2008a, Sargeant et al.
2008b), touching on issues of charity branding
and values (Venable et al. 2005; Sargeant, Ford,
& West, 2008a; Sargeant, Hudson, & West,
2008b) in the context of a recognised climate of
increased competition in the nonprofit and voluntary sector in the UK (Bennett & Gabriel, 2003)
and the adoption of management and marketing
methods (Saxton, 2004; Bennet, 1998). The analysis of participants’ perceptions of NGOs discussed
here identifies two key models of humanitarian
NGOs, descriptively anthropomorphised into the
figures of the Good Samaritan and the Marketer.
Although some of our conclusions concur with extant work in the field, the work described here is
unique in several respects. First, it identifies a new
key model through which NGOs’ identities and activities are understood by the UK public, the Marketer, which has not been recognised and
researched so far. Second, this model was consistently referred to across all focus groups and
emerged ‘naturally’ rather than being prompted
by specific questions from the researchers, thus
marking a methodological departure from the majority of existing research. Third, we also differ
from existing work as we do not focus on the role
of these perceptions in stimulating donations,
which largely characterises current research. We
do not understand monetary donations as intrinsically signifying responsiveness; on the contrary,
we have found that monetary donations can be
an effective way of only fleetingly engaging with
humanitarian issues (Seu & Orgad, 2014). The
focus on factors stimulating donations and the
deductive approach of existing research might
explain why this model of humanitarian
operations has not been identified so far.
First, we map out current literature debates on
public perceptions of NGOs; then, we briefly introduce the project and present its findings. The paper
concludes with a discussion of the relevance of
these findings for the relationship between NGOs
and their public.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

Public perceptions of NGOs, trust and
commitment
The voluntary sector plays a highly significant role
in modern society, dealing with difficult social issues
and occupying a distinct space, separate from government and private sector enterprise (Sargeant &
Lee, 2004, 2004a). Although small when compared
with either of these, the sector possesses a moral authority that belies its relative size (Hind, 1995). Indeed, it has been argued that voluntary organisations
play a pivotal role in generating broader trust (Fukuyama, 1995) and that, when nonprofit organisations
fail, the breach of public trust can be devastating
(Herzlinger, 1996).
According to a survey conducted by the Charity
Commission in the UK (2010), charities enjoy a high
level of trust from the public, as the third most
trusted group after doctors and the police. However, a recent study carried out in the UK found that
the relationship between the UK public and humanitarian and international development NGOs is in
crisis (Seu & Orgad, 2014); a view shared by others,
including NGOs themselves (see Crompton, 2010;
Darnton & Kirk, 2011; Orgad & Vella, 2012). Saxton
(2004) argues that ‘ironically, it is the very success of
professionalization in delivering the goods in terms
of income and effectiveness, direction and impact
that is the root of the problem’ (Saxton, 2004: 188).
Many (e.g. Bruce, 1994; Mullin, 1995; Sumption,
1995) have commented on the critical role played
by trust in ‘defining both the credibility and legitimacy of the charity sector and in affording it a
higher moral tone in the minds of key stakeholder
groups such as supporters, the media and the general public’ (Sargeant & Lee, 2004a:614). According
to the Charity Commission (2002, 2001), the maintenance of public goodwill necessary to support both
donating and volunteering activity is consistently
tied directly to the presence and the promotion of
trust as the enduring and central relationship that
sustains the sector as a whole (Sargeant & Lee,
2004a:186). Recent studies lend further support to
the idea that the strength of a donor’s commitment

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

to the relationship with a nonprofit is a function of a
complex causal structure driven by trust (Atkinson
et al., 2012, Sargeant & Lee, 2004, 2004a), which is
fostered, among other factors, by the perceived
ethics/judgement of the organisation and the extent
to which the purpose of the organisation is felt to
be benevolent (Kennedy, et al., 2001; McFall,
1987; Morgan & Hunt, 1994).
However, over the last 20 years, the way that charities and humanitarian and international development
NGOs work has changed beyond recognition (Calhoun,
2010; Chouliaraki, 2013), in a move away from the traditional ‘charity’ model. Competition among general
charities vis-à-vis attracting public donations is intense
(Bennett & Gabriel, 2003) due to the proliferation of
charities resulting from the British government’s withdrawal from many areas of medical and social welfare
(Sargeant, 1999) and the adoption by charities of a market focus and the latest management and marketing
methods (Bennett & Gabriel, 2003, 1998; Bennet,
1998; Bruce & Chew, 2011; Chouliaraki, 2013). According to Saxton (2004), nonprofits and charities now run
operations like professional businesses; they set performance target, employ professionals – fundraisers, marketers, campaigners, CEOs – to do their work.
Reflecting on the historical and political changes
affecting humanitarianism, Calhoun (2010) has similarly pointed out that, in contrast to the old fashioned model of charitable practices, since the
1980s organisations have been increasingly concerned with achieving best practice, with many of
their executives coming from backgrounds in consultancy, advertising and communications industries. Hilton, Crowson, Mouhot and McKay (2012)
claim that the ethos of ‘business’ in the British
NGO sector broadly coincided with the Thatcher
years, when the government attacked public sector
services, expecting NGOs to provide public services, but do so in a manner that increased accountability requirements. A wave of professionalism and
managerialism then became further entrenched in
the 1990s (Benthall, 1993).
The political implications for NGOs immersion
in commercial norms have been widely analysed

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

213

(e.g. Voeth & Herbst, 2008). For example, on the
basis of in-depth interviews with top communications managers of major international aid agencies,
Cottle and Nolan (2007) found that these organisations were foremost structured by corporate media
practices and priorities, concluding that these NGOs
were deeply ensnared in global media logic. In marketing terms, organisations strive to project a strong
and positive corporate identity, because this is the
ideal image that an organisation wants its public to
hold (Johnson & Zinkhan, 1990) and is crucial in determining whether people enter into a relationship
with an organisation or not (Venable, et al., 2005).
But people’s perception of this identity is complicated (Seu & Orgad, 2014).
Saxton (2004) argues that although nonprofits and
their communicators—most notably fundraisers—
tend to play down and gloss over the size, shape,
scale and sophistication of modern charities, this
has considerably complicated charities’ relationship
with the public. Humans need symbolic representations to simplify buying decisions, and a persons’ image of an organisation can be viewed as a preliminary
heuristic for deciding whether to become involved
with the organisation (Venable et al., 2005). Venable
et al. (2005:307) found that the respondents in their
study ascribed human personality traits to nonprofit
organisations and that many of the dimensions used
to describe the nonprofit organisations were similar
to those previously found for consumer brands.
Aaker (1997: 347) defines brand personality as ‘the
set of human characteristics associated with a brand’
(quoted in Venable et al., 2005: 298), and Berger and
Gainer (2002) have found that, because giving
carries important psychosocial meanings, donors
are drawn to brands that are perceived as having a
personality encompassing values congruent to their
own, be they actual or aspired (De Chernatony
et al., 2004, quoted in Sargeant et al., 2008a).
The organisation’s ‘brand personality’ has also
been found to be intimately connected to trust and
commitment to the organisation (Sargeant et al.,
2008a), a crucial component of which is its image.
Image concerns the knowledge, feelings and beliefs

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

214

about an organisation that exist in the thoughts of its
audience (Bennett & Gabriel, 2003); Hatch &
Schultz, 1997), that is, ‘the set of meanings through
which people know, describe, remember and relate
to an organisation’ (Dowling, 1986, quoted in
Bennett & Gabriel, 2003: 277). Because image is
the mental representation that can be manipulated
in the minds of an organisation’s audiences, it has
been argued that ‘an organisation’s image needs to
be consciously managed’ (Bennett & Gabriel, 2003).
Sargeant et al. (2008b) found that participants
employed the notion of ‘charity’ to imbue the organisation with a distinctive set of characteristics (e.g.
‘trustworthiness’ or ‘caring’), which were regarded
as the necessary base to include the organisation
in their consideration set. Additionally, responsive
and engaging, ability to effect a change, approachable, compassionate, and helpful and, importantly,
the perception of heroism, were considered desirable characteristics in the organisation.
Stride (2006) also explored the relationship between charities’ branding and values; questioned
whether branding is an appropriate and effective
tool in the charity context and argued that it is precisely the non-negotiability of charity values that differentiates them from commercial organisations (see
also Vestergaard, 2008). More recently, Chouliaraki
(2013), in her study of what she terms ‘posthumanitarian’ communication, also discusses the
role of brand recognition in spectators’ response to
humanitarian organisations. She argues that when
using post-humanitarian communication, humanitarian NGOs are positioning themselves within the
world of corporate branding and ‘obeying market
logic’ with detrimental effects on an ethical discourse on public action.
In summary, an inconsistent picture emerges
from these different strands of literature. The ‘critical’ strand of work (based on Lazarsfeld’s distinction, 1941) critiques and problematises the
increased professionalization of NGOs internal operations and the changing norms in NGOs communications and draws conclusions on how the
commercialisation of NGOs has affected public

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

perception of NGOs and their operations. Because
this strand is rarely supported by empirical evidence, it is difficult to get a real sense from these
studies of the extent, the nature and implications
of these tensions.
The second, ‘administrative’ strand of work provides robust, empirically based insights into the role
of trust, image and brand in donor perceptions of organisations. However, these studies do not problematise
the marketisation of NGOs and openly aim at finding
effective strategies towards increasing donations.
With few exceptions, these studies are deductive in
nature and predominantly quantitative.
Overall, as Sargeant et al. (2008a) and, Sargeant,
Ford, and West (2006) have pointed out, a noticeable
gap in research still exists concerning the role that
the characteristics of a recipient organisation might
play in stimulating donations and developing trust.
In particular, there is little empirical evidence and
understanding of how members of the public, donors and non-donors view NGOs, how they understand and assess their activities and how these
opinions and perceptions affect their relationship
with and to NGOs. This study seeks to address this
gap in existing research.

Method
The nationwide study conducted in the UK, presented in this paper, sought to address this lacuna
in several ways. The study had a broader scope than
the focus on monetary donations, thus allowing
much needed empirical insights into how members
of the public understand and assess NGOs activities,
respond—cognitively, emotionally and through actions—to humanitarian communications, and how
these responses relate to audiences’ everyday morality and biography. As a qualitative and exploratory
study, the research was participant-led and, although
following a semi-structured schedule of questions, it
respected the natural flow of the conversation and
enabled the emergence of naturally occurring
themes.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

We wanted to know, firstly, what emotional reactions and cognitive responses were generated in
members of the public by humanitarian communications. Second, we were interested to know what
socio-cultural scripts people use to make sense of
humanitarian communications and their ideological,
emotional and biographical underpinnings. Third,
we wanted to understand the relationship between
the moral scripts audiences draw on and those
informing humanitarian organisations, and how audiences’ responses to humanitarian appeals relate
to those intended by humanitarian organisations.
The first two research questions were investigated through focus groups and individual interviews with members of the UK public, the third
through individual interviews with representatives
from international humanitarian and international
development NGOs and a comparison between the
audience and practitioners data sets. The focus
groups took place first, then the individual interviews with practitioners and, lastly, the individual
biographical interviews with a selection of participants who had taken place in the focus groups.
The data discussed here comes from the 20 focus
groups (each with roughly nine participants) with
members of the UK public. Groups were selected to
represent a range of age, gender, socio-economic class,
sexual orientation and family formations. The focus
groups were conducted by the first and second author.
Participants were given a folder containing 12 examples of communications from the eight key humanitarian agencies (Oxfam, Save the Children, Disasters
Emergency Committee, Plan UK, ActionAid, Médecins
Sans Frontières, United Nations International Childrens Emergency Fund (UNICEF)4 and Amnesty International) collaborating on the study. All these agencies
are registered charities in the UK. Collaborating agencies were asked to select communications that best
4

With the exception of UNICEF, representatives from these
NGOs were interviewed and actively participated in the project’s knowledge exchange and action research activities. We
also interviewed representatives from CARE International and
CONCERN Worldwide, but the pack did not contain their
communications.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

215

reflected their work and ethos to be used as props
during the focus groups. Out of these, the research
team (the three authors and the project’s consultant)
selected the 12 examples as enabling technique, but
also to reproduce what members of the UK public
are normally exposed to. The appeals were given in
different and random order for each participant to
prevent bias.
One of the aims of the focus group discussions was
to gather views, attitudes and emotional reactions towards NGOs and charities in general. The schedule
contained specific questions asking which NGOs participants recognised and trusted, as well as to which
they donated, but only a small minority of the quotes
discussed in this paper were in response to individual
questions about NGOs and their communications.
Noticeably, almost invariably, impressions, perceptions and experiences of humanitarian agencies were
spontaneously offered by participants as a way of
opening group discussions, and these ‘naturally occurring’ comments also peppered the whole discussion. Additionally, participants frequently returned
to the topic of NGOs while discussing other issues.
Overall, the focus group data suggest that NGOs and
the charitable sector figure large in the public imagination and that their actions and communications
elicit strong emotional reactions.
The data were thematically analysed and the analysis was triangulated throughout. Thematic analysis
(Braun & Clark, 2006) is a method for identifying,
analysing and reporting patterns (themes) within
data, a particularly useful one when studying underresearched topics, especially when an inductive approach is applied and themes are identified in a ‘bottom up’ way (e.g. Frith & Gleeson, 2004). ‘Thematic
analysis is not wedded to any pre-existing theoretical
framework. […] it works both to reflect reality and
to unpick or unravel the surface of “reality”’ (Braun
& Clark, 2006:81).
The analysis was data driven and the themes were
not only selected on the basis of frequency, relevance and richness but also when they captured
‘something important in relation to the overall research question’ (Braun & Clark, 2006:82).

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

216

Results
Overall, participants’ comments made use of two
distinct and contrasting models to characterise
NGOs in positive and negative ways. Positive views
of NGOs and their activities were organised around
descriptions of NGOs as Good Samaritans. As captured by its dictionary definition—‘charitable or
helpful person (with reference to Luke 10:33)’—
the figure of the Good Samaritan in ordinary parlance is shorthand for pure altruism. The Christian
parable tells the story of how a Samaritan spontaneously helped an injured stranger, from a different
ethnic group to his own, at a cost to himself and
without expectation of reward or compensation. Although participants never literally used this definition, the figure of the Good Samaritan encompasses
many of the positive qualities attributed by participants to NGOs when viewed as helping strangers with
no benefit to oneself. Although the Good Samaritan
characterisation of NGOs was directly mentioned only
in 4 out of the 20 focus groups, it was consistently presented and experienced, implicitly or explicitly, as the
‘true spirit’ of charitable work and illustrates ways in
which NGOs were perceived by audiences to ‘get
it right’.
On the other hand, strong negative views were
expressed in terms of accountability and the increased marketisation of NGOs, what we have
called the Marketer model of NGOs. These negative
views were continuously and consistently mentioned within and across different focus groups,
thus highlighting the dominance of this previously
unidentified perception of NGOs and suggesting
that a crucial dimension of NGOs relations with
the public has been neglected and needs further
investigation.
It is through the stark contrast with the Good Samaritan characterisation that NGOs as Marketer
comes across as one of the most disliked aspect of
NGOs’ work.
The next section presents the two themes at their
‘face value’. It is not our aim to question the truthfulness or accuracy of the extracts. Rather, we intend

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

to take note of these two polarised views of NGOs
as they emerged in the focus groups discussions,
and how they speak to each other.

The Good Samaritan
The 20 focus groups discussions lasted between 90
and 120 min each, generating hours of lively discussion. Yet, only eight comments from four different
groups explicitly described NGOs as Good Samaritan. This suggests that however powerful and
cherished this view of NGOs may be in public imagination, it is far from dominant or widespread in
terms of how humanitarian agencies are currently
perceived.
Bridget5: (I chose) this one (MSF) because I’ve
heard of doctors and you do feel as though they
go there and they stay there and they’ve got some
kind of positive commitment that they are with
people.
Belinda: And I saw this one, Médecine Sans
Frontières. I’ve always admired them for the same
reasons that have already been discussed, that we
know they’re on the ground and most of them are
doctors, I believe, and they’re actually administering the medicines and doing the wounds and all
that, so I like it. […] And then these two, […] both
Amnesty. […] I’ve been subscribing to Amnesty for
many years because with their work, you know,
you can even ring the Amnesty office and find
out exactly what’s going on in a particular situation and they send something, I think, monthly,
don’t they?

The first two quotes capture the key characteristics of the Good Samaritan construction of NGOs
5
For ease of reference in reading the extracts, participants in the
same focus group were given a pseudonym starting with the
same letter of the alphabet. The letter was allocated to groups
in the chronological order in which the group took place: group
1 = A, 2 = B, 3 = C and so on.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

according to which NGOs work on the ground and
in direct contact with sufferers. Their mandate is
easily recognisable, familiar and down to earth.
Belinda approves that ‘they’re actually administering the medicines and doing the wounds and all
that’, implying that the doctors behave humbly
and are in direct contact with the sufferers in whatever way is needed. Bridget identifies another important dimension of the Good Samaritan type of
NGO. Additional to their direct contact with sufferers, they are in for the long haul, committed in
the long-term. So, they do not just ‘go there’, also
‘they stay there’. This temporal emphasis is particularly important as it seems to suggest a dislike for
NGOs (seeming to be) carrying out short-term ‘fleeting’ interventions.6
The quality of NGOs’ accessibility and direct contact to both the sufferers and/or the UK supporters
seems to be key to these positive representations.
The idea of a clear and visible outcome and
NGOs’ mandate also seemed important to participants who talked of wells, homes, bandaging
wounds and, in the case of Amnesty, getting a good
solicitor.
Of course, as these are big organisations, what
participants refer to is only a part of their operations. For example, not all people working for MSF
are medics, or are on the ground. Like all other agencies, they have offices, administrators, fundraisers,
and so on, but the infrastructure does not seem to
be resented as long as there is sufficient and consistent evidence that agencies are primarily motivated
by being Good Samaritans and prioritise sufferers’
needs. This was also a key criterion in Cathy’s
choice, from a different focus group.
Cathy: (UNICEF) because they do try to help the
ones that are starving and on the streets abroad
and all that. Different people go out and get these
buildings and house them
6
This corresponds with Orgad’s (2012) critique of the limits of
the fleeting intimacies constructed by contemporary humanitarian communication.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

217

In Cathy’s extract, there is a similar reference to
NGOs’ ‘hands on’ direct intervention. NGOs as
Good Samaritans fight for the underdog, canvass
on behalf of the weak and disenfranchised and
achieve visibly effective changes.
In summary, the relationship between NGOs and
those in need emerged as a key factor in the Good
Samaritan characterisation.
If we were to personify agencies as Good Samaritans, we would say that the public sees them as
selfless. They put themselves at risk to help others.
This makes them visible, as well as their clearly identifiable and measurable effectiveness. They are heroic and ‘hard-core’, but there is no arrogance or
machismo in this vision. Agency workers as Good
Samaritans are primarily perceived as profoundly
caring for the victims to their own detriment. In
fact, as some commented, they are seen as humble,
available and accessible, both to the sufferer and the
public. As a couple of participants put it ‘They are
good people’.
Finally, the Good Samaritan model is Universalist. Like in the parable of the Good Samaritan,
these agencies could be found anywhere and at anytime of human suffering and people being in need.
These characteristics seem to produce two important outcomes. First, there is a clear sense that to be
seen to behave as a Good Samaritan engenders trust
and respect in the NGOs. We are not suggesting that
these are the only factors engendering trust and respect in NGOs, but that being seen as a Good
Samaritan seemed to generate overall positive feelings towards NGOs. Second, NGOs’ ‘positive commitment’ towards victims and/or beneficiaries, according
to the participants, engenders a mirroring of this commitment through the donors’ continuous support to
NGOs. Notwithstanding the contextual nature of these
connections—for example, that negative views of
NGOs might rhetorically warrant participants’ refusal
to donate and unresponsiveness to humanitarian appeals (Seu, 2013, 2011, 2010)—it seems important to
pay attention to the polarised and passionate nature
of feelings evoked by the two models. This is particularly important when considering that the potency of

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

218

the Good Samaritan model was not limited to the
characteristics identified earlier but seemed to exist
as a foundational principle informing more broadly
public’s reactions to NGOs. See, for example, how it
is invoked, even though not directly referred to, to
argue that NGOs employees should donate their
time for free.
Monica: At the end of the day, I think that if they’re
doing it for charity, why don’t they do it for charity
and not take their bit out of it? Give certain hours
for the admin. If they’re asking us to donate £1, why
can’t they donate their time, if that’s what they’ve chosen to do?

That the Good Samaritan is still implied as the desired norm is revealed by the question ‘If they are doing it for charity, why don’t they do it for charity
[…] and donate their time?’ This suggests a taken
for granted notion that NGOs should use a ‘charity
model’, which is about giving something one holds
dear—time, money, safety—to help others in need,
voluntarily and with nothing in return. The core of
Monica’s argument is that NGOs fail to act as they
preach, whereby NGO workers do not give their
time for free, but expect the fair equivalent of monetary donations from the public. It is in comparison
with the Good Samaritan, who works for NGOs
out of the goodness of their heart, that the Marketer
is implicitly presented as self-serving.

The Marketer
In stark contrast with the positive connotations of
NGOs perceived as Good Samaritans, the construction of the agency worker as Marketer is steeped in
distrust and criticism for NGOs’ perceived inappropriate use of funds and the employment of marketing
techniques. Although discussions around these topics
took a myriad of forms, a common thread was that
the participants repeatedly questioned the motives
behind NGOs operations, as well as of their workers
in joining the humanitarian field.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

The qualities of the Marketer model described in
the succeeding sections were mentioned in all the focus groups and were always voiced negatively with
some participants expressing strong animosity. This
model portrays NGOs as corporate businesses, in
competition with each other, preoccupied with targets and striving towards expansion. Such construction of NGOs as corporate businesses is contrasted
with an alternative and preferable view of NGOs as
cooperating rather than competing.
Alistair: I used to work for a humanitarian aid
group quite a while ago, and I think a lot of people
within the humanitarian aid groups also make too
much money themselves. I think most of these adverts
are actually there to actually keep directors in jobs, to
keep the organisation going, also to, how do I say,
make the organisation bigger. I think too many organisations nowadays, they’re competing with each
other, which is wrong when it comes to charity. They
should be working together and actually helping people instead of competing, Q < oh, our organisation
can get more funding than this one > Q, because at
the end of the day they’re not reaching the target they
are supposed to. While they’re competing, they’re
spending too much money on advertising on TV or
newspapers when that could have been going to
whatever they are campaigning about.

Alistair is critical of what are, in his view, overinflated salaries of NGO personnel, and that the purpose of fundraising is to ‘keep directors in job, to
keep the organisation going, to make the organisation bigger’. Thus, NGOs are portrayed as greedy
and self-serving. These are compounded by his third
point that, instead of helping others, NGOs use their
energy and resources to compete with each other.
The mocking tone used by Alistair in the speech attributed to NGOs—as if they were taunting children
triumphing over each other—betrays Alistair’s veiled
contempt and disapproval of NGOs behaving as
corporate businesses. His concluding statement
positions NGO appeals and communications as selfadvertising aimed at competing with other NGOs

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

rather than ameliorating the plight of distant
sufferers.
It is not surprising to see that this type of characterisation of NGO workers seems to have a negative effect on a potentially trusting relationship
between NGOs and the public. Because of the
expressed distrust in the agencies, the lack of accountability and mismanagement of funds referred to by many, the damage to the NGOs’
relationship with the public cannot be addressed
and repaired by simple accountability of resource
usage.
Bruna: Would it make a difference if any of these
organisations reported back to you with a breakdown of how much they spent?
Hugh: I think so, but I don’t know whether I’d believe it or not.

According to some, the lack of accountability and,
for others, suspect morals are exacerbated by the
size of the organisations: the larger the size of the
NGO the less resources are used for helping
beneficiaries. Funds are instead used for business
venture.
Hugh: The bigger the charity, the bigger the business, I feel like, the less actually gets to where it’s
intended. […] once you get to this stage there’s less going (to those in need). That’s all, it becomes a business venture

Other participants also blamed the size of the organisation for an alleged NGOs disconnection from
their original aims. These two kinds of disconnections—financial investment in the beneficiaries and
a principled investment in the original values and
aims of the NGOs—were considered one of the
key characteristics of the Marketer model. The next
extract takes this point further and illustrates a clash
between the view that NGOs need professional
fundraisers to procure funds to help people, and
the view that this ‘marketisation’ of NGOs is antithetical to helping others.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

219

Alan: I agree with (Alistair) 100% in the way the
charities are set up, because they’re set up as businesses, and you’ve got the people at the top who […]
are going in as a job, they’re not actually going in
for the sake of helping. […] the way they advertise in
the papers, they are advertising for a successful career
or whatever, rather than actually helping someone.

First, this extract illustrates the perceived polarisation
between a market ideology and motives, and what is
implied as charity’s ‘true spirit’ of helping selflessly.
It points to a strong expectation that NGOs should
be driven by traditional principles of charity and altruism, and the deep disappointment that this is no
longer the case. Thus, while only few people believe
that currently NGOs are Good Samaritans, the majority of participants still hold a strong belief in the
significance of these values. This suggests an important gap between the public’s normative views of
humanitarian principles and those principles they
perceive to practically drive NGOs activities.
Second, the widespread concern that the business side of NGOs is antithetical to the original and
‘true’ aims of charity was believed to affect NGOs’
activities in many ways. While some were primarily
concerned with the self-serving quality of NGOs as
intermediaries between donors and beneficiaries,
others worried about the effects on the relationship
with the beneficiaries. Some suggested that as the
size of the NGO grows, the distance between its
workers and the beneficiaries also expands. As a
consequence, many participants believed that the
operations of large NGOs are in danger of becoming
impersonal and saw NGOs’ communications as
forms of marketing and advertising.
Keith: […] when you think about it, whoever produced these [the appeals],(has) done a good job,[…]
It’s how they get you. I think personally, it’s a form
of advertising, marketing
Bruna: What do you think they’re advertising?
UM: Well, they’re preying for your money, aren’t
they?

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

220

Keith: They’re advertising to get your money. It’s like
a car, or something. They’re advertising for you to go
and buy that car. I think they’re advertising for
money, really. That’s it.
Bruna: So it’s like a business?
UM: I think so personally. It is a business. I think it is
a business.

And from a different group:
Harold: I see charity donation as sometimes a risky
thing to get into.
Hamish: It’s lack of trust now.
Bruna: Lack of trust?
Hamish: No one trusts them.

This section on data analysis has used participants’ statements to illustrate how members of the
UK public understand and judge NGOs identities
and activities through the two key models of the
Good Samaritan and the Marketer. In the next section, we summarise the characteristics of these two
models, in dialogue with existing literature on the
relationship between NGOs and the public.

Discussion
In summarising the main characteristics of the Good
Samaritan and the Marketer models, our aim is not
to privilege one model over the other, but to offer
an empirically grounded examination of views as
expressed by focus group participants in order to expose the salience of these models in people’s thinking
and how they inform and affect the relationship between NGOs and public.
We identified four key characteristics of the Good
Samaritan model of NGOs.
The first was NGOs’ visibility, discussed in three
contexts: NGOs’ visibility through direct action
(through public profile, brand recognition, performance over time) and indirect means (through independent media, particularly documentaries) and
clearly identifiable and measurable effectiveness of

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

NGOs’ actions (e.g. provision of housing, wells, solar
power to sufferers). The stress on NGOs visibility
highlights the desirability of a concrete and transparent quality of NGOs activities. This confirms Sargeant
et al. (2006) findings that trust (and indirect commitment) are significantly affected by the performance of
the nonprofit and are predicated on the perceived
benefits supplied to beneficiaries. Further support
comes from Bennett and Savani (2003), Sargeant,
West, and Ford (2001), Harvey and McCrohan
(1988) who highlight the significance of the notion
of perceived efficacy to giving behaviour and that,
in general, charities perceived as more efficient tend
to generate higher levels of compliance and levels of
giving (Sargeant et al. 2008a).
The second was primacy of the other. In the Good
Samaritan model, NGO workers offer help to others
selflessly and sometimes putting themselves at risk,
with no expectation of reward. This resonates with
Venable et al. (2005) who stress the social importance
of nonprofit being kind, caring and compassionate,
and with Sargeant et al. (2008a, 2008b), who found
that humanitarian workers’ heroism generated excitement and emotional engagement with agencies.
The third characteristic of NGOs workers in this
model was their verifiable accessibility, both to sufferers and supporters.
Finally, the Good Samaritan model is underpinned
by Universalist principles. Similarly to the mythical
biblical figure, the helpfulness of the Good Samaritan
is not reliant on their identification with the sufferer in
terms of shared ethnicity of other characteristics.
NGOs as Good Samaritans can be found anywhere
and at anytime of human suffering and people being
in need.
As repeatedly demonstrated in existing research
(Sargeant et al., 2006; Sargeant & Lee, 2004) and further supported by our findings, the perceived performance and qualities of the organisation impact on
the level of trust afforded to the organisation by the
public. In particular, while agencies perceived to
be wasteful of or mismanaging funds have been
found to struggle to foster trust in members of the
public (Sargeant & Lee, 2004; Baily & Bruce, 1992),

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

the perceived ethics of the organisation and its benevolence foster trust and inclusion of an organisation in an individual’s consideration (Sargeant et al.
2008a)
Similar to our study, others have also found that
participants employed the notion of charity to imbue
an organisation with a distinctive set of benevolent,
values-based characteristics (Sargeant et al. 2008b,
Sargeant et al. 2006, Werther & Berman, 2001).
Our study takes these points further and shows that
the potency of the Good Samaritan model was not
limited to the characteristics identified previously,
but seemed to exist as a foundational principle
broadly informing public’s reactions to NGOs. Indeed, a closer examination of the extracts shows that
the Good Samaritan model underpinned all discussions of NGO activities. It is against this model, sometimes ideal and idealised, that NGOs are being
judged by the public.
Conversely, and particularly when compared,
openly or not, with the Good Samaritan, the Marketer model of NGOs was consistently judged negatively and generated hostility and animosity. Scott
(2014) and Madianou (2013) have touched on this
issue when studying the role of celebrities and social media in humanitarianism, respectively. However, with the exception of Venable et al. (2005),
who have commented that ‘a new generation of donors has emerged that increasingly perceives the
nonprofit sector as a “big business” that should be
held accountable for the effectiveness of its operations and services’ (2005:295), the Marketer model
has not been systematically investigated or given
due attention so far. This is particularly striking considering the dominance of this perception of humanitarian agencies in our study and the high level
of distrust and strong emotional responses associated with this model.
In direct contrast with the Good Samaritan
model, NGOs considered as Marketers displayed
the following characteristics. First, the Marketer appears to carry a negative direct visibility in terms of
flash cars, glamorous careers, inflated salaries and
scandals. Agencies as marketers were viewed as

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

221

greedy and self-serving, and NGO appeals and communications as self-advertising aimed at competing
with other NGOs rather than ameliorating the plight
of distant sufferers.
As argued by Sargeant et al. (2008a) and Sargeant
and Lee (2004), this generated distrust. Crucial for
current research and theory, our data suggest that
because of the expressed distrust in the agencies
and the lack of accountability and mismanagement
of funds referred to by many, the damage to the
NGOs’ relationship with the public cannot be addressed and repaired by simple accountability of resource usage. Indeed, many participants blamed the
size of the organisation for an alleged NGO’s disconnection from their original aims. These two kinds of
disconnections—financial investment in the beneficiaries and a principled investment in the original
values and aims of the NGO—were considered one
of the key characteristics of the Marketer model.
Considering the robust evidence in the literature
that trust is significantly affected by the performance of the charity and is predicated on the perceived benefits supplied to beneficiaries and the
manner in which the impact of these benefits is
communicated back to donors (Sargeant et al.
2008a and Sargeant et al., 2006), the Marketer
model seems to have a profoundly damaging impact
on trust and confidence in the agency.
Additionally, NGOs’ generated visibility through communications to the public is viewed with suspicion,
considered overall as manipulative self-promotion. Connected to this and crucial in terms of how its comparison with the Good Samaritan engenders animosity,
NGOs as Marketers’ actions are seen as self-serving
rather than other-oriented and in aid of strangers. As
Marketers, NGOs are seen as businesses employing
marketing techniques aimed at expanding and beating
competing NGOs.
A very small minority of participants held the
view that the marketisation of NGOs operations is
justifiable by a more efficient provision of aid to sufferers. However, what the data show clearly is, that
even when there is recognition of the increased
complexity of humanitarian work and some degree

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

222

of acceptance for NGOs’ need to professionalise,
the intense and often passionate criticism of the
Marketer model, and the distrust it engenders, is
widespread and expressed across all the demographic groups. Overall, further research is needed
to explore the separate aspects of this model, some
of which are perceived as potentially positive
and/or necessary by some members of the public.

Conclusions
This study has shown that the Good Samaritan
model of humanitarian work, even when not explicitly articulated, appears to be very much alive in
people’s minds and is used as the yardstick against
which to evaluate and make judgments about NGOs
and their activities. Despite efforts made by NGOs to
shake off associations with charitable endeavour,
the evidence indicates that aspects of an imagined
Victorian charitable ideal still exercise a remarkably
powerful hold on the UK public imagination, particularly in relation to expectations of voluntarism
from NGO staff members. This model continues to
be adhered to, desired and used by participants to
actively resist a more professionalised model of humanitarian work, which is perceived to go against
the much cherished values of the Good Samaritan.
This suggests an important clash of values and resistance to a model of operating that betrays what the
public seems to perceive as the ‘true’ spirit of charitable work/operations.
In this sense, the data discussed in this paper support assertions made in Finding Frames (Darnton &
Kirk, 2011) about the persistence of ‘charitable’
frames for audience understanding, as well as the
problematic knock on effects of the ‘cheque book’,
transactional mentality which has generated increased
revenue for NGOs in the last decade, but has kept the
public at arm’s length. This is corroborated by the
expressed salience for the public of NGOs approachability, both to sufferers and supporters, and further
feedback from members of the public expressing
worry about the unwelcome distancing effect of

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Irene Bruna Seu et al.

bureaucratisation of NGOs, compared with the desired ‘hands on’ and human touch approach.
In conclusion, while the Marketer is perceived to
be out of touch with both the public and beneficiaries, the Good Samaritan model evokes positive responses, trust and public loyalty to NGOs.
Our conclusions have implications for NGOs current practices. The data suggest that the humanitarian
principle of helping distant others in need is not in
crisis, but the relationship of NGOs with the public
might be. In terms of the desirability of the Good Samaritan, two elements seem at odds with current
practices. First, one of the key characteristics of the
iconographic Christian figure of the Samaritan is that
he was a stranger and remains a stranger to the beneficiary. Yet, NGO communication and branding works
precisely against this anonymity of the stranger, and is
geared towards familiarising audiences with NGOs
and their workers, stressing recognition. Second,
the Good Samaritan provides aid to the sufferer,
without articulating their deed and their justification
and, importantly, without expressing emotion
(Boltanski, 1999). Again, NGOs’ contemporary practice is antithetical to these important features of the
Good Samaritan.
Participants expressed a deep disillusionment and
disappointment deriving from the recognition of the
Marketer model being applied to and employed
within the realm of humanitarianism. This suggests
that completely moving away from traditional notions of charity might be premature and counterproductive. Drawing on these findings, we want to
underline the persistence of the Good Samaritan
model, despite its rejection by NGOs, and suggest
that it might offer some creative opportunities for
NGOs to engage with questions around the endurance of such powerful ideas of encounter, victimhood and strangeness.
As a final comment, we would like to reflect on
the pervasiveness of a transactional model in humanitarian work in current research, in particular,
but perhaps unsurprisingly, in the marketing literature, where the connection between public trust
in humanitarian and charitable organisations and

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer

donations is consistently taken for granted, unquestioned and therefore normalised. The vast majority
of studies in the field openly state an interest in
enhancing public trust in humanitarian and charitable organisation in order to increase donations
(e.g. Sargeant et al., 2006), and indeed members of
the public are unproblematically classified in terms
of ‘current and potential donors’ (e.g. Venable et al.,
2005). Although this might be understandable within
the field of marketing research, nevertheless it highlights that the view of humanitarian and charitable
organisations as ‘marketers’ is uncritically treated as
endemic to their relationship with their public,
which consequently can only be transactional and
instrumental. This is, in our view, highly problematic
both intellectually and politically.
Privileging and normalising a view of NGOs as marketers is in danger of reducing NGOs relationship with
the public to one between ‘sellers and buyers’, potentially foreclosing the investigation of other important
aspects of this complex relationship. This restrictive
view may also mask the potentially corrosive impact
the marketing model may have on public trust in the
sector and consequent engagement with humanitarian issues (Seu & Orgad, 2014). Intrinsically, positioning NGOs as Marketers could also explain, to some
extent, why the figure of the Marketer has not been
previously identified in research. If public trust and
commitment to NGOs are viewed primarily as instrumental to donation, then the figure of Marketer is intrinsically taken for granted.
This might also have wider political and social repercussions. If NGOs act as moral entrepreneurs,
contributing to the ‘creation of a new fragment of
the moral constitution of society’ (Becker, 1991
[1963]: 145), then the volume and potency of the
public’s disillusionment, distrust and animosity towards humanitarian NGOs expressed in our study
may have serious repercussions for their capacity
to effectively carry on this role. These strong sentiments and perceptions expressed by the UK public
could negatively impact not only individual NGOs,
but also the nonprofit charity sector as a whole and
humanitarian aid in general (Seu & Orgad, 2014).

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

223

These findings suggest that further empirical investigation of these issues is urgently needed. The
consistent reference across all focus groups to the
Marketer model highlights the dominance of this
previously unidentified perception of NGOs and
suggests that a crucial dimension of NGOs relations with the public has been neglected and
needs further investigation, in particular the negative impact of the Marketer model on public trust
and commitment to humanitarian NGOs and
causes in general.

References
Aaker JL. 1997. Dimensions of Brand Personality. Journal
of Marketing Research 34(19): 347–356.
Atkinson AB, Backus PG, Michlewright J, Pharoah C,
Schnepf SV, et al. 2012. Charitable Giving for Overseas
Development. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series A 175(1): 167–190.
Baily A, Bruce M. 1992. United Way. Chronicle of Philanthropy 4: 2–6.
Becker HS. 1963. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of
Deviance. Free Press: New York.
Bennet R. 1998. Market Orientation Among Small to
Medium Sized UK Charitable Organisations.
Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing
6(1): 31–45.
Bennett R, Gabriel H. 1998. Direct marketing managers in
UK charitable organizations. Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing 3(2): 160–172.
Bennett R, Gabriel H. 2003. Image and Reputational Characteristics of UK Charitable Organizations. Corporate
Reputation Review 6(3): 276–289.
Bennett R, Savani S. 2003. Predicting the Accuracy of
Public Perceptions of Charity Performance. Journal
of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing 11(4): 326–342.
Dowling GR. 1986. Managing your corporate image.
Industrial Marketing Management 15(2): 109–115.
Benthall J. 1993. Disasters, Relief and the Media. I.B.
Tauris: London.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

224
Berger IE, Gainer B. 2002. Jewish Identity, Social Capital
and Giving. Advances in Consumer Research 29:
408–413.
Boltanski L. 1999. Distant Suffering. Polity: Cambridge.
Braun V, Clark V. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis in
Psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3(2):
77–101.
Bruce I. 1994. Marketing Need. ICSA: Hemel Hempstead.
Bruce I, Chew C. 2011. Debate: the Marketization of the
Voluntary Sector. Public money and management 31
(3): 155–157.
Calhoun C. 2010. The idea of emergency. Contemporary
States of Emergency. MIT: Cambridge; 29–58.
Charity Commission. 2001. Fundraising Through Partnerships with Companies. HMSO: London.
Charity Commission. 2002. Charities and Fundraising.
HMSO: London.
Chouliaraki L. 2013. The Ironic Spectator. Polity: Cambridge.
Cottle S, Nolan D. 2007. Global Humanitarianism and the Changing Aid-Media Field. Journalism Studies 8(6): 862–878.
Crompton T. 2010. Common Cause. WWF-UK: UK.
Darnton A, Kirk M. 2011. Finding Frames. Bond: London.
De Chernatony L, Drury S, Segal-Horn S. 2004. Identifying
and sustaining services brands’ values. Journal of Marketing Communications 10: 73–94.
Frith H, Gleeson K. 2004. Clothing Andembodiment. Psychology of Men and Masculinity 5: 40–48.
Fukuyama F. 1995. Trust. The Free Press: New York.
Harvey JW, McCrohan KF. 1988. Fundraising costs societal implications for philanthropies and their supporters. Business and Society. Spring; 15–22.
Hatch MJ, Schultz M. 1997. Relations Between Organizational Culture, Identity and Image. European Journal
of Marketing 31(5/6): 356–365.
Herzlinger RE. 1996. Can Public Trust in Nonprofits and Governments be Restored? Harvard Business Review 74(2): 97.
Hilton M, Crowson N, Mouhot J-F, McKay J. 2012. A Historical Guide to NGOs in Britain. Palgrave MacMillan: London.
Hind A. 1995. The Governance and Management of Charities. Voluntary Sector: High Barnet.
Johnson M, Zinkhan GM. 1990. Defining and Measuring
Company Image. Academy of Marketing Science: New
Orleans.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Irene Bruna Seu et al.
Kennedy MS, Ferrell LK, LeClair DT. 2001. Consumers’
Trust of Salesperson and Manufacturer. Journal of
Business Research 51: 73–86.
Lazarsfeld P. 1941. Remarks on Administrative and Critical
Communications Research. Studies in Philosophy and
Social Science 9: 2–16.
Madianou M. 2013. Humanitarian campaigns in social media: Network architectures and polymedia events.
Journalism Studies 14(2): 249–266.
McFall L. 1987. Integrity. Ethics 98: 5–20.
Morgan RM, Hunt SD. 1994. The Commitment-Trust Theory
of Relationship Building. Journal of Marketing 58: 20–38.
Mullin R. 1995. Foundations for Fundraising. ICSA:
London.
Orgad S. 2012. Media Representation and the Global
Imagination. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Orgad S, Vella C. 2012. Who cares? Polis and Media at LSE
Publications.
Sargeant A. 1999. Charity Giving. Journal of Marketing
Management 15: 215–238.
Sargeant A, West DC, Ford J. 2001. The Role of Perceptions in Predicting Donor Value. Journal of Marketing
Management 17(3-4): 407–428.
Sargeant A, Lee S. 2002. Individual and contextual antecedents of donor trust in the voluntary sector. Journal
of Marketing Management 18: 779–802.
Sargeant A, Lee S. 2004. Trust and Relationship Commitment in the United Kingdom Voluntary Sector. Psychology & Marketing 21(8): 613–635.
Sargeant A, Lee S. 2004a. Donor Trust and Relationship
Commitment in the UK Charity Sector. Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 33(2): 185–202.
Sargeant A, Ford JB, West DC. 2006. Perceptual Determinants of Nonprofit Giving Behavior. Journal of Business Research 59(2): 155–165.
Sargeant A, Ford JB, Hudson J. 2008a. Charity Brand Personality: The Relationship With Giving Behavior. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 37(3): 468–491.
Sargeant A, Hudson J, West DC. 2008b. Conceptualizing
Brand Values in the Charity Sector. The Service Industries Journal 28(5): 615–632.
Saxton J. 2004. The ‘Achilles’ Heel of Modern non-Profits.
Editorial IJNVSM 9(3): 188–190.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

The Good Samaritan and the marketer
Scott M. 2014. The role of celebrities in mediating distant
suffering. International Journal of Cultural Studies
Online First, 8 May.
Seu IB. 2010. Doing Denial. Discourse and Society 21(4):
438–457.
Seu IB. 2011. Shoot the Messenger. Journal of Human
Rights Practice 3(2): 139–161.
Seu IB. 2013. Passivity Generation. Palgrave: London.
Seu IB, Orgad S. 2014. Mediated Humanitarian Knowledge – FINAL REPORT. http://www.bbk.ac.uk/psychosocial/FinalReportBruna.pdf
Stride H. 2006. An Investigation into the Values Dimensions of Branding. IJNVSM 11: 115–124.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

225
Sumption H. 1995. Yesterday’s Trail-Blazing. Brainstorm:
Hertford.
Venable BT, Rose GM, Bush VD, Gilbert FW. 2005. The
Role of Brand Personality in Charitable Giving. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 33(3):
295–312.
Vestergaard A. 2008. Branding the Humanitarian. Journal
of Language and Politics 7(3): 200–216.
Voeth M, Herbst U. 2008.The Concept of Brand Personality
as an Instrument for Advanced non-Profit Branding. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing 19(1): 71–97.
Werther WB, Berman EM. 2001. Third Sector Management. Georgetown University Press: Washington DC.

Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt. Sect. Mark., August 2015
DOI: 10.1002/nvsm

