The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0265-1335.htm

Marketing in non-profit
organizations: an international
perspective
Sara Dolnicar and Katie Lazarevski
School of Management and Marketing,
Marketing Research Innovation Centre (MRIC), University of Wollongong,
Wollongong, Australia

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
275
Received December 2007
Revised April 2008
Accepted January 2009

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to tests three hypotheses: non-profit organizations follow a
customer-centered approach to marketing; marketing is run by marketing-trained staff; and
cross-continental differences in the adoption of marketing in the UK, the USA, and Australia exist due
to differences in the operating environment.
Design/methodology/approach – A survey study was conducted with non-profit managers. The
sample contains 136 respondents; 36 from the UK, 33 from the USA and 67 from Australia.
Findings – Non-profit managers indicated that the most important marketing activities are
promotional in nature. The importance of market research and strategic marketing was acknowledged
only by a small proportion of non-profits, supporting Andreasen and Kotler’s assertion that non-profit
organizations have an “organization-centered” mindset. Only one fifth of marketing staff are trained in
marketing. Non-profit organizations in the UK, the USA, and Australia did not differ in their use of
marketing and marketing operations, suggesting that the similarity of market pressures may be more
influential than the differences in operating environments.
Practical implications – Shifting from an “organization-centered” to a “customer-centered”
approach to marketing represents a key opportunity for non-profit organizations to increase their
competitive advantage and improve their outcomes in terms of the organizational mission. The
primary strategy to achieve this aim is to make increased use of formally trained marketing staff.
Originality/value – To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study to assess the state of
marketing practise in non-profit organizations since Kotler, the first to test the organization-centered
hypothesis and the first to test differences across countries.
Keywords Non-profit organizations, Marketing, United Kingdom, United States of America, Australia
Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Non-profit organizations have started to adopt business-like techniques (Goerke, 2003)
used in the for-profit sector as they are becoming increasingly confronted with market
pressures typical of for-profit organizations, like competition for funding and the need
to earn money to fulfil their mission (Andreasen and Kotler, 2003; Alexander and
Weiner, 1998; Dolnicar et al., 2008). These techniques and approaches have been
recognized as important to non-profits by the academic field (Gonzalez et al., 2002); one
in particular is especially important – the marketing concept – which advocates an
The authors thank the Australian Research Council for supporting this research through the
ARC Discovery Grant DP0557769 and also thank Paul Collins for his contribution to this paper
as a research assistant.

International Marketing Review
Vol. 26 No. 3, 2009
pp. 275-291
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0265-1335
DOI 10.1108/02651330910960780

IMR
26,3

276

understanding of the customer (Day, 1994). It appears, however, that the competitive
advantages that could be gained from using the full portfolio of the marketing toolbox
are not harvested as successfully as they could be (Bruce, 1995). Instead of embracing
the marketing concept and beginning the marketing process with the customer and
investigating what the market actually needs and wants (Gonzalez et al., 2002),
non-profit organizations have an “organization-centered” marketing mindset and may
falsely believe that their product or service is needed by the market (Andreasen and
Kotler, 2003). A number of other researchers agree with this viewpoint in emphasizing
the importance of market orientation for the non-profit sector (Kara et al., 2004; Macedo
and Pinho, 2006; Padanyi and Gainer, 2004; Sargeant et al., 2002).
The first research aim of this study is to test whether there is empirical support for the
call for greater market orientation through a “customer-centered” mindset and to gain
detailed understanding of the nature of marketing operations undertaken by non-profit
organizations internationally. The second aim of this study is to compare whether
differences in marketing operations exist across countries on different continents, which
differ significantly with respect to the environment in which non-profit organizations
operate. Differences especially in the competitiveness of markets (the number of
non-profit organizations per capita of the population) can be expected to have a
significant impact on the extent to which the marketing toolbox is harvested to survive
in the marketplace and gain competitive advantage.
Although a significant amount of research has been undertaken in the area of
non-profit marketing, there is a lack of agreement regarding the use of key terms. The
non-profit “customer” is one of these terms. Bruce (1995, p. 77) classified non-profit
customers into two groups:
(1) End customers who may include “clients, patrons, patients, donors, volunteer
workers, advocates, trustees, committee members, local government inspectors,
the local community”.
(2) Intermediary customers who are involved in the process but are not the prime
customer group (for example, government agencies who refer patients to
non-profit organizations).
However, Bruce preferred the term “beneficiary” to represent customers from
non-profits as the word signifies those who receive a benefit from non-profits;
beneficiary is also the preferred term of Gonzalez et al. (2002). Alternatively, others
address the customer/client issue by stating there is a difference between the non-profit
market for customers and the market for resources (Kara et al., 2004; Padanyi and
Gainer, 2004). From this aspect, different audiences require different marketing
campaigns. Similarly, the non-profit sector lacks a generally accepted definition.
Gonzalez et al. (2002, p. 56) define private non-profit organizations as “any organisation
without a financial objective, under private control, which aims to generate a social
benefit for a specific sector of society.” The unique characteristics of non-profits pose
challenges for them. These characteristics include non-financial objectives,
mission-driven, multiple “customers,” and a competitive-cooperative relationship with
their competitors (Gallagher and Weinberg, 1991). In this paper, we adopt the definition
proposed by Gonzalez et al. (2002) for the term non-profit organizations, with the only
difference that we do not prescribe for them to be in private control, thus also including

public sector based non-profit organizations. We use Bruce’s (1995) definition of end
consumers when referring to consumers.
The adoption of marketing by non-profit organizations
Although researchers appear to largely agree that the adoption of a market oriented
perspective as well as marketing tools is important for non-profit organizations
(Andreasen and Kotler, 2003; Gonzalez et al., 2002; Kara et al., 2004; Macedo and Pinho,
2006; Padanyi and Gainer, 2004; Sargeant et al., 2002), it can be argued that market
orientation is not a relevant concept for non-profit organizations because their mission
(product) is defined in advance and cannot be changed in dependence of market needs.
However, there is a wide range of other marketing strategies and instruments available
to non-profits that can be implemented without changing or denying their true mission.
Such strategies include the identification of customers who are most interested in
supporting their mission (market segmentation), ensuring an image is built that is
attractive to those people (product positioning), the development of communication
messages most attractive to these people (advertising) and communicating with them
through channels these people regularly use (place). Consequently, the assumption
underlying the present study is that – despite the fact that non-profit organizations are
distinctly different from for-profit organizations – market orientation can significantly
increase the effectiveness of non-profit organizations in achieving their mission.
Although many non-profits may view marketing as a business activity, Kotler and
Levy (1969) believe that marketing plays a very important role in the lives of non-profit
organizations. They argued that all organizations undertake marketing whether they
know it or not, therefore they must possess a satisfactory understanding of it.
Furthermore, the non-profit sector has characteristics of marketplace problems
(Kotler, 1979) where memberships decline, costs soar, and competition is fierce. Owing to
these indicators, it was suggested that marketing had a great deal to offer the third sector
in order to “survive, grow, and strengthen their contributions to the general welfare”
(Kotler, 1979, p. 44). Complicating characteristics of non-profits’ organizational structure
include non-financial objectives, multiple stakeholders (Bruce, 1995), a
competitive-collaborative relationship with other organizations in the field, and the
balance between financial pressures and the mission (Gallagher and Weinberg, 1991).
These characteristics make it very difficult to ascertain success and may lead to their
disregard of marketing.
The emphasis on applying marketing to non-profits has been shaped by the work of
Kotler and Levy (1969), Kotler and Zaltman (1971), and Shapiro (1974). Their support of
the application of marketing techniques to the non-profit environment has created a
shift in the mindset from realizing the advantages of applying marketing concepts and
tools in the non-profit arena to the emphasis of a more systematic approach through
the help of strategic planning (Andreasen and Kotler, 2003).
Kotler (1979, p. 40) posed some questions in order to assess the state of marketing
acceptance in non-profit organizations. He asked about the response of non-profit
administrators to marketing, whether they are interested, aware or enthusiastic, and
whether they know how to use marketing in their organizations. Results indicated that
marketing lagged dramatically in adoption by non-profit organizations, compared to
other business practices like accounting, financial management, and formal planning.
Even when adopted, the term “marketing” was primarily used to mean hard

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
277

IMR
26,3

278

promotion, where many non-profits “rushed into marketing with more enthusiasm
than understanding.”
Over the past decades, non-profit organizations have slowly been introducing
marketing into their activities, realizing that it may help them achieve their
organization’s mission and as non-profits are challenged by more complicated
decisions than for-profit organizations survival is dependent on careful application of
marketing management tools (Bendapudi et al., 1996). It has also become necessary to
adopt a marketing orientation where marketing begins and ends with the customer
(Gonzalez et al., 2002).
When Kotler (1982) posed a question about the meaning of marketing to college
administrators, 61 percent saw it as a combination of selling, advertising, and public
relations, 28 percent said it was only one of the three activities, and only a small
proportion suggested it had to do with needs assessment, marketing research, product
development, pricing and distribution.
Misconceptions about marketing still appear to abound, with many thinking that
marketing is equivalent to selling and promotion (Akchin, 2001) and that it is used to sell
“people things they do not need” (Bruce, 1995, p. 84). More than two decades after
Kotler’s (1979) initial investigation of the state of marketing acceptance by non-profit
organizations, Akchin (2001) endeavoured to determine the state of marketing in
non-profit organizations. The study, conducted with marketing, public relations or
communications officers of the Maryland Association of Non-profit Organizations in the
USA reported some alarming news about marketing in non-profit organizations.
The study highlighted a trend to perform one or more marketing functions instead of the
adoption of a comprehensive marketing strategy. The study questioned each respondent
about the size of their organization, the type of organization, how they would rate the
following marketing functions, which included fundraising, public relations, and
marketing to the success of their organization. When asked about the responsibilities
required of them, the most cited were fundraising, event planning, public relations
strategy, media relations, marketing strategy, and publications. Ranking these
responsibilities saw marketing strategy as the top choice for only 10 percent of the
participants, whereas 53 percent of respondents chose fundraising as their top priority.
In order to gauge the acceptance of a marketing approach, the assessment of the
individual’s skills with marketing functions was undertaken. Individual assessments
indicated high ratings on ability to write press releases, produce publications, and write
grant applications. A low interest in learning more about focus groups and surveys in
order to conduct their own market research was indicated. The author expressed an
opinion that educational background may play a part. As suspected, 37 percent had
formal training in business or communications; the others were from an assortment of
educational backgrounds and had “on the job” experience in marketing.
More specific guidelines to formal strategic marketing for non-profit organizations
have been developed by Andreasen and Kotler (2003). It is evident that these
recommendations are based on the belief that marketing for non-profits entails
applications of fundamental marketing techniques and principles to new and
challenging settings, not new principles (Kotler, 1982). In their recommendations for
strategic marketing for non-profits, Andreasen and Kotler (2003, p. 49) emphasize the
adoption of a marketing mindset, termed a “customer-centered” mindset, which focuses
on understanding the customers’ needs, wants and perceptions, as opposed to an

“organization-centered” mindset. A “customer-centered” mindset means the
organization places the customer at the centre of everything the organization does.
The authors stress the importance of market research in order to understand the needs
of non-profit customers in order to better satisfy these needs.
Five years after the recommendations of Andreasen and Kotler (2003), we conducted
this review of the state of non-profit marketing in order to reassess the adoption of
marketing principles, methodologies, and techniques in the non-profit sector. In
addition, an international comparison is conducted to assess whether distinct
differences in the regulatory and market structure in which non-profits operate in
different countries effect the adoption of marketing in the organizations. We expect a
shift towards a customer-centered mindset, away from the organization-centered
mindset. Inherent in a customer-centered mindset is the realization that marketing
research is crucial in understanding the customer, that the market consists of smaller
sub-segments which can be used for more targeted campaigns, a more inclusive
marketing campaign other than just promotion or communication, and an awareness of
the fact that the customer cannot be changed to suit the offering. The following two core
hypotheses, implying improved professionalization of marketing in the non-profit
sector, are investigated in the study:
H1. Marketing in non-profit organizations is guided by a consumer-centered
mindset.
H2. The marketing portfolio of non-profit organizations is run by staff members
who are formally trained in marketing.
National differences in non-profit environments
Non-profit organizations operating in different countries are exposed to different
environments: first and foremost, the UK, the USA, and Australia differ significantly
with respect to their population. Currently about 60 million people live in the UK
(National Statistics (UK), 2006), 299 million in the USA (US Census Bureau, 2007) and
21 million in Australia (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2006). In addition to this
significant difference in size, the socio-demographic composition of the populations
differs as well: the UK has one of the largest ageing medians in the world (National
Statistics (UK), 2006) and Australia’s population is also ageing. In Australia, the median
age (the age at which half the population is older and half is younger) is rising and at June
2006 was 36.9 years, which is leading to problems with many issues such as housing and
health (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2006). The USA is experiencing slightly less
population ageing on average (US Census Bureau, 2007). In the UK, the population aged
over 65 years grew by 31 percent, from 7 to 9.7 million, whilst the population aged less
than 16 years declined by 19 percent, from 14 to 12 million (National Statistics (UK),
2006). In the USA, people aged 65 years and over increased from 31 million in 1990 to 35
million in 2000, however, their proportion of the total population dropped from 12.5
percent in 1990 to 12.4 percent in 2000 (US Census Bureau, 2007).
The USA has the largest amount of non-profit organizations (contributing
9.6 percent of GDP), followed by the UK (contributing 6.7 percent of GDP) and Australia
(contributing 4.3 percent of GDP). The total number of non-profit organizations in the
USA in 2006 is approximately 1.5 million (National Center for Charitable Statistics, 2006)
of which about 59,000 are private non-profit organizations (National Council of

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
279

IMR
26,3

280

Non-profit Organizations, 2006) compared to 700,000 in Australia ( Philanthropy
Australia, 2007), and 190,439 charities in the UK (Charity Commission, 2007). Owing to
the large number of non-profits in the USA, competition has intensified ( Johns, 2004).
The structure of the UK non-profit system is centralized through the Charitable
Commission of England and Wales. This promotes less competition and focuses more on
equitable distribution when it involves government funding for non-profits.
In terms of community participation in non-profit organizations, almost 84 million
people volunteer in the USA each year (Independent Sector, 2007), in comparison to the
UK where 23 million people volunteer each year (European Volunteer Centre, 2006) and
Australia where approximately 6 million volunteer each year (Volunteering Australia,
2006).
The taxation structure in the three countries differs. Tax deductible contributions in
the USA apply to all charity status organizations defined as any non-profit organization
under section 501c of the internal tax code, meaning all non-profits except for those with
political ideology agendas receive these contributions (Internal Revenue Service, 2007).
In Australia a non-profit must fall under “Gift Deductible Recipient” status, which
restricts the number of non-profits who can claim on tax deductible donations
(Australian Government, 2007). In the UK all non-profits can apply for gift contribution
tax deductions (Her Majesties Revenue and Customs, 2007). Australia has fringe benefits
tax exemption for non-profit organizations that fall under ATO guidelines. The USA
has no exemption and non-profits must withhold employment taxes, and also no
exemptions on Medicare or social security taxes. The UK is similar to the USA with
employment taxes but also tax benefits received by employees. The USA has no goods
and services tax, whereas the UK and Australia do. The Australian Taxation Office
(2007) web site states that the Australian GST level has been stable compared to the
UK GST which, since its implementation, has risen by several percentage points.
In terms of regulation, Australian non-profits are mainly regulated by the three layers
of government including local, state and federal regulation (National Roundtable of
Non-profit Organizations, 2007). The UK manages the non-profit sector through a third
party body called the Charity Commission of England and Wales. This body regulates
charities activities and charity status within the UK. The commission implements
standards of operation and accountability with the non-profit sector in the UK. This
body is closely tied to the UK government and controls most programs and funding
allocated to the non-profit sector (Charity Commission, 2007). In the USA the main
regulators of the non-profit sector are the Internal Revenue Service, which control taxes,
financial transparency and accountability of the non-profit sector. All other regulatory
controls are managed by the states and congress through the implementation of
legislation (Bothwell, 2001).
The accounting and reporting requirements are much more complex in the USA: a
very specific type of system must be used to make IRS reports if the non-profit
organization is tax exempt (Internal Revenue Service, 2007). In Australia, income tax
exempt non-profits are not required to file income statements; they only need to release
disclosure information to keep their income tax exempt status (Australian
Government, 2007). In the UK public disclosure is mandatory if a non-profit is to
keep its income tax exemption. This includes income and expense reports which are
filed with Her Majesties Revenue and Customs department (Her Majesties Revenue and
Customs, 2007).

Non-profit organizations around the world have grown considerably since the 1980s
(Ebrahim, 2003). While the public sector is increasingly adopting practices of the
for-profit sector, these changes are permeating the non-profit sector (Eikenberry and
Kluver, 2004). Non-profits are adopting the practices and values of the for-profit sector.
Non-profits exist within environments that are dictated by institutionalized rules and
regulations and if they are to receive support and appear legitimate they must conform
to these rules (DiMaggio ad Powell, 1983; Meyer and Rowan, 1977; Scott, 2001). Thus,
organizations are obliged to adopt practices within their field imposed by governments
or customer (for example, donor) demands. In addition, the influences of globalization
mean that practices, such as economic restructuring, accounting practices and
increased accountability standards, are not only being adopted within national fields
but also across borders (McDonald, 1999). An example of the spread of institutional
practices as part of the process of globalization is the adoption of western accounting
standards in developing countries facilitated through regulatory bodies like the World
Bank (Cooper et al., 1998).
Consequently, two alternative hypotheses can be formulated with respect to
expected differences in operations of non-profit organizations in the UK, the USA, and
Australia:
H3.

There is no difference between the marketing operations of non-profit
organizations across these countries (because they all face similar market
pressures and institutional practises are increasingly global).

H3alt. There are differences between the marketing operations of non-profit
organizations across countries (because of country-specific differences in
external environments).
Methodology
Managers of non-profit, charitable and religious organizations in the UK, the USA, and
Australia were surveyed using an international permission-based internet panel which
provides research services only (as opposed to selling email addresses for direct marketing
purposes). Panel members were recruited through a range of avenues (including telephone
and mail) in order to reduce panel bias towards heavy internet users. The panel population
was maintained in a way to represent the basic socio-demographic characteristics of the
countries in which survey services are provided.
Invitation emails were sent to 1,451 people who had declared that they were
managers of a non-profit organization. The total sample size was limited to 140
respondents due to budgetary restrictions for the study. The panel company was
instructed that at least 30 respondents were required from each of the three countries.
Two screening questions were used to determine if respondents qualified to participate
in the study. The first screening question asked respondents “Does your organization
engage in marketing activities?” Respondents were offered four answer options: not at
all, not much, a fair bit, and very much. The second question investigated whether the
respondent was familiar with the marketing work of the organization with only a “yes”
and a “no” answer available to respondents. Only respondents who worked in an
organization which did at least some marketing and who were familiar with the
organization’s marketing activities were allowed to continue. This pre-screening means
that no conclusions can be drawn from this study with respect to the proportion of

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
281

IMR
26,3

282

non-profit organizations which use marketing. This, however, is not the main focus of
the study. The main focus is to understand the way in which marketing is used and
whether systematic differences exist across countries.
The questions included in the questionnaire were developed on the basis of
non-profit marketing literature in order to ensure that the key hypotheses posed could
be tested. In addition, several questions were asked which were not directly related to
the hypotheses but instead provided a more detailed insight into the respondents and
the organizations included in the sample. Questions included the extent to which
respondents are familiar with the organization’s marketing activities, their position
title, the number of years they have worked for the organization, whether they are
trained in marketing, the name of the organizations (optional), the sector in which the
non-profit is operating (for example, environment, culture and recreation, health, etc.),
the primary mission of the organization, ownership and reporting relationships, and
sources of funding.
The survey was taken offline when a minimum of 30 responses were available for
each of the three countries under study which occurred after two days. The final
sample consisted of 36 UK respondents, 33 US respondents, and 67 Australian
respondents.
The questionnaire included questions directly related to the research hypotheses.
Questionnaire items and answer formats are described in detail in the results section.
All questions are single item measures.
Results
Sample characteristics
Respondents were asked several questions to describe the type of organization they
belonged to and their marketing background. Respondents were initially asked whether
they “engage in marketing activities.” Of the non-profit organizations represented in the
dataset, 49 percent use marketing “a fair bit,” 39 percent “not much” and 13 percent “very
much.” The answer options were deliberately formulated in the respondents own
language because it was impossible to identify an objective benchmark for classifying
the extent of engagement in marketing activities across a wide range of diverse
non-profit organizations. An optional question was included which directly asked “what
is the name of your organization.” Although half of the respondents preferred not to state
the name of the organization, it is clear from the remaining 68 responses that a wide
range of non-profit organizations were represented with organizations in the social area
as well as religious organizations representing approximately half of the sample. The
distribution of included organizations across the non-profit categorization proposed by
Andreasen and Kotler (2003) is provided in Table I.
To understand the environment the organizations operated in, respondents were
asked to indicate which organization they were required to report directly to out of the
categories “United Nations,” “Other international body,” “National non-profit body,”
“State/Local Government,” “Board of trustees,” “Industry group,” “other” and “none
of the above.” No organization indicated that they report to the first two categories and
26 percent stated that they report to an ‘other’ industry group not included in the list.
A total of 23 percent of the sample report to state or local governments, 42 percent to a
board of trustees and 3 percent to an industry group.

Religion
Social services
Education and research
Health
Culture and recreation
Development and housing
Philanthropic intermediaries and volunteerism promotion
Law advocacy and politics
International activities
Business
Business and professional associations, unions
Other
Total

Frequency

%

39
32
11
10
6
5
5
4
2
1
1
20
136

29
24
8
7
4
3
3
3
2
1
1
15
100

Respondents were also asked to specify their funding sources. On average 32 percent of
the total funding for the organizations sampled came from private donations, 22 percent
through government funding, and 12 percent through grants. All other funding sources
(service fees, corporate donations, revenues from sales, revenues form unrelated
enterprises, and investment income) contributed less than 8 percent each to the average
total funding of non-profit organizations.
In addition to questions about the organization, questions about the respondent
were also included: respondents were asked to state their role in the organization.
Positions represented ranged from “volunteer” to “CEO.” When asked to self-classify
the level of their position in one of five categories, about a third stated that they
were working in a management role, another third classified themselves as
administrative staff, 18 percent as senior management and seven percent as senior
executive. Respondents had worked an average of 6.5 years for the organization. This
was derived from questions, which asked them to enter the number of years they have
worked for the organization. Although all respondents stated that they were familiar
with the organization’s marketing activities, the level of participation in marketing
activities varied between three levels of involvement: only 16 percent stated that they
had very much to do with marketing activities, 54 percent had a fair bit to do with it
and 29 percent not much.
Respondents were asked to state (using a “yes” – “no” scale) whether they felt their
organization faces competition. Two thirds of the respondents agreed. From the list of
competitors, derived from an open-ended question, it was evident that the main kind of
competition perceived was with other organizations with similar missions and the two
main objects of competition listed included funding and volunteers. One third of
respondents stated (using a “yes” – “no” scale) that action had been taken by the
organization to protect their market position against competitors. Such actions listed in
the following open-ended question included the use of strong, understandable core
messages, marketing, pricing, diversification, specialization, improvement of tender
writing skills, offering the best service, developing collaborative relationships with
competitors, competition analysis, and building of reputation. One respondent put it

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
283

Table I.
Areas of operation

IMR
26,3

284

very passionately: “Marketing is our life-blood – as all charities who want to survive, it
is essential that we publicize our work through photos, talks, editorial, TV.”
Two interesting insights can be drawn from these responses. First, that the
majority of the non-profits sampled are acutely aware of the competition they are
facing in the marketplace. Second, that the non-profit organizations sampled
are acutely aware of their competition and the need to optimise their operations to stay
competitive.
Marketing philosophies of non-profits
Before asking respondents questions which offered answer alternatives they were asked
to state in an open-ended manner how they would personally define marketing. This
approach was taken to ensure that answer options would not bias the results. The
resulting definitions provided qualitative insight into the way in which marketing is
viewed by the included non-profit organizations, indicating a highly promotion-focused
view of marketing. A few examples of definitions provided by managers include
“Anything with a company logo displayed to the public,” “Exposure to the public
through the use of various types of media,” “Presenting our organization in an appealing
way,” and maybe most illustratively for the typical view that marketing is a one-way
street from the organization to the market: “Telling others what we do, how we do it and
how it can help them.”
When asked whether marketing helps an organization achieve its mission, the vast
majority of respondents (70 percent) stated that “it contributes,” only 26 percent stated
that it “is crucial” for success, and only 4 percent selected the “not at all” answer option.
These personal views of respondents appear to reflect their evaluation of top
management’s attitudes towards marketing. Considering that the support of top
management is a necessity for a transition to a market orientation (Narver and Slater,
1994), respondents were asked to describe how supportive top management is of
marketing in their organization. A total of 18 percent of respondents stated that top
management sees it as a “necessary evil,” 58 percent stated that marketing is seen as an
“important part of operations” and 24 percent stated that their top management believes
that marketing represents a “central success factor.”
Figure 1 depicts which areas of marketing non-profit organizations viewed as part
of marketing as well as which they perceived as the most important area.
This figure reports the results of two separate questions, each containing a list of
the same marketing areas. First, a question was asked to assess respondent beliefs of
the most important marketing activity. Respondents were asked to select only one
marketing area they believed was the most important. Fundraising, public relations,
and advertising were the top three most important marketing activities. The second
question asked respondents what they believe marketing contains. Respondents could
select as many options as they thought appropriate. The top three activities that
marketing contains were, once again, advertising and public relations and also the
activity of image building/positioning. Amongst the least important marketing
activities was market research. However, 60 percent of respondents indicated that they
believed that marketing does contain market research.
Respondents were asked to state (using a “yes” – “no” scale) which of a list of
strategic marketing tools they use. The first of these questions asked: “does your
organisation work with different market segments?” to which 67 percent agreed.

Marketing contains

Public relations

Most important
Advertising

15

Fundraising

15

Assessment of consumer/volunteer/donor needs

13

Image building/Positioning

89
68
67

285
83

10

Event planning

72

8

Market segmentation

4

Marketing strategy

3

Distribution

3

Media relations

2

Product development

1

Pricing

1

Marketing research

1
0

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations

85

15

54
66
50
77
41

Figure 1.
Marketing areas and most
important task in
marketing as assessed by
non-profit organizations

37
60
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Only slightly more than one third of respondents (36 percent) stated that their
organization has clearly specified marketing objectives, 34 percent stated that their
organization has a formalised marketing strategy. One third of the non-profit
organizations represented in the sample stated that they use key performance
indicators (KPIs) to monitor their success. Of those, only one fifth uses marketing KPIs.
Forty-two percent of respondents stated that their organization has performed a
SWOT analysis, and 42 percent stated that they measure the success of their
marketing strategy or actions. An open-ended question was used to determine what
types of measures of success were used by the respondents. Responses to this question
included an increased number of funding of one kind or another (for example,
donations, T-shirt sales).
Only 29 percent of respondents stated that the non-profit organization they work for
undertakes market research. When asked about the frequency of use, 10 percent of
respondents stated that market research is undertaken “every few years,” 2 percent
stated that market research is undertaken “less then once a year,” 10 percent research
the market “once a year” and only seven percent “more than once a year.” Respondents
were asked in an open ended format “what kind of market research do you undertake?”
Responses were heavily dominated by two kinds: focus groups and surveys.
Based on these empirical findings, H1 has to be rejected. It appears that the
marketing operations and strategy of the sampled organizations are still heavily
dominated by an organization-centered mindset. Marketing appears to be primarily
defined by these organizations as promotion, including activities such as advertising,
fundraising and public relations. According to Andreasen and Kotler (2003) this is one

IMR
26,3

286

indicator of an organization-centered mindset. The minor role given to consumer
research is another indicator of an organization-centered mindset. In fact, the empirical
results derived from the multi-country non-profit survey conducted in October 2007
mirror the findings from Kotler (1982) and Akchin (2001) to a large extent. Kotler found
the main emphasis to be on selling, advertising and public relations. The results of the
present study indicate that non-profit organizations still focus on fundraising,
advertising and public relations some 25 years later, despite the calls for non-profits to
adopt a more market-oriented approach. Also in line with Kotler’s early findings is the
fact that a very small proportion of non-profit organizations view needs assessment
and market research as crucial, a finding supported by Akchin (2001). Although
60 percent of respondents correctly identify market research as being part of the
marketing toolbox, only one percent stated marketing research as the most important
area of marketing and less than one third engaged in any kind of market research.
Additional evidence for the focus on marketing tactics rather than strategies is
provided by the analysis of strategic marketing activities undertaken by non-profits:
except for market segmentation, none of the strategic tools available to managers were
used by more than 42 percent of the sampled non-profit organizations.
Training of marketing staff
The second hypothesis relates to the training of those people within non-profit
organizations who are responsible for marketing. In line with the assumption that
non-profits have improved their operations and have gone though a period of increased
professionalization we expect that marketing is run by staff members trained in
marketing.
In order to understand the qualifications and background of marketing personnel,
respondents were asked whether or not the organization employs a “marketing
manager or one or more people who are specifically dedicated to doing marketing?”
Results indicate that 29 percent of non-profits sampled employed one or more staff
members who are specifically dedicated to marketing activities. In terms of their
qualification, 19 percent can be classified as trained in marketing in the broadest sense:
15 percent studied marketing at university, four percent at high school, and 10 percent
were trained on the job. In an effort to determine whether the employees of these
organizations have the opportunity to further develop their marketing skills,
respondents were asked: “does your organization offer any internal training on
marketing?” – ten percent of respondents agreed.
These results lead to the conclusion that H2 needs to be rejected: the marketing
portfolio in sampled non-profits was generally not run by staff members who were
trained in marketing. The proportion of marketing-trained staff working in marketing
in this sample was in fact alarmingly low with approximately only one fifth of
marketing staff having formal training. This may well provide an explanation for the
fact that marketing operations have not improved significantly since 1982 and that the
marketing mindset remains one of organizational rather than market orientation.
Differences across countries
An open-ended question asked respondents whether they thought there were different
conditions in which non-profit organizations in the UK, the USA, and Australia
operate. Sixty-nine percent of all respondents believed that such differences exist.

A wide range of differences was listed by respondents: the first, noted by a total of 44
respondents, included the fact that there are very different regulatory systems,
especially in the context of tax laws and government regulation, with one respondent
stating “The US has so much red tape and political rhetoric sometimes agencies don’t
want to do the work because of this.”
The second way in which respondents felt the three countries differed was the
culture of donation giving and community attitudes towards donating and
volunteering, stated by 15 respondents. Funding attainment was also seen to differ
across the three countries, with 18 respondents stating that funding structures and
sources vary from country to country. One respondent noted “I think Australia has a
lot more backing and encouragement from our Government.” Accountability and
reporting was another theme detected in the open-ended responses. Nine respondents
stated that accountability and reporting standards are dissimilar.
Respondents were also asked whether or not they believed that differences in the
external environment effect the way non-profit organizations work in each of these
countries; 77 percent of those respondents who believed that differences between
countries exist also believed that these differences effect the operations of non-profit
organizations. When describing ways in which they expect these differences to effect
the operations in an open-ended manner, six respondents stated that increased
reporting would occur. Another seven believed the type and level of funding support
would be effected, one comment explaining “other countries [. . .] larger than the UK
will receive more funding.” Surprisingly, four respondents believed marketing would
be affected, while others noted differences in the degree of customer support (for
example, individual donor support), government support, competition for funds, and
their mission and the type of work they do.
Contrary to the expectation of the majority of respondents, no significant differences
in the marketing operations were found when comparing the quantitative data for the
UK, the USA, and Australian non-profit organizations. Consequently, H3 cannot be
rejected. Although the precise reasons why no differences in marketing operations
were found cannot be directly derived from the conducted survey, it appears that the
regulatory differences may have less effect on marketing operations than the market
pressures. With respect to market pressures, non-profit organizations in all three
countries appear to face very similar challenges: increased competition from other
non-profit organizations for both volunteers and funding.
Conclusions, limitations and future work
The work of non-profit organizations is essential to maintain much needed services
typically not provided by the for-profit sector or the government. Given the increased
market pressures non-profit organizations are facing and given that marketing as one
of many operational business areas has been adopted by non-profit organizations some
decades ago, the two core hypotheses of the present study were that:
(1) Non-profit organizations of the twenty-first century have managed to make the
transition from an organization-centered marketing philosophy to a
consumer-centered or market-oriented philosophy.
(2) The increased use of marketing has led to a professionalization of the marketing
workforce in non-profit organizations.

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
287

IMR
26,3

288

This empirical study, based on 136 respondents from three continents, leads to the
conclusion that both hypotheses have to be rejected: first, many non-profit
organizations still demonstrate a distinct lack of understanding of what the
principles of marketing are and largely focus their efforts on sales and promotional
activities. Only a small proportion in this sample engaged in any kind of strategic
marketing, including market research. Second, and this may in fact be the explanation
for the way in which marketing is implemented, only a small proportion of staff
members of the sampled non-profit organizations who work in marketing are actually
trained in marketing. Only 18 percent have studied marketing at university level.
Using the broadest possible definition of training (by including training on the job)
only about one fifth of marketing staff in the sampled non-profit organizations are
trained.
The third question of interest was whether or not systematic differences in
marketing operations could be determined between the three countries under study: the
UK, the USA, and Australia. Results indicate that this is not the case, suggesting that
the increased market pressures faced by non-profit organizations in all these countries
weigh stronger than national differences in rules and regulations affecting to non-profit
organizations.
The results of this study are practically significant as they indicate that many
non-profit organizations are far from having reached the full potential through
marketing. This could be due to a number of different reasons:
.
It could be that the limited use of marketing tools and the heavy dependence on
promotion by non-profits is based upon the perception that many of the
marketing mix elements are not under the full control of the non-profit
organization (for example, the product cannot be changed, the price is often
voluntary and distribution channel decisions can rarely be made).
.
It is possible that non-profits have been reluctant to adopt marketing strategies
and instruments because they perceive marketing is a bad thing which aims at
manipulating people and that it therefore is not compatible with the honorable
work they are doing.
As a consequence, non-profit organizations could have been slower in accepting the
benefits of marketing to achieve their mission and adopting marketing strategies and
techniques.
There is significant potential for improvement through the adoption of a
customer-centered, market oriented approach that does not attempt to sell what is
believed to be a perfect service to the market but instead attempts to understand which
service the market really requires. Many possible strategies could be taken to initiate
such operational improvements, and one key factor may well lie in hiring formally
trained marketing staff that have a clear understanding about how the marketing
toolbox can most effectively be applied.
Like most previous investigations (Kotler, 1979, 1982; Akchin, 2001), the present
study is limited by the fact that the sample of non-profit organizations studied is
unlikely to be representative of the national population of non-profit organizations in
the UK, the USA, and Australia. Yet the consistency of the data collection approach
ensures that the comparison across three countries could be safely performed.
Optimally, it could be attempted to derive a truly representative sample by using

registries of non-profit organizations in all three countries (if publicly available) as a
starting point for a true random sampling procedure.
It would also be very interesting to try to map changes in the non-profit marketing
mindset and professionalization over a longer time period using a true longitudinal
survey design. Finally, barriers to the acceptance of marketing practices, especially
reasons why many non-profit managers believe that market research is unimportant or
too difficult, would form an interesting qualitative follow-up investigation to the
present study.
References
Akchin, D. (2001), “Non-profit marketing: just how far has it come?”, Non-profit World, Vol. 19
No. 1, pp. 33-5.
Alexander, J.A. and Weiner, B.J. (1998), “The adoption of the corporate governance model by
nonprofit organizations”, Nonprofit Management & Leadership, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp. 223-42.
Andreasen, A.R. and Kotler, P. (2003), Strategic Marketing for Non-profit Organizations, 6th ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2007), “Animated population pyramids”, available at: www.abs.
gov.au/websitedbs/d3310114.nsf/home/populationpercent20pyramidpercent20preview
(accessed November 2007).
Australian Government, Australian Taxation Office (2007), “Non-profit organizations”, available
at: www.ato.gov.au/non-profit/ (accessed November 2007).
Bendapudi, N., Singh, S.N. and Bendapudi, V. (1996), “Enhancing helping behavior: an integrative
framework for promotion planning”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60 No. 3, pp. 33-49.
Bothwell, R. (2001), “Trends in self regulation and transparency of non-for-profits in the US”,
The International Journal of Non-for-Profit Law, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 1-6.
Bruce, I. (1995), “Do not-for-profits value their customers and their needs?”, International
Marketing Review, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 77-84.
Charity Commission (2007), “The regulator for charities in England and Wales”, available at:
www.charity-commission.gov.uk/ (accessed November 2007).
Cooper, C., Greenwood, R., Hinings, B. and Brown, J.L. (1998), “Globalization and nationalism in a
multicultural accounting firm: the case of opening new markets in eastern Europe”,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 23 Nos 5/6, pp. 531-48.
Day, G.S. (1994), “The capabilities of market-driven organizations”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58
No. 4, pp. 37-52.
DiMaggio, P.J. and Powell, W.W. (1983), “The iron cage revisited: institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organizational fields”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 48, April,
pp. 147-60.
Dolnicar, S., Irvine, H. and Lazarevski, K. (2008), “Mission or money? Competitive challenges
facing public sector nonprofit organisations in an institutionalised environment”,
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 13, pp. 107-17.
Ebrahim, A. (2003), “Making sense of accountability: conceptual perspectives for northern and
southern non-profits”, Non-profit Management and Leadership, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 191-212.
Eikenberry, A.M. and Kluver, J.D. (2004), “The marketization of the non-profit sector: civil society
at risk?”, Public Administration Review, Vol. 64 No. 2, pp. 132-40.
European Volunteer Centre (2007), “Manifesto for volunteering in Europe”, available at: www.ce
v.be/ (accessed November 2007).

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
289

IMR
26,3

290

Gallagher, K. and Weinberg, C.B. (1991), “Coping with success: new challenges for non-profit
marketing”, Sloane Management Review, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 27-42.
Goerke, J. (2003), “Taking the quantum leap: nonprofits are now in business. An Australian
perspective”, Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 317-27.
Gonzalez, L.I.A., Vijande, M.L.S. and Casielles, R.V. (2002), “The market orientation concept in
the private nonprofit organisation domain”, International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 55-67.
Her Majesties Revenue and Customs (2007), “Charities: list of statutory references”, available at:
www.hmrc.gov.uk/charities/legislation.htm (accessed November 2007).
Independent Sector (2007), “Giving and volunteering in the United States 2001”, available at: www.
independentsector.org/programs/research/gv01main.html (accessed November 2007).
Internal Revenue Service (2007), “Tax information for charitable organizations”, available at:
www.irs.gov/charities/charitable/index.html (accessed November 2007).
Johns, G. (2004), “Charities reform in Australia”, Agenda, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 293-306.
Kara, A., Spillan, J.E. and DeShields, O.W. Jr (2004), “An empirical investigation of the link
between market orientation and business performance in non-profit service providers”,
Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 59-72.
Kotler, P. (1979), “Strategies for introducing marketing into non-profit organizations”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 37-44.
Kotler, P. (1982), Marketing for Non-profit Organizations, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ.
Kotler, P. and Levy, S.J. (1969), “Broadening the concept of marketing”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 10-15.
Kotler, P. and Zaltman, G. (1971), “Social marketing: an approach to planned social change”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 35 No. 3, pp. 3-12.
McDonald, C. (1999), “Internal control and accountability in non-profit human service
organizations”, Australian Journal of Public Administration, Vol. 58 No. 1, pp. 11-22.
Macedo, I.M. and Pinho, J.C. (2006), “The relationship between resource dependence and market
orientation”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 40 Nos 5/6, pp. 533-53.
Meyer, J.W. and Rowan, B. (1977), “Institutionalized organizations: formal structure as myth and
ceremony”, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 82 No. 2, pp. 340-63.
Narver, J.C. and Slater, S.F. (1994), “Market orientation customer value, and superior
performance”, Business Horizons, Vol. 22, March/April, p. 28.
National Center for Charitable Statistics (2007), “Number of non-profit organizations in the united
states, 1996-2006”, available at: http://nccsdataweb.urban.org/PubApps/profile1.php?sta
te¼US (accessed November 2007).
National Council of Non-profit Organizations (2007), “US sector report”, available at: www.ncna.
org/_uploads/documents/live//us_sector_report_2003.pdf (accessed November 2007).
National Roundtable of Non-profit Organizations (2007), “Non-profit roundtable”, available at:
http://nfproundtable.org.au/publications.htm (accessed November 2007).
National Statistics (UK) (2007), “Population”, available at: www.statistics.gov.uk/glance/
#population (accessed November 2007).
Padanyi, P. and Gainer, B. (2004), “Market orientation in the nonprofit sector: taking multiple
constituencies into consideration”, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, Vol. 12 No. 2,
pp. 43-58.

Philanthropy Australia (2007), “Research and information”, available at: www.philanthropy.
org.au/research/factsheets/nfpfactsheet.pdf (accessed November 2007).
Sargeant, A., Foreman, S. and Liao, M. (2002), “Operationalizing the marketing concept in the
nonprofit sector”, Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 41-65.
Scott, W.R. (2001), Institutions and Organizations, 2nd ed., Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Shapiro, B.P. (1974), “Marketing in non-profit organizations”, Journal of Voluntary Action
Research, Vol. 3 Nos 3/4, pp. 1-16.
US Census Bureau (2007), “Population finder”, available at: http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/
SAFFPopulation?_submenuId¼population_0&_sse¼on (accessed November 2007).
Volunteering Australia (2007), “National census: are we a nation of volunteers?”, available at:
www.volunteeringaustralia.org/html/s02_article/article_view.asp?id ¼ 2962&nav_ca
t_id¼222&nav_top_id¼50 (accessed November 2007).
About the authors
Sara Dolnicar is a Professor of Marketing at the School of Management and Marketing at the
University of Wollongong and the Director of the Marketing Research Innovation Centre (MRIC).
She has completed her PhD at the Institute for Tourism and Leisure Studies at the Vienna
University of Economics and Business Administration. Her research interests include market
segmentation, measurement in marketing, tourism marketing, and social marketing.
Sara Dolnicar is the corresponding author and can be contacted at: sarad@uow.edu.au
Katie Lazarevski is a doctoral candidate from the School of Management and Marketing at
the University of Wollongong in Australia. She is a member of the Marketing Research
Innovation Centre (MRIC), and her research interests include tourism marketing and non-profit
marketing. Her PhD dissertation is focused on improving the managerial usefulness of market
segmentation solutions.

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

Marketing
in non-profit
organizations
291

