Journal of Advertising

ISSN: 0091-3367 (Print) 1557-7805 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ujoa20

Shared Brand Equity
T. Bettina Cornwell, Michael S. Humphreys & Youngbum Kwon
To cite this article: T. Bettina Cornwell, Michael S. Humphreys & Youngbum
Kwon (2023) Shared Brand Equity, Journal of Advertising, 52:3, 311-329, DOI:
10.1080/00913367.2022.2131656
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2022.2131656

© 2022 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
Published online: 15 Nov 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 11042

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 18 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ujoa20

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING
2023, VOL. 52, NO. 3, 311–329
https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2022.2131656

Shared Brand Equity
T. Bettina Cornwella

, Michael S. Humphreysb and Youngbum Kwonc

a
University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA; bUniversity of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia; cPusan National University, Busan,
Republic of Korea

ABSTRACT

Many brand collaboration platforms—such as sponsorship, celebrity endorsement, influencer
marketing, product placement, cobranding, and human branding—build strong relationships
between brands and contribute to the brand equity of two or more brands. Brand equity, since
inception, has been concerned with the value of a brand, how this value is built and measured,
and how the marketplace responds to it. Based on previous work and in response to current
marketing practices, the authors suggest that the concept of shared brand equity, where collaborative efforts result in connectivity between brands, is needed to better explain and guide
advertising and marketing communications research and practice. Drawing on developments in
cognitive psychology, we explain how shared brand equity is developed and how it persists,
the role it plays in semantic/associative neighborhoods, and how it explains research findings.
We offer a set of research propositions, as well as concrete examples of the usefulness of the
theoretical approach.

The blazing Olympic torch, paraded through London
yesterday for only the third time in the history of the
games, is an unmistakable symbol of the world’s oldest
sporting competition. But over the course of the past
century, the Olympics have become subtly associated
with another globally recognized icon: the red-and-white
branding of the Coca-Cola Company. (The Independent,
April 7, 2008)

As brands have devoted more of their communications
budgets to collaborative platforms such as sponsorship,
brand placement, endorsement, social media influencers
(Donthu et al. 2022), and cobranding (Pinello, Picone,
and Destri 2022), they have become more intertwined
with other brands, just as the Coca-Cola brand is intertwined with the Olympic brand. Calls in advertising
emphasize the need to “leverage secondary associations
to build brand equity” by linking to people, places, and
things (Keller 2020, p. 448). Observations in marketing
reveal that branding now occurs in a hyperconnected
world where traditional brand equity measures may not
be relevant or sufficient (Swaminathan et al. 2020).
These themes speak to the need for a construct that

captures the brand equity shared between two or
more brands.
Aaker (1991) defines brand equity as “a set of brand
assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name and
symbol, that add to or subtract from the value provided
by a product or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s
customers” (p. 15). Berry (2000) describes brand equity
as “the differential effect of brand awareness and meaning combined on customer response to the marketing of
the brand” (p. 130). Brand equity has subsequently been
defined and redefined (see Table 1). In keeping with
Aaker’s original definition, brand equity is viewed as an
additive/subtractive phenomenon where the focal brand
“aggregates” (Srivastava and Shocker 1991) or “adds value” (Farquhar 1989) through all it does.
Accumulated brand equity can then be accounted
and is often measured as compared to an unbranded
product. The second half of Table 1 summarizes measures of brand equity. Ailawadi, Lehmann, and Neslin
(2003) identify three categories of brand equity measurement: customer mindset, product-market outcomes, and
financial market outcomes. These categories are widely

CONTACT T. Bettina Cornwell
tbc@uoregon.edu
Lundquist College of Business, University of Oregon, 1208 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR
97403, USA.
T. Bettina Cornwell (PhD, University of Texas) is a professor, Lundquist College of Business, University of Oregon.
Michael S. Humphreys (PhD, Sandford University) is a professor, School of Psychology, University of Queensland.
Youngbum Kwon (PhD, University of Michigan) is an assistant professor, College of Human Ecology, Pusan National University.
ß 2022 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed,
or built upon in any way.

312

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

Table 1. Selected definitions and measurement categories of brand equity.
Definition

Study

“A set of brand assets and liabilities linked to a brand, its name and
symbol, that add to or subtract from the value provided by a product
or service to a firm and/or to that firm’s customers” (p. 15).
“The differential effect of brand awareness and meaning combined on
customer response to the marketing of the brand” (p. 130).
“Present and future valorization derived from internal and external brandinduced performance” (p. 391).
“A set of perceptions, attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors on the part of
consumers that results in increased utility and allows a brand to earn
greater volume or greater margins than it could without the brand
name” (p. 48).
“Brand equity is the added value with which a brand endows a product”
(p. 24).
“The total value of a brand as a separable asset when it is sold or
included on a balance sheet; a measure of the strength of consumers’
attachment to a brand; a description of the associations and beliefs the
consumer has about the brand” (p. 11).
“The differential effect of brand knowledge on consumer response to the
marketing of the brand” (p. 17).
“The enhancement in the perceived utility and desirability a brand name
confers on a product” (p. 13).
“The difference between an individual consumer’s overall brand
preference and his or her multiattributed preference based on
objectively measured attribute levels” (p. 273).
“The aggregation of all accumulated attitudes and behavior patterns in
the extended minds of consumers, distribution channels and influence
agents, which will enhance future profits and long-term cash flow”
(p. 92).
“The incremental cash flows which accrue to branded products over and
above the cash flows which would result from the sale of unbranded
products” (p. 29).
“Consumers’ different response between a focal brand and an unbranded
product when both have the same level of marketing stimuli and
product attributes” (p. 1).
“The difference in consumer choice between the focal branded product
and an unbranded product given the same level of product features”
(p. 196).
Category
Customer mindset

Farquhar, P. H. (1989). Managing brand equity. Marketing Research,
1(3), 24–33.
Feldwick, P. (1996). Do we really need “brand equity”? Journal of Brand
Management, 4(1), 9–28.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customerbased brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Lassar, W., Mittal, B., and Sharma, A. (1995). Measuring customer-based
brand equity. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 12(4), 11–19.
Park C. S., and Srinivasan V. A. (1994). A survey-based method for
measuring and understanding brand equity and its extendibility.
Journal of Marketing Research, 31(2), 271–288.
Srivastava, R. K., and Shocker, A. D. (1991). Brand equity: A perspective on
its meaning and measurement. Marketing Science Institute Working
Paper Series, Report No. 91–124. Cambridge, MA: Marketing
Science Institute.
Simon, Carol J., and Mary W. Sullivan (1993). The measurement and
determinants of brand equity: A financial approach. Marketing Science,
12(1), 28–52.
Yoo, B., and Donthu, N. (2001). Developing and validating a
multidimensional consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of
Business Research, 52(1), 1–14.
Yoo, B., Donthu, N., and Lee, S. (2000). An examination of selected
marketing mix elements and brand equity. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 28(2), 195–211.

Measures

Study
Aaker, D. A. (1996). Measuring brand equity across products and
markets. California Management Review, 38(3), 102–120.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing
customer-based brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
Yoo, B., Donthu, N., and Lee, S. (2000). An examination of selected
marketing mix elements and brand equity. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 28(2), 195–211.
Washburn, J. H., and Plank, R. E. (2002). Measuring brand equity: An
evaluation of a consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, 10(1), 46–62.
de Chernatony, L., Harris, F., and Christodoulides, G. (2004). Developing
a brand performance measure for financial services brands. The
Service Industries Journal, 24(2), 15–33.
Buil, I., De Chernatony, L., and Martinez, E. (2008). A cross-national
validation of the consumer-based brand equity scale. Journal of
Product and Brand Management, 17(6), 384–392.
Agarwal, M. K., and Rao, V. R. (1996). An empirical comparison of
consumer-based measures of brand equity. Marketing
Letters, 7(3), 237–247.
Chaudhuri, A., and Holbrook, M. B. (2001). The chain of effects from
brand trust and brand affect to brand performance: The role of
brand loyalty. Journal of Marketing, 65(2), 81–93.
Ailawadi, K. L., Lehmann, D. R., and Neslin, S. A. (2003). Revenue
premium as an outcome measure of brand equity. Journal of
Marketing, 67(4), 1–17.
Huang, R., and Sarig€
oll€
u, E. (2014). Assessment of brand equity
measures. International Journal of Market Research, 56(6), 783–806.
Simon, C. J., and Sullivan, M. W. (1993). The measurement and
determinants of brand equity: A financial approach. Marketing
Science, 12(1), 28–52.
Mizik, N. (2014). Assessing the total financial performance impact of
brand equity with limited time-series data. Journal of Marketing
Research, 51(6), 691–706.

Brand loyalty, satisfaction, reputation
Brand awareness, brand associations, perceived
quality, brand loyalty (perceived value, brand
personality, organizational associations)
Price premium
Market share
Revenue premium
Revenue premium
Financial market
outcomes

Berry, L. L. (2000). Cultivating service brand equity. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 28(1), 128–137.
Burmann, C., Jost-Benz, M., and Riley, N. (2009). Towards an identity-based
brand equity model. Journal of Business Research, 62(3), 390–397.
Christodoulides, G., and De Chernatony, L. (2010). Consumer-based brand
equity conceptualisation and measurement: A literature
review. International Journal of Market Research, 52(1), 43–66.

Brand awareness, brand associations, perceived
quality, brand loyalty
Brand knowledge (brand associations
brand Image)
Brand awareness/associations, perceived quality,
brand loyalty
Brand awareness, brand associations, perceived
quality, brand loyalty

Product-market
outcomes

Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing brand equity. New York: Free Press.

Residual market value
Total performance impact of brands

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

accepted in brand management research (see Mizik
2014), and measurement in each category captures the
differential brand effect that accrues to brands with high
equity. What was not envisioned when brand equity was
originally defined and refined, primarily in the 1990s,
was the evolving nature of marketing communications.
Brand collaboration platforms go beyond the original
bounds of brand equity to develop powerful connections
between brands that must be accounted for if a clear
strategic picture of the brand’s potential direction is to
be plotted.
As we move toward an interrelatedness of stakeholders in business (Hillebrand, Driessen, and Koll
2015), our constructs must also match our interrelatedness. We argue that a construct, shared brand
equity, has arisen through contemporary advertising
and marketing practice. We define the construct here:
Shared brand equity is the extent to which semantic/
associative knowledge between brands is linked, is
widely represented in a linguistic community, and
affects community member brand responses (e.g.,
expectations, predictions, decisions).

In this definition, semantic/associative knowledge
represents the mental store of concepts, words, and categories of meaning that people have acquired from their
life experiences (compare Anderson and Bower 2014).
Semantic/associative knowledge about a brand might be
built by any relevant encounter with the partnering
brands, actual or mental. It might include seeing logos
or advertising, buying the brand, reading an online
review, thinking of a brand collaboration when encountering the brand name in a store, or learning about
either brand partner in a noteworthy context, such as
winning an award or surviving a scandal. This definition considers brands as concepts with words and
developed categories of knowledge that are linked or
connected to one another. For the construct of shared
brand equity to be meaningful, it must be commonly
found or widely represented in a linguistic community,
thus allowing discourse regarding the focal brands. A
linguistic community refers to a social group with frequent social interaction patterns (Gumperz 1962) that
share linguistic constructions (e.g., words, clauses) that
evoke representations with a high degree of consensus
regarding their meaning (Cornejo 2004). Finally, in
keeping with definitions of brand equity and with the
role of semantic/associative memory (Bright and
Feeney 2014), shared brand equity affects community
member responses to brands.
Theoretically, shared brand equity is a construct representing the network of associations in memory
between two (or more) brands. Although a new

313

construct, it can be observed in consistent patterns
across brand collaboration platforms. Identification and
recognition of shared brand equity challenges established
siloed theorizing about a single brand’s equity when
established through brand collaboration platforms. To
extend thinking about brand equity to shared brand
equity, we must understand how linkages are formed
among the associative networks of brands and how
these linkages influence responses to brands. We develop
our thinking on the shared brand equity that influences
the fates of brands with the following goals in mind:
 Introduce a provoking theory (Sandberg and
Alvesson 2021) of shared brand equity based on
research in cognitive psychology, which responds
to a call for improving brand awareness research
in advertising (Bergkvist and Taylor 2022).
 Demonstrate how shared brand equity, across a
range of brand collaboration platforms, explains
the influence of central constructs (e.g., individual
brand equity, congruence) and addresses mixed
findings in the literature.
 Guide future research on shared brand equity from a
memory perspective, with a process model, research
propositions, and measurement alternatives.
 Suggest, for managers, approaches to assessing the
shared semantic/associative knowledge that is critical for marketing decisions.
It is acknowledged that the memory-based construct of shared brand equity will not address the full
compendium of questions on the management of
brands in partnerships. Thus, the work here could be
labeled as “provoking theory” where the “purpose is
to show alternative . . . disruptive ways of seeing phenomena” (Sandberg and Alvesson 2021, p. 504). Thus,
in keeping with Sandberg and Alvesson, we suggest
that not only could things be different than seen but
they are already other than currently represented.
Definitions of the main brand collaboration platforms that build shared brand equity and estimates of
financial investments in them are shown in Table 2,
as is worldwide spending on advertising for comparison. The largest brand collaboration platform, in
terms of worldwide investment, is sponsorship.
Sponsorship spending estimates, as deals brokered for
collaboration with a property rights holder, are outside traditional advertising measurements, but collateral spending surrounding partnerships is estimated to
result in double the amount spent on sponsorship
deals (Cornwell 2020). The activities of other collaborations, such as celebrity endorsements and influencer

314

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

Table 2. Brand collaboration platform definitions and spending estimates.
Platforms (Spending)
Sponsorship in 2018 ($65 billion, IEG Sponsorship Report 2018)

Celebrity endorsementa

Influencer marketing ($16.4 billion in 2022; Influencer MarketingHub 2022)

Product placement ($23.3 billion in 2021; PQ Media 2021)

Cobrandinga

Human brandinga

Advertising ($689 billion in 2021; Statista 2022)b

Definition
“A cash or in-kind fee paid to a property (typically in sports, arts,
entertainment, or causes) in return for access to the exploitable
commercial potential of that property” (IEG Sponsorship Report 2017).
“The provision of assistance either financial or in kind to an activity by a
commercial organization for the purpose of achieving organizational
objectives” (Meenaghan 1983, p. 9).
“An agreement between an individual who enjoys public recognition (a
celebrity) and an entity (e.g., a brand) to use the celebrity for the
purpose of promoting the entity” (Bergkvist and Zhou 2016, p. 644).
“A celebrity endorser is defined as any individual who enjoys public
recognition and who uses this recognition on behalf of a consumer
good by appearing with it in an advertisement” (McCracken 1989,
p. 310).
“An influencer is a persona (related to a person, group of people, or
organization) that possess greater than average potential to way others
in terms of thoughts, attitudes, and behaviors due to attributes of their
communication frequency, persuasiveness, social network, or other
characteristics” (Cornwell and Katz 2021, p. 7). Thus, influencer
marketing is marketing activities that employ personas.
“Identifying and targeting influential users and stimulate them to endorse
a brand or specific products through their social media activities” (De
Veirman, Cauberghe, and Hudders 2017, p. 802).
“This article conceptualizes product placement as an intertext at the
intersection of the entertainment content, the IMC context, and the
sociocultural environment in which the product placement/
entertainment/IMC are consumed” (Russell 2019, p. 38).
“A paid product message aimed at influencing movie or television
audiences via the planned and unobtrusive entry of a branded product
into a movie or television program” (Balasubramanian 1994, p. 31).
“Any pairing of brands in a collaborative marketing effort” (Besharat and
Langan 2014, p. 115).
“Pairing two or more branded products” (Washburn, Till, and Priluck 2000,
p. 591).
“Any well-known persona who is the subject of marketing
communications efforts” (Thomson 2006 p. 104).
“The set of associations identified with a particular person” (Parmentier
and Fischer 2012, p. 107).
“Advertising is paid, owned, and earned mediated communication,
activated by an identifiable brand and intent on persuading the
consumer to make some cognitive, affective or behavioral change, now
or in the future” (Kerr and Richards 2021, p. 190).
“Any paid form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas,
goods, or services by an identified sponsor” (Kotler 2000, p. 578).

a

Some brand collaboration platforms, such as cobranding, have limited contractual reporting. Moreover, some brand collaborations may be doubly
counted, such as celebrity endorsement from the brand advertiser’s perspective and from the human branding side of a partnership.
b
Advertising spending is included as a comparison.

marketing, are largely captured in advertising estimates. The emphasis in Table 2 is on a well-known
set of brand collaboration platforms that are active,
intentional,
brand-to-brand
relationship-building
strategies. However, the concept applies broadly, for
example, to an organization, between a human brand
chief executive officer and a product brand; across
categories, between a place brand and a product
brand; or between a created avatar and a brand.

Why the Construct of Shared Brand Equity
Is Needed
To open discussion of the role of shared brand equity
in brand collaborations, we must address two important characteristics of shared equity relationships that

contrast with traditional advertising. First, unlike traditional, informational, or image-based advertising
regarding a single brand, brand collaborations bring
together brands and intentionally create links among
them, thus building interdependence. Shared brand
equity can reduce the control that either partner has
in strategic brand decisions. For example, following
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, vodka
brands, once touting their Russian heritage, have
sought distance from the place brand of Russia; some
even changed the product’s brand name—for example,
Stolichnaya to Stoli (Lascelles 2022). The strategic
decision on the part of some vodka brands to develop
links with the place brand of Russia resulted in disruptive changes for brands in the category. The place
brand of Russia did not simply subtract from the

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

value of the Stolichnaya vodka but forced a crisis and
immediate rebranding.
Second, brand advertising campaigns have an end
point. While advertised brands persist and likely take
forward many characteristics from past advertising,
the advertising campaign no longer has a life of its
own (save for historical records and YouTube videos).
Once advertising ends, associations formed through
advertising may be reactivated by the brand but are
unlikely to be reactivated by the advertising because it
is no longer encountered. In contrast, when brand
collaborations end, both partners typically persist, as
do aspects of their relationship. Shared brand equity
can impact the performance that either partner realizes from strategic brand decisions. For example, in
sponsorship of sports, research has shown that years
(McAlister et al. 2012) or even decades (Edeling,
Hattula, and Bornemann 2017) after a partnership has
ended, previous sponsors are recalled when cued with
the event. Interinfluence stemming from previous
sponsoring partners impacts recall performance of the
new sponsor for years. The residual shared brand
equity from the original partnership can be viewed as
an asset of the departing sponsor but is a detriment to
the arriving sponsor in developing brand equity
through partnering with the sport/event brand.
Given the differences between traditional advertising
and brand collaboration approaches, alternative theorizing is needed to understand how brands brought
together in a communications platform become different
due to partnering. The current work is by no means the
first to argue that other brands influence a focal brand’s
potential. In 1998, Henderson, Iacobucci, and Calder
argued that understanding brand networks is useful to
brand managers and could be achieved with elicited
associations, but that this understanding is rarely developed or used. In 2001, Lederer and Hill argued that it is
insufficient to manage a brand as a stand-alone entity
when clearly a brand’s connectivity to the brands of
other companies influences customer brand perceptions.
These arguments—that other brands matter—are even
more important today given the expansion of brand collaborations and budgets devoted to them. What we have
not had over the past two decades is a theoretical construct, namely, shared brand equity, and a framework
that addresses its development.

Linked Knowledge: The Theoretical
Underpinning of Shared Equity
With the conceptual arguments for shared brand
equity introduced and grounded in the brand

315

collaboration context, we briefly review the underpinnings of our theorizing. We begin with a discussion of
three established recall paradigms of interest in examining shared brand equity. We then provide an
updated perspective on associative networks through
the discussion of four memory characteristics fundamental to recall for partners and their linkages. We
then use this understanding of paradigms and memory characteristics to develop our process model and
propositions.

Recall Paradigms of Interest
There are three major recall paradigms in the study of
memory (i.e., cued recall, paired associate learning,
and primed free association), and all are cue dependent. Humphreys and Chalmers (2016) provide substantial support for the importance of cues in
memory. The evidence reviewed by these authors
includes a study by Smith and Moynan (2008), which
shows that participants who experienced a highly salient and provocative event (e.g., studying a list of
swear words) could fail to remember the event unless
an appropriate cue was provided. One way to appreciate the cue-dependent nature of memory is to imagine
a college reunion. The usual experience is that many
memories of relatively trivial events, not thought
about in years, come flooding back in response to the
cues provided by the situation. A corollary of a cuedependent memory is that there will be many ways to
cue a well-learned concept that has occurred in many
different situations and is associated with many different concepts, as is the case in collaborative branding.
We briefly review these major paradigms.
Cued Recall with an Extralist Associate Cue
In this paradigm in psychology (see Humphreys, Bain,
and Pike 1989), participants study a list of unrelated
words and are then cued with a word which is meaningfully or associatively related to a studied word but
which was not on their list of studied words, thus
termed an “extralist” cue. This corresponds closely to
the situation where people are asked to recall a brand
placed in media programming. This is an instance of
deliberate recall, but the individuals probably cannot
use a contextual cue that specifies where they learned
the association between the program and the brand
unless they viewed the program recently. They can,
however, use other cues to home in on the brand in
that program. One possibility is that they use the concept of a brand as a cue in addition to the program cue

316

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

(Humphreys et al. 2010). For example, they might think
that brands placed in programming are usually product
brands, but this might make it harder to recall an
organization, such as the U.S. Army, as a brand.
Paired Associate Learning
The second paradigm is where a related pair of words
has been studied, and one member of the pair is provided as a cue (see Goss and Nodine 2014). This corresponds to the situation where someone who has just
watched an influencer on YouTube is asked to recall a
brand mentioned by the influencer. Here, it is likely
that the event context is used as a cue, but it is not
known whether the concept of a brand is also used.
Indeed, there may well be a mixture of different cues
used or different individual strategies used to support
memory in learning paired associates (see Martinez
and O’Rourke 2020).
Primed Free Association
The third paradigm is similar to cued recall with an
extralist cue in that there is a study opportunity, but
when the cue is presented in a study, the participant
is instructed to produce the first word that comes to
mind. In the instructions for the test, there is no mention of the preceding study opportunity. This is the
type of task utilized to learn the brands most associated with the Tokyo Olympics, where study participants were given blank space and asked to write the
brands that came to mind (Meyers 2021). This corresponds in daily life to encountering the brand or the
event on its own and spontaneously being reminded
of the pairing. In this task, there is presumably no cue
other than the brand or event involved.
All three of these research paradigms are utilized in
the study of brand collaborations. Free association is,
however, the method of interest to examine shared
brand equity and will be discussed subsequently. Free
association can capture the strength of a relationship
between two brands in memory; strength is, however,
also a nuanced phenomenon (see Nelson, Dyrdal, and
Goodmon 2005). Now we turn to measures in memory that underpin how shared brand equity might be
understood and the four memory characteristics stemming from research.

Associative Networks Background
Advances in understanding human memory have
been supported by the development of associative

databases. Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber (2004) used
data collected from U.S. respondents to produce the
University of South Florida Free Association Norms
(USF-FAN) database. It has 5,019 stimulus words and
has been cited thousands of times. The associative
networks of words (nouns 76%, adjectives 13%, verbs
7%) were determined using a free-association task
where individuals were shown a word and asked to
produce the first word that came to mind that was
meaningfully or associatively related. Responses were
discarded when only one person gave a particular
response, and the results were aggregated over
approximately 150 participants. The associative
strength between the cue and the target is then
defined as the percentage of participants who produce
the target given the cue.
The Small World of Words (SWOW-EN) database
(De Deyne et al. 2019), now the largest database of
word associations, has more than 12,000 cue words.
Unlike the USF-FAN database, the SWOW-EN database allows participants to provide multiple responses
to each cue. This work is ongoing and has been
expanded to include languages other than English.
Development of these and other free-association
databases has led to extensive research on memory.
Nelson et al. (2013) reviewed studies conducted utilizing word-association databases. In this review, they
highlighted the importance of four memory characteristics derived from free-association findings: forward
strength, backward strength, relative cue-to-distractor
strength, and neighborhood density. These four characteristic measures account for a substantial proportion of the variance in the recall paradigms discussed
and are briefly reviewed here.
Forward and Backward Strength
In memory, forward strength is defined as the probability that the cue elicits the target in free-association
norms, and backward strength is defined as the probability that the target elicits the cue in those norms
(Nelson et al. 2013). They are defined relative to a
particular memory retrieval task. For example, if chair
is used as a cue to recall table, the probability that
chair elicits table in free association is the forward
strength, and the probability that table elicits chair is
the backward strength. If, however, table is being used
to cue the retrieval of chair, the probability that table
elicits chair in free association is the forward strength,
and the probability that chair elicits table is the backward strength. Forward strength has a large positive

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

effect on the probability of recall, and backward
strength has a small positive effect.
As an example, brands in sponsoring often seek to
build awareness of the brand as a sponsor. Financial
services provider Visa is a long-term sponsor of the
Olympics, and the words Visa and Olympics have
been
repeatedly
paired
in
communications.
Nonetheless, in recall tasks, Visa could still be
expected to perform better in a forward strength test
with Visa as the cue (e.g., “What events does Visa
sponsor?”) than in a backward strength test with the
Olympics as the cue (e.g., “What brands sponsor
the Olympics?”).
Relative Cue-to-Distractor Strength
Relative cue-to-distractor strength is defined as the
number of associates of the cue that do not elicit the
target and are not elicited by the target divided by the
total number of associates of the cue (Nelson et al.
2013). These distractors represent concepts or meanings that are unrelated to the target. Relative cue-todistractor strength has a slightly negative effect on
recall. Keeping with the example of Visa sponsoring
the Olympics, Visa is also a long-term sponsor of the
National Football League (NFL) and FIFA World Cup
soccer. These sports brands are associates of the cue
Visa that may distract from recall of the Olympics as
a sponsored partner.
Neighborhood Density
Targets with more connectivity among their associates
have been shown to be more likely recognized and
recalled (Nelson et al. 1998). This phenomenon,
termed neighborhood density, is defined as the number of links between a target’s associates (nonzero
associative strengths) divided by the total number of
possible links. It has a small positive effect on recall.
It is related to relative cue-to-distractor strength,
which, as noted, refers to the relationship between the
cue and associates linked to the target and associates
not linked to the target. In contrast, neighborhood
density is purely a property of the target and its network. One can think of it as the coherency of the target concept. That is, it reflects the extent to which the
different meanings or nuances of meaning of the target cohere or do not cohere.
Theoretically, the role neighborhood density plays
is particularly important to marketing communications. In explaining how marketing and advertising
work, the spreading activation theory (Collins and

317

Loftus 1975) is often referenced. According to this
theory, when the target is studied, activation travels in
a stepwise fashion from the target out to associates
and among them and then, following the network
connections, returns back to the target. An alternative
account of how recall works is the activation-at-a-distance theory, and evidence supports it (Nelson et al.
2013). Activation-at-a-distance theory argues that the
target activates its representation and the associates in
its network at the same time. In this theoretical
account, the target is strengthened regardless of
whether activation returns to the target.
As an example, Gatorade sports drink is a coherent
target with a dense neighborhood of associations in
sports developed through hundreds of sponsorships
over several decades. When U.S. adults were given
“blank space to write the brands that came to mind
when they think of the Tokyo Olympics,” Gatorade
came to mind for 2% of respondents (Meyers 2021).
Gatorade was neither an event sponsor nor a U.S. team
partner for the Tokyo Olympics. “Neighborhood density theoretically measures primed target strength, on the
assumption that targets with higher neighborhood densities are primed to higher activation levels within the
semantic network” (Nelson et al. 2013, p. 799; emphasis
in original). Importantly, top Tokyo Olympic sponsors,
including Airbnb, Alibaba Group, Allianz, Atos,
Bridgestone, Intel, Omega, Panasonic, P&G, and
Samsung, did not make the list of participants’
responses, but Visa and Toyota did come to mind.
Neighborhood density and the activation-at-a-distance
theory provide an understanding of these outcomes.

Shared Brand Equity Development in Brand
Collaboration
With a summary of recall paradigms and an understanding of the fundamental memory characteristics
in mind, we now return to a discussion of shared
brand equity. The process of developing shared brand
equity in brand collaboration is depicted in Figure 1
as having three stages: partnership initiation, shared
equity development, and partner assemblage. Briefly,
two (or more) partners come into an agreement,
bringing their current brand relationships, depicted as
their respective portfolios, to the new partnership. The
central box in Figure 1 considers how shared equity is
developed via brand collaboration. Moderators of
shared equity such as partnership length and positive
and negative events are shown to influence shared
equity outcomes as well as the potential of how shared
brand equity might develop into the future (e.g., with

318

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

Figure 1. Mapping propositions in the process of building shared brand equity.

a further contract or via termination of the relationship). Figure 1 guides the organization of this discussion and the presentation of theoretical assumptions
and propositions.
Partnership Initiation
For an account of shared equity, one must take into
consideration the equity brought to the relationship
by each partner. Each partner enters a relationship
with a network of associates and associations built up
over time that are the essence of traditional discussions of brand equity. These links among associates
support recall of the target in a memory task, and this
connectivity (Nelson et al. 2013) contributes to neighborhood density. The starting point in Figure 1 brings
together the potential partners. The extent to which a
brand is already established in the linguistic community will determine the structure of associations on
which shared brand equity may be built (presuming
that there are not already established links between
partners, to be addressed subsequently). In basic psychological research, better connected words have a
greater ability to acquire new links, a phenomenon
referred to as “the rich get richer” (Mak and
Twitchell 2020).
Research on the importance of awareness in consumer decision making parallels findings in psychology. For example, a replication study of established
findings on the role of awareness shows that people
“choosing from a set of brands with marked

awareness differentials showed an overwhelming preference for the high awareness brand despite quality
and price differentials” (Macdonald and Sharp 2000,
p. 5). Negative or positive starting-state brand associations are brand associations regardless of valence. It is
self-evident that the starting equity of each partner
should influence the potential of the pair and is thus
a theoretical assumption.
Overlapping Associations
Across brand collaboration strategies, the role of congruence between partners has been and continues to
be researched. Congruence, the relatedness or compatibility between partners, is a central construct in
sponsorship (see Cornwell and Kwon 2020), celebrity
endorsement (e.g., Lee, Chang, and Zhang 2022),
influencer advertising (e.g., Kim and Kim 2021), product placement (see Russell 2019), cobranding (e.g.,
Nguyen, Romaniuk, et al. 2018), and human branding
(e.g., Mogaji et al. 2022). When athletic shoemaker
Adidas sponsors the Boston Marathon, there is a
functional match (i.e., people use this product for this
activity) between the brand and the event. Basically,
any source of overlapping associations will influence
shared equity. Each partner may independently hold
an associate such as “winner” or “finish line” that the
other partner holds. As well, there may be indirect
facilitating links, or mediators that join the cue and
target naturally (Nelson et al. 2013), such as ADIDASrunning-MARATHON. The value of congruence
between partners stemming from overlapping

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

associations has been positive in past research and
profound in sponsoring. But as sponsoring has
expanded, congruence has also been suggested as a
source of confusion (see Cornwell 2020, p. 209). Past
relationships by any member of a new collaboration
may bring with it other brand associations, even direct
competitor brands that may detract from the new
relationship.
Proposition 1. Starting state overlapping associations
held by partners contribute to the ability to build
shared equity but will detract from the focal collaboration if shared associations include noncollaboration brands.
Collaboration Portfolios
Because brand collaborations build strong associations
and brand-to-brand links, the extent of a brand’s
experience in collaborations is relevant. Collaboration
portfolios of Partner A and Partner B are featured in
Figure 1. For example, in cobranding, a firm’s financial outcomes are affected by their own and their partners’ alliance experiences, and each brand’s
collaboration experience is therefore included as a
variable of interest in studying the effectiveness of
cobranding (Cao and Yan 2017). A person, as brand,
holds an endorsement portfolio (Kelting and Rice
2013), and the nature of the person’s brand portfolio
influences each member brand’s communications
potential. Similarly, brands in sponsoring hold a portfolio of properties, and properties have a roster
of supporters.
Research on brand portfolio coherence (where subbrands share a common underlying logic of features)
suggests that coherence improves consumer response
to brands (Nguyen, Zhang, et al. 2018). Applying this
finding to shared brand equity, coherent connectivity
of partners’ collaboration portfolios should set the
potential for a new relationship. Current relationships
within collaboration portfolios would be expected to
have the most profound influence on the development
of shared brand equity, but the role of past relationships cannot be excluded. This corresponds to the
introduced activation-at-a-distance theorizing, where
the target in a recall task activates the representation
of the target and all the associates that comprise its
network in parallel (Nelson et al. 2013), which supports recall.
Proposition 2. The extent to which the partners’ collaboration portfolios have coherent connectivity within
their respective portfolios contributes to their ability to
develop shared brand equity.

319

Shared Equity Development
Naturally, investments in advertising and communications can support the development of shared brand
equity and will be discussed. Although the relationship between spending and communication success
cannot be viewed as a given, the more theoretically
interesting question is how to invest. We first consider
investments in individual and shared activities and
discuss their roles in building shared brand equity.
We also discuss the detracting roles of similarity and
active interference in building shared brand equity.
Building Activities
New learning capitalizes on old learning (e.g., Mak
and Twitchell 2020; Tehan 2010). In short, associations held by each partner, such as those developed in
advertising, become potential shared brand associates
that are the basis of shared brand equity. Based on
both memory and advertising research, it is highly
likely that repetition, frequency of exposure (Schmidt
and Eisend 2015), variation in communications
(Janiszewski, Noel, and Sawyer 2003), and spacing
(i.e., the interval between one ad and the next;
Janiszewski, Noel, and Sawyer 2003) strengthen each
partner and potential associations between partner
networks. Importantly, individual activities that build
associations for one partner (without association to
the other partner) hold the potential to increase recall
through neighborhood density.
From associative accounts of word learning, we know
that new linkages are built between words and concepts
by experience in context. As an innovative example,
Sloutsky et al. (2017) studied young children and adults
and examined how syntagmatic associations (i.e., links
between words that co-occur in close temporal proximity: “furry cat”) and paradigmatic associations (i.e., links
between words that belong to the same grammatical
class: “cat and dog”) are formed. The researchers agree
that some learning occurs when a child points to an
object, and the adult names that object. They argue, however, that this cannot account for the bulk of word learning, as it does not account for the learning of abstract
words, such as love, or of entities that cannot be seen,
such as air. Instead, they argue that most word learning
must come from the context in which words occur.
Overall, semantic memory is viewed as a fluid and flexible system that is sensitive to context, situational
demands, as well as perceptual and sensory information
coming from the environment (Kumar 2021)
Importantly, in brand collaborations, individuals
establish associative strength from implicit learning in
contexts that surround brands. This implicit learning

320

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

could take place when activities surrounding a partnership bring a product brand and a branded activity
together (Simmons and Becker-Olsen 2006) or when
brands engage in thematically tied advertising where
partner brands are represented in an ad (Kelly et al.
2012). Joint activities, where the brands are communicated together, hold the potential to build forward
and backward strength as well as neighborhood density, and the aforementioned coherent connectivity.
That said, starting brand equity may result in lopsided
outcomes in brand collaborations. Cobranding
research finds that brand evaluations for well-known
brands and less-known brands depend on when
cobranding information is presented (Cunha,
Forehand, and Angle 2015). Similarly, well-known
celebrities can overshadow brand partners and reduce
recall for the product (Erfgen, Zenker, and Sattler
2015). In sponsorship, high-equity brands are perceived as more congruent sponsors than low-equity
brands in the same brand category (Roy and Cornwell
2003). These findings are likely due to the extensive
associative networks large brands have that hold many
points of connection for partner event brands. In
another example of size dominance, research on
human brands in the context of fashion houses and
designers finds that there is a dilution of an individual
designer’s professional brand resulting from entangled
associations between the designer and the house
(Parmentier and Fischer 2021).
Proposition 3. Contributions of individual and joint
activities to shared brand equity depend on starting
partner equity, and thus neighborhood density, with
small equity brands less able to build shared brand
equity through activities than large equity brands.
Detracting Activities
In building shared brand equity, it is also important to
understand what may be detracting (see Figure 1).
Advertising repetition has been shown to be most successful when there is little or no advertising for similar
products in the context (Burke and Srull 1988). Similar
competing brands are confused in memory tasks.
In sponsorship, support for this conjecture comes
from demonstrations that after studying a paragraph
announcing a sponsorship arrangement between a
well-known brand and a fictitious event, people sometimes substitute a direct competitor for the actual
sponsor (Humphreys et al. 2010). Weeks, Humphreys,
and Cornwell (2018) expanded on these findings by
taking into consideration the difference between item
and relational information (Einstein and Hunt 1980;
Humphreys 1976). Item information is information

that differentiates between items (e.g., brands), while
relational information is information that links two or
more items. They reasoned that provision of relational
information for a congruent relationship would
increase the probability of recalling the event, given
the competitor as a cue because this relational information would often apply to a competitor as well as
to the sponsor. In Experiment 2 of their work, following exposure to press releases, participants were told
to use the brand to recall the event. Unbeknownst to
the participants, some of the cues were competitors of
the named sponsor. Under these circumstances, having provided relational information about the sponsor-event partnership increased recall of the event,
given the competitor as a cue. However, having provided item information differentiating the sponsor
and its competitor protected against these errors.
Brands that are competitors have many similarities,
causing confusion errors in recognition and allowing a
competitor to substitute for the focal brand. Further,
brand collaborations can develop bindings that may
cause confusion across categories. For example, following a five-year cobranding relationship between equipment manufacturer Peloton and athletic apparel
Lululemon Athletica, the two partners became embroiled
in lawsuits. The legal actions began when Peloton
launched a line of their own fitness apparel. Lululemon
argued that selling Peloton products through the same
retail outlets as were used to sell the cobranded
Lululemon products may be misleading (Ping 2021).
Here Lululemon as a strong associate of Peloton (because
of cobranding) might come to mind and be thought of
as the fitness apparel provider. This is in keeping with
research that shows forward and backward associative
strength can indicate the extent to which similarity
causes confusion or false memories (Arndt 2015).
Across collaboration platforms, similarity and interference can be seen as detracting from shared brand
equity. In cobranding, research finds that advertising
using brands from two categories has a negative effect
on brand memorability and that the advertisement’s
category context, when congruent, supports brand
recall (Nguyen, Romaniuk, et al. 2018). In human
branding endorsement portfolios, brands with a high or
low match with the celebrity are more accurately
recalled than brands having a moderate match with the
celebrity (Kelting and Rice 2013). The researchers argue
that the associative strength of high- and low-matching
brands influences recall through extremity of the link.
Coherence of high-match brands and the inconsistency
of low-match brands drive attention and thus recall. In
brand placement, active interference from a nonpartner

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

brand has also been identified. In the context of an
advertiser-funded program, where programming is
built around a brand, program liking positively impacts
viewer attitude toward the main competitor of the
brand funding the program (Verhellen et al. 2016). The
researchers found the strong fit between the program
and the funder guarded somewhat against this confusion. The role of interference from multiple brands in
product placement has been argued as important for
future research (Russell 2019).
In sponsoring, active interference often comes from
nonpartner brands. Ambush marketing is a form of
associative marketing where a nonsponsoring brand
seeks to capitalize on awareness and attention by associating with an event or activity (Chadwick and
Burton 2011). Ambushing tends to have adverse
effects on recall and recognition (Kelly, Cornwell, and
Singh 2019), but counterintuitively, some associations
that would seem interfering can support memory.
Cornwell et al. (2012) had participants read simulated
press releases announcing a known brand sponsoring
a fictitious event. In half the press releases, a competitor was also mentioned as having lost in a competition to be the sponsor. The surprising finding from
this study was that the mention of the competitor in
the press release increased the recall of the sponsor.
The explanation put forward by the authors was that
one might think at encoding or retrieval, “Ah, this
one is [a competitor or] an ambusher,” and this might
support memory of the true sponsor.
To summarize, much, if not most, forgetting is due
to associative interference. The traditional idea is
when a single cue is associated with two or more targets, referred to as cue overload (Watkins and
Watkins 1976), memory errors are likely. Work conducted in various paradigms finds that interference
does not overwrite remembered information but can
limit access to it (see Cohn and Moscovitch 2007;
Dyne et al. 1990; Verde 2010); thus, cues utilized to
retrieve established information must be clarifying.
Proposition 4. Similarity to and active interference
from partner or nonpartner brands reduces shared
brand equity when cue overload results in confusion
but supports shared equity when nonpartner brands
cue context, novelty, or clarifying information at encoding or retrieval.
Moderation
Several moderating variables may influence the
strength or direction of shared equity development.
Many moderators could be imagined. We will

321

consider examples of moderators argued to play supporting and detracting roles in shared brand equity
development.
Length of Partnership
Just like in long-running, consistent advertising campaigns (e.g., Braun-LaTour and LaTour 2004), longterm relationships in collaborative branding support
memory (e.g., Walraven, Bijmolt, and Koning 2014).
Straightforwardly, the longer the partnership, the
greater the strength of the forward and backward
associations, assuming almost any reasonable attempt
to link the two brands. Moreover, long-term common
usage in the linguistic community will result in representations with a high degree of consensus in meaning. When a partnership ends, the persistence of
shared equity will be directly related to the duration
of the partnership (see McAlister et al. 2012).
Proposition 5. The longer the partnership, the more
forward and backward cueing is strengthened, and the
more consensus of meaning is established in the linguistic community; thus, the greater the developed shared
equity and the greater the extent and duration of
residual equity if the relationship is terminated.
Affect in Shared Brand Equity
Affect has been conceived of as an “umbrella for a set
of more specific mental processes including emotions,
moods, and (possibly) attitudes” (Bagozzi, Gopinath,
and Nyer 1999, p. 184). Past theorizing regarding consumer-based brand equity finds favorability of brand
associations is important in building positive consumer-based brand equity (Keller 1993, p. 5). On the
other hand, negative affect produces unfavorable
brand associations and is detrimental to attitudes
(Chaudhuri and Holbrook 2001). Limited research in
sponsorship suggests that repeated visual images with
negative (e.g., skiing accident) or positive (e.g., winners’ circle) valence in sports do influence the attitudinal response to sponsors in keeping with the
valence of the images (Cornwell, Lipp, and Purkis
2016). From research in psychology, we know that
affect supports recognition because affective events are
more richly experienced in memory (Ochsner 2000).
We also know that emotions can support memory for
information that is thought to be central to an event
through attentiveness and impair memory for peripheral information (Levine and Edelstein 2009). Further,
both positive and negative emotional stimuli have the
potential to influence memory for details (Chipchase
and Chapman 2013).

322

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

In psychology, early work by Schachter and Singer
(1962) argued that the compendium of physiological,
semantic, and perceptual experience comes together as
an emotional state. With repetition, details of these experiences drop out or become attenuated, with what
remains being an emotional category of something we
know, such as fear, excitement, or joy (see Barrett,
Lindquist, and Gendron 2007; Lindquist, Satpute, and
Gendron 2015). This role of emotion in the context of
shared equity could be illustrated with celebrity endorser
Naomi Osaka and the emotion of admiration. When the
tennis player withdrew from the French Open event in
2021, citing her own mental health and well-being
(Gregory 2021), individuals watching the event or reading about her actions may have had varied experiences
of admiration. As brand partners articulated admiration
and understanding of her actions, the potential for an
associative link was built. Admiration, as an associate of
the player Osaka and of her brand partners, helps support memory for each partner and their relationship.
There are, however, challenges in incorporating
affect into a measurement model of shared brand
equity. Negative events increase the potential to
cement in memory the forward and backward
strength between two brands because they draw attention to the relationship and likely come with repeated
reinforcing exposures to the brand pairing. Negative
valence of an event may detract from the positive
influence of the event in the near term, but over time
it may simply become associative as the gist of a relationship is retained but not the valence.
In short, at least three aspects of affect must be considered important in shared equity. First, affect, in the
main, supports memory through attentiveness. Second,
repeated affective experiences and messaging can result
in emotional categories (e.g., admiration) that might
serve as linking concepts in recall and recognition.
Finally, affective links influence attitudes in keeping
with their valence, but both positive and negative affective events influence memory positively over time.
Proposition 6. Positive events increase shared equity
in terms of attitude and memory, whereas negative
events reduce shared equity in terms of attitude in the
short term but support shared equity over time through
increased forward and backward associative strength
irrespective of valence.
Partner Assemblage
Shared Equity Investing
Advertising research has, for the most part, been concerned with short-term to medium-term response to

largely one-way communications. Shared brand equity
is important over an extended time horizon.
Influencer marketing in social media may be measured in weeks, but advertising campaigns featuring
celebrity endorsers or utilizing brand placement are
typically two or three years in length. Contrast this to
six- or 10-year team sponsorships or 30-year stadium
sponsorships. In the main, advertising research is
understandably oriented to relatively short-term measures of effectiveness, but long-term perspectives are
informative. For example, Hansen, Kupfer, and
Hennig-Thurau (2018) studied social media firestorms
and found significant long-term effects for brands.
Their research built a two-year database that discovered data points where the term “shitstorm” was combined with a brand name. Their findings showed that
40% of brands face long-term negative consequences
from the firestorm (p. 566).
With the need for long-term measurement in
mind, we need to look to research in other areas to
inform expectations of long-term relationships.
Bahrick (1984) studied retention of Spanish learned in
school as long as 50 years ago. Testing showed that
large portions of originally acquired information are
available (even without practice or use) after 50 years.
Bahrick argued that the transition of information into
a “permastore” state occurs during the extended
period of original training. This finding hints at an
important process for shared brand equity: The transition from memories of individual episodes to a network of long-term associations in semantic memory.
There is considerable interest in the process by which
episodic memories become semantic memories
(Kumar 2021). Brands that extend their relationships
build equity over time and may specifically increase
their backward strength from the program, person, or
event to the brand as they crowd out less-involved
brands in the context.
Proposition 7. Continuation of a partnership with
varied investments into the future enhances shared
equity and, in particular, backward associative strength
from various touchpoints in the collaboration.
Residual Shared Equity
Advertising associations acquired by a brand are
known to have carryover effects that extend beyond
the active advertising period (Lodish et al. 1995). In
discussing the celebrity capital life cycle, Carrillat and
Ilicic (2019) suggest that brands with strong relationships in the past might stage a resurgence plan. The
authors offer the example of child star Neil Patrick
Harris and his leading role in the 1990s TV series

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

Doogie Howser, M.D., which were years later utilized
in a series of ads for the personal care brand Old
Spice. The comical advertising referenced the actor’s
fictional role as a child medical doctor in the Old
Spice ads. In terms of shared brand equity, the original partners, Harris and the Doogie Howser, M.D.
program, were paired with a third brand, Old Spice,
to activate and utilize residual shared brand equity.
In sponsorship, the persistence of shared brand
equity has also been demonstrated. McAlister et al.
(2012) utilized a classic paradigm from psychology to
study how a sponsorship relationship that has ended,
even when the sponsored property has gone on to
form a relationship with a new sponsor, persists in
memory. The researchers argued that an old sponsor
would be spontaneously recovered from memory (see
Brown 1976; Wheeler 1995) because contexts that
shift over time are utilized in making recall and recognition decisions (Dennis and Humphreys 2001). The
new sponsor may lose its retrieval advantage over the
old sponsor when the context of the new sponsorship
is less available as a cue.
McAlister et al. (2012) studied four sponsoring
contexts where a former sponsorship relationship had
ended and a new relationship had begun. For each
sponsorship, two independent samples six months
apart were asked to recall (not recognize) the current
major sponsor and subsequently to recall the previous
major sponsor. Importantly for each sponsorship relationship, the data were collected around the time of
the event, and the prior sponsor held a long-term
relationship. Summing across the four events, at the
time of the event the new sponsor was correctly
recalled as the current sponsor 35% of the time,
whereas the prior sponsor was incorrectly recalled
approximately 17% of the time. In contrast, after a
six-month delay and away from the time that the new
sponsor and its associations were being activated by
the event, 20% of the new replacement sponsors were
recalled, whereas 42% of the replaced old sponsors
were recalled. In some instances, the new sponsor had
replaced the prior sponsor for more than a decade,
but the prior sponsor was still remembered.
Similar supporting evidence of the persistence of
sponsorship-based associations comes from Edeling,
Hattula, and Bornemann (2017) and their study of 33
German soccer sponsorship relationships. These
authors find that the duration of an original sponsorship relationship influences correct recall decades
later. This is consistent with the theorizing of Nelson
et al. (2013) in that the quality of the initial encoding
was likely supported by a long-term relationship.

323

Their hypothesized relationship between recall of a
past sponsor and the number of subsequent sponsorships with “other congruent objects” reduced recall
for the focal past sponsor. While this is interpreted as
interference-based forgetting and an overwriting of
stored information, the results are also consistent with
the logic of a crowded neighborhood and a failure of
access (Tulving and Pearlstone 1966). This logic then
suggests that information regarding the focal sponsor
is there, available, and not overwritten but less accessible due to subsequent sponsor relationships.
Proposition 8. The strength and duration of residual
shared equity, without continued investment, depends
on the length of the original relationship, the extent of
joint marketing communications, and the nature of
subsequent relationships held by the partners.

Measurement
Measurement in Brand Collaboration
For any construct, measurement is essential.
Measuring the effects of brand collaborations in specific areas has a long tradition and is an active stream
of research. Research finds that tourists increase their
search behavior and intent to visit a location when
exposed to joint brand advertising rather than single
brand advertising. (Can et al. 2020). In terms of memory, cobranded advertising has been shown to have a
negative effect on brand memorability due to interference (Nguyen, Romaniuk, et al. 2018). Using secondary data, Yang, Shi, and Goldfarb (2009) estimated the
value of brand alliances between athlete brands and
sports team brands in basketball and found that the
highest value for the collaboration comes between top
players and medium brand equity teams. These examples highlight the interest in measuring the outcomes
of shared brand equity, but not the construct of
shared brand equity.
Measuring Shared Brand Equity
Studies of semantic memory in cognitive science utilize three models: (1) associative-network models using
various semantic network databases, including freeassociation norms that orient to the association
between words; (2) feature-based models where databases develop feature norms based on binary features
(e.g., birds have wings; cars do not); and (3) distributional semantic models built by extracting regularities
from a corpus of natural language and inferring associations between words and concepts (Kumar 2021).

324

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

The first of these approaches, based on elicited human
free associations, and the last, based on inferred associations from the corpus of text, are discussed as useful in the study of shared brand equity. Feature-based
models are not discussed further due to the lack of a
systematic way to measure features (see Kumar 2021).
Solicited Free-Association Norms
Use of associative strength as a measure of shared
brand equity would require adjustments to the procedures previously utilized in psychology. Unlike in
psychology, where words are normed for associates
with broad human knowledge networks in mind, participants in advertising and marketing would need to
be oriented toward the context of interest (e.g., sports,
arts, entertainment). Orienting instructions might be
supplied or, if data were collected in a relevant context, contextual cues might provide adequate orienting. Then the simple task asks approximately 150
participants to respond to each cue with the first
word that comes to mind. The conditional probability
of a response given a cue is the forward associative
strength (FAS) that binds the cue and response.
Similarly, backward associative strength (BAS) can be
assessed following the assessment of FAS. For
example, Arndt (2015, p. 1099) uses the word task to
exemplify associative strength: The most frequent
response is job (FAS ¼ .370); the second, third, and
fourth associates are chore (FAS ¼ .145), duty (FAS ¼
.055), and force (FAS ¼ .032). The FASs sum to less
than 1, and idiosyncratic responses and failures to
respond account for the remainder. The BAS is, for
example, the ability of duty as a cue to produce task
(BAS ¼ .027)
If one wanted to know how effective Brand A
would be as a cue for Brand B (and vice versa), one
would start with collecting the associates of Brands A
and B. Then one would have to collect the associates
of all their associates, though the total number of
associates is unlikely to be large (e.g., less than 30 as
seen in word norms) because every participant produces only a single associate to each cue, and there is
likely to be substantial agreement in the associates
produced across participants. What is produced for
the free-association test will depend on the context,
which will include the other items tested. Collecting
data directly from humans experiencing brands in
context offers free association, norming the advantage
of grounding the approach in actual human perceptions (Harnad 1990). We will return to this topic
when discussing inferred associations from text.

How can a shared brand equity measure inform
research and practice? As an example, consider the
“vampire effect” (Erfgen, Zenker, and Sattler 2015),
where a celebrity endorser overshadows the brand
partner because “a well-known celebrity might activate
certain associations in consumers’ memories, whereas
an unknown endorser cannot, because he or she
invokes no cognitive schema” (p. 156). A celebrity
endorser is typically employed to elevate awareness of
a brand and to associate the characteristics of the
celebrity brand with the product brand. This process
could be monitored by considering their shared brand
equity over time. If forward associative strength from
the endorser brand to the product brand develops
over time, but backward associative strength from the
product brand to the endorser brand does not rise, it
suggests that activation of the celebrity brand primes
recall of the product brand, but activation of the
product brand does not prime recall of the celebrity.
Characteristics (e.g., associations such as “cool”) of
the celebrity brand may not be developing as shared
associations of the product brand.

Inferred Associations from Text
Another measurement approach that may be useful in
studying shared brand equity is text analysis. Text
corpora (e.g., books, newspapers, online articles) are
thought to be a good proxy for the language people
experience in their lives (Kumar 2021). Developments
in computational semantic networks—extracted from
text corpora—have been used to investigate both the
structure of semantic memory and retrieval processes
(Kumar, Steyvers, and Balota 2022). The use of secondary data from downloadable text sources holds
appeal in the study of shared brand equity due to
their variety and availability (e.g., news, advertisements, scrapped social media posts). Text sources,
even though written by humans, have the disadvantage of being distant from perceptual experiences.
This shortcoming in grounding symbols to human
experience (Harnad 1990) is being addressed in part
with multimodal distributional semantic networks. For
example, Bruni, Tran, and Baroni (2014) have developed computer vision techniques that can produce
“visual words” to identify patterns in images, thus
allowing the distributional representation of a word in
a text corpus to be matched with co-occurrence of
images associated with words (p. 1). This development
is particularly relevant to the measurement of shared
brand equity.

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

Discussion and Future Directions
Research, as well as industry practice, needs a strong
theoretical understanding of shared brand equity in
terms of development, effects, and long-term persistence. Stemming from work in marketing on brand
equity, work in psychology on memory, and work
developing free-association norms, the current work
builds a theory of shared brand equity and makes it
concrete through application to the contexts of brand
collaboration. Contributions toward the four goals
declared at the onset—namely, introduction to shared
brand equity theory, demonstration of its explanatory
capacity, provision of a process model and propositions, and suggestions for managers—are summarized
in the following sections.
Theory Contribution
In their call for advertising research on awareness as a
construct, Bergkvist and Taylor (2022) review publications in the Journal of Advertising, International Journal
of Advertising, and Journal of Advertising Research for
articles that include the terms awareness, recall, or recognition. Of the 337 articles having included one of the
three search terms, only 136 include some measure of
brand awareness. These 136 publications represent
5.2% of the total articles retrieved (p. 7). Given the
underlying importance of awareness to advertising and
marketing communications, the authors argue that
there needs to be a reinvestment in this space.
The introduction of this provoking theory of shared
brand equity, which accounts for findings from a range
of brand collaboration platforms, calls into question
long-standing assumptions about how brands build
equity, and lays the groundwork for future research, is
long overdue. In 2003, Nelson, McEvoy, and Pointer
published an article titled “Spreading Activation or
Spooky Action at a Distance.” In this work, they admitted to their own surprise that the resonance to preexisting links (a concept central to spreading activation
theory) was not necessary to improve recall. They at
first believed the findings must be a fluke. Referring to
their earlier work (Nelson et al. 1998), the authors
“found it difficult to believe that associative links could
affect memory for the target in the absence of links
coming back to it” (Nelson, McEvoy, and Pointer 2003,
49). Their subsequent work solidified this finding
(Nelson et al. 2013). As a field, we have been slow to
integrate new findings from psychology into our understanding of how advertising and marketing communications work. The construct of shared brand equity is
consequential in understanding recall results in brand

325

collaboration platforms. Theorizing regarding shared
brand equity can account for past findings, in part
through theoretical contributions such as activation-ata-distance theory (Nelson et al. 2013), and the propositions introduced can guide future research.
Managerial Value
Understanding the starting points, development, and
long-term outcomes of shared brand equity is important for brand managers engaging in brand collaboration platforms. From the developed process model,
clearly starting brand equity is critical in developing
shared brand equity, and the advantages and disadvantages of being a large or small brand are largely
understood. Strategies are perhaps not informed, however, regarding the challenge of lopsided associative
strength. Fortunately, brands could monitor the development of backward associative strength on a regular
basis through free-association norms.
One of the least recognized aspects of shared brand
equity is best illustrated with the evidence that terminated sponsorship relationships still influence recall for
new and old sponsors years later (Edeling, Hattula, and
Bornemann 2017; McAlister et al. 2012). Any brand
beginning a partnership should assess the shared brand
equity developed through past relationships that will
influence their communications into the future.
Similarly, brand managers may be unaware of the longterm impact of negative events or social media firestorms caused by a past or current partner, but keywords arising in free associations or from text analysis
could gauge any continued unwanted associations.
The theoretical construct of shared brand equity is
needed in research and practice to better model the
phenomenon of influential associative links developed
via popular marketing communication platforms. To
ignore shared brand equity is to avoid eye contact
with phenomena that influence research designs, marketing activities, and human behavior. To fully
account for shared brand equity is a monumental
task. The memory-based provoking theory provided
here is a starting point.

Acknowledgments
This work is dedicated to Professor Michael S. Humphreys,
a theoretical memory researcher who valued learning from
and working in applied fields. Thank you to Noelle Nelson
for comments on an early draft of this work, Jenny Burt for
comments on the penultimate version, and to the Journal of
Advertising review team for their thoughtful comments on
this manuscript.

326

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

Funding
While completing this work, T. Bettina Cornwell was supported by the Philip H. Knight Chair.

ORCID
T. Bettina Cornwell
http://orcid.org/0000-00015686-7875
Youngbum Kwon
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1222-6448

References
Aaker, D. A. 1991. Managing Brand Equity: Capitalizing on
the Value of a Brand Name. New York, NY: Free Press.
Ailawadi, K. L., D. R. Lehmann, and S. A. Neslin. 2003.
“Revenue Premium as an Outcome Measure of Brand
Equity.” Journal of Marketing 67 (4):1–17. doi:10.1509/
jmkg.67.4.1.18688
Anderson, J. R., and G. H. Bower. 2014. Human Associative
Memory. New York: Psychology Press.
Arndt, J. 2015. “The Influence of Forward and Backward
Associative Strength on False Memories for Encoding
Context.” Memory (Hove, England) 23 (7):1093–111. doi:
10.1080/09658211.2014.959527
Bagozzi, R. P., M. Gopinath, and P. U. Nyer. 1999. “The
Role of Emotions in Marketing.” Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science 27 (2):184–206. doi:10.1177/
0092070399272005
Bahrick, H. P. 1984. “Semantic Memory Content in
Permastore: Fifty Years of Memory for Spanish Learned
in School.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
113 (1):1–29. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.113.1.1
Balasubramanian, S. K. 1994. “Beyond Advertising and
Publicity: Hybrid Messages and Public Policy Issues.”
Journal of Advertising 23 (4):29–46. doi:10.1080/
00913367.1943.10673457
Barrett, L. F., K. A. Lindquist, and M. Gendron. 2007.
“Language as Context for the Perception of Emotion.”
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (8):327–32. doi:10.1016/j.
tics.2007.06.003
Bergkvist, L., and C. R. Taylor. 2022. “Reviving and
Improving Brand Awareness as a Construct in
Advertising Research.” Journal of Advertising 51 (3):
294–307. DOI: 10.1080/00913367.2022.2039886
Bergkvist, L., and K. Q. Zhou. 2016. “Celebrity
Endorsements: A Literature Review and Research
Agenda.” International Journal of Advertising 35 (4):
642–63. doi:10.1080/02650487.2015.1137537
Berry, L. L. 2000. “Cultivating Service Brand Equity.”
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 28 (1):
128–37. doi:10.1177/0092070300281012
Besharat, A., and R. Langan. 2014. “Towards the Formation
of Consensus in the Domain of Co-Branding: Current
Findings and Future Priorities.” Journal of Brand
Management 21 (2):112–32. doi:10.1057/bm.2013.25
Braun-LaTour, K. A., and M. S. LaTour. 2004. “Assessing
the Long-Term Impact of a Consistent Advertising
Campaign on Consumer Memory.” Journal of
Advertising 33 (2):49–61. doi:10.1080/00913367.2004.
10639160

Bright, A. K., and A. Feeney. 2014. “The Engine of Thought
Is a Hybrid: Roles of Associative and Structured
Knowledge in Reasoning.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology. General 143 (6):2082–102. doi:10.1037/
a0037653
Brown, A. S. 1976. “Spontaneous Recovery in Human
Learning.” Psychological Bulletin 83 (2):321–38. doi:10.
1037/0033-2909.83.2.321
Bruni, E., N. K. Tran, and M. Baroni. 2014. “Multimodal
Distributional
Semantics.”
Journal
of
Artificial
Intelligence Research 49:1–47. doi:10.1613/jair.4135
Burke, R. R., and T. K. Srull. 1988. “Competitive
Interference and Consumer Memory for Advertising.”
Journal of Consumer Research 15 (1):55–68. doi:10.1086/
209145
Can, A. S., Y. Ekinci, G. Viglia, and D. Buhalis. 2020.
“Stronger Together? Tourists’ Behavioral Responses to
Joint Brand Advertising.” Journal of Advertising 49 (5):
525–39. doi:10.1080/00913367.2020.1809574
Cao, Z., and R. Yan. 2017. “Does Brand Partnership Create
a Happy Marriage? The Role of Brand Value on Brand
Alliance Outcomes of Partners.” Industrial Marketing
Management 67:148–57. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.
09.013
Carrillat, F. A., and J. Ilicic. 2019. “The Celebrity Capital
Life Cycle: A Framework for Future Research Directions
on Celebrity Endorsement.” Journal of Advertising 48 (1):
61–71. doi:10.1080/00913367.2019.1579689
Chadwick, S., and N. Burton. 2011. “The Evolving
Sophistication of Ambush Marketing: A Typology of
Strategies.” Thunderbird International Business Review 53
(6):709–19. doi:10.1002/tie.20447
Chaudhuri, A., and M. B. Holbrook. 2001. “The Chain of
Effects from Brand Trust and Brand Affect to Brand
Performance: The Role of Brand Loyalty.” Journal of
Marketing 65 (2):81–93. doi:10.1509/jmkg.65.2.81.18255
Chipchase, S. Y., and P. Chapman. 2013. “Trade-Offs in
Visual Attention and the Enhancement of Memory
Specificity for Positive and Negative Emotional Stimuli.”
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology (2006) 66
(2):277–98. doi:10.1080/17470218.2012.707664
Cohn, M., and M. Moscovitch. 2007. “Dissociating
Measures of Associative Memory: Evidence and
Theoretical Implications.” Journal of Memory and
Language 57 (3):437–54. doi:10.1016/j.jml.2007.06.006
Collins, A. M., and E. F. Loftus. 1975. “A SpreadingActivation Theory of Semantic Processing.” Psychological
Review 82 (6):407–28. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.82.6.407
Cornejo, C. 2004. “Who Says What the Words Say? The
Problem of Linguistic Meaning in Psychology.” Theory &
Psychology 14 (1):5–28. doi:10.1177/0959354304040196
Cornwell, T. B. 2020. Sponsorship in Marketing: Effective
Partnerships in Sports, Arts and Events. London:
Routledge.
Cornwell, T. B., M. S. Humphreys, E. A. Quinn, and A. R.
McAlister. 2012. “Memory of Sponsorship-Linked
Marketing Communications: The Effect of Competitor
Mentions.” Sage Open 2 (4):215824401246813. doi:10.
1177/2158244012468139
Cornwell, T. B., and H. Katz. 2021. Influencer: The Science
behind Swaying Others. New York: Routledge.

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

Cornwell, T. B., and Y. Kwon. 2020. “Sponsorship-Linked
Marketing: Research Surpluses and Shortages.” Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 48 (4):607–29. doi:10.
1007/s11747-019-00654-w
Cornwell, T. B., O. V. Lipp, and H. Purkis. 2016.
“Examination of Affective Responses to Images in
Sponsorship-Linked Marketing.” Journal of Global Sport
Management 1 (3-4):110–28. doi:10.1080/24704067.2016.
1240947
Cunha, M., Jr., M. R. Forehand, and J. W. Angle. 2015.
“Riding Coattails: When Co-Branding Helps versus
Hurts Less-Known Brands.” Journal of Consumer
Research 41 (5):1284–300. doi:10.1086/679119
De Deyne, S., D. J. Navarro, A. Perfors, M. Brysbaert, and
G. Storms. 2019. “The “Small World of Words” English
Word Association Norms for over 12,000 Cue Words.”
Behavior Research Methods 51 (3):987–1006. doi:10.3758/
s13428-018-1115-7
De Veirman, M., V. Cauberghe, and L. Hudders. 2017.
“Marketing through Instagram Influencers: The Impact
of Number of Followers and Product Divergence on
Brand Attitude.” International Journal of Advertising 36
(5):798–828. doi:10.1080/02650487.2017.1348035
Dennis, S., and M. S. Humphreys. 2001. “A Context Noise
Model of Episodic Word Recognition.” Psychological
Review 108 (2):452–78. doi:10.1037/0033-295x.108.2.452
Donthu, N., W. M. Lim, S. Kumar, and D. Pattnaik. 2022.
“The Journal of Advertising’s Production and
Dissemination of Advertising Knowledge: A 50th
Anniversary Commemorative Review.” Journal of
Advertising 51 (2):153–87. DOI: 10.1080/00913367.2021.
2006100
Dyne, A. M., M. S. Humphreys, J. D. Bain, and R. Pike.
1990. “Associative Interference Effects in Recognition
and Recall.” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 16 (5):813–24. doi:10.
1037/0278-7393.16.5.813
Edeling, A., S. Hattula, and T. Bornemann. 2017. “Over,
out, but Present: Recalling Former Sponsorships.”
European Journal of Marketing 51 (7/8):1286–307. doi:10.
1108/EJM-05-2015-0263
Einstein, G. O., and R. R. Hunt. 1980. “Levels of Processing
and Organization: Additive Effects of Individual-Item
and Relational Processing.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 6 (5):588–98.
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.6.5.588
Erfgen, C., S. Zenker, and H. Sattler. 2015. “The Vampire
Effect: When Do Celebrity Endorsers Harm Brand
Recall?” International Journal of Research in Marketing
32 (2):155–63. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2014.12.002
Farquhar, P. H. 1989. “Managing Brand Equity.” Marketing
Research 1 (3):24–33.
Goss, A. E., and C. F. Nodine. 2014. Paired-Associates
Learning: The Role of Meaningfulness, Similarity, and
Familiarization. New York: Academic Press.
Gregory, S. 2021. “Brands Continue to Back Naomi Osaka,
Showing an evolution in How Sponsors Treat Athletes.”
Time.com, June 7. https://time.com/6071645/naomiosaka-french-open-sponsors-brands/.
Gumperz, J. J. 1962. “Types of Linguistic Communities.”
Anthropological Linguistics 4 (1):28–40.

327

Hansen, N., A. K. Kupfer, and T. Hennig-Thurau. 2018.
“Brand Crises in the Digital Age: The Short-and LongTerm Effects of Social Media Firestorms on Consumers
and Brands.” International Journal of Research in
Marketing 35 (4):557–74. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2018.08.
001
Harnad, S. 1990. “The Symbol Grounding Problem.”
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 42 (1-3):335–46. doi:10.
1016/0167-2789(90)90087-6
Henderson, G. R., D. Iacobucci, and B. J. Calder. 1998.
“Brand Diagnostics: Mapping Branding Effects Using
Consumer Associative Networks.” European Journal of
Operational Research 111 (2):306–27. doi:10.1016/S03772217(98)00151-9
Hillebrand, B., P. H. Driessen, and O. Koll. 2015.
“Stakeholder Marketing: Theoretical Foundations and
Required Capabilities.” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 43 (4):411–28. doi:10.1007/s11747-0150424-y
Humphreys, M. S. 1976. “Relational Information and the
Context Effect in Recognition Memory.” Memory &
Cognition 4 (2):221–32. doi:10.3758/BF03213167
Humphreys, M. S., J. D. Bain, and R. Pike. 1989. “Different
Ways to Cue a Coherent Memory System: A Theory for
Episodic, Semantic, and Procedural Tasks.” Psychological
Review 96 (2):208–33. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.96.2.208
Humphreys, M. S., and K. A. Chalmers. 2016. Thinking about
Human Memory. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Humphreys, M. S., T. B. Cornwell, A. R. McAlister, S. J.
Kelly, E. A. Quinn, and K. L. Murray. 2010.
“Sponsorship, Ambushing, and Counter-Strategy: Effects
upon Memory for Sponsor and Event.” Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Applied 16 (1):96–108. doi:10.
1037/a0018031
IEG Sponsorship Report. 2017. “IEG’s Guide to
Sponsorship.” https://www.sponsorship.com/ieg/files/59/
59ada496-cd2c-4ac2-9382-060d86fcbdc4.pdf.
IEG Sponsorship Report. 2018. “Signs Point to Healthy
Sponsorship Spending in 2018.” January 16. https://www.
sponsorship.com/About/Press-Room/Signs-Point-To-HealthySponsorship-Spending-In-201.aspx.
Influencer Marketing Hub. 2022. “The State of Influencer
Marketing 2022: Benchmark Report.” March 2. https://
influencermarketinghub.com/influencer-marketing-benchmark-report/.
Janiszewski, C., H. Noel, and A. G. Sawyer. 2003. “A MetaAnalysis of the Spacing Effect in Verbal Learning:
Implications for Research on Advertising Repetition and
Consumer Memory.” Journal of Consumer Research 30
(1):138–49. doi:10.1086/374692
Keller, K. L. 1993. “Conceptualizing, Measuring, and
Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity.” Journal of
Marketing 57 (1):1–22. doi:10.1177/002224299305700101
Keller, K. L. 2020. “Leveraging Secondary Associations to
Build Brand Equity: Theoretical Perspectives and
Practical Applications.” International Journal of
Advertising 39 (4):448–65. doi:10.1080/02650487.2019.
1710973
Kelly, S. J., T. B. Cornwell, and K. Singh. 2019. “The
Gladiatorial Sponsorship Arena: How Ambushing
Impacts Memory.” Marketing Intelligence & Planning 37
(4):417–32. doi:10.1108/MIP-07-2018-0271

328

T. B. CORNWELL ET AL.

Kelly, S. J., T. B. Cornwell, L. V. Coote, and A. R.
McAlister. 2012. “Event-Related Advertising and the
Special Case of Sponsorship-Linked Advertising.”
International Journal of Advertising 31 (1):15–37. doi:10.
2501/IJA-31-1-15-37
Kelting, K., and D. H. Rice. 2013. “Should We Hire David
Beckham to Endorse Our Brand? Contextual Interference
and Consumer Memory for Brands in a Celebrity’s
Endorsement Portfolio.” Psychology & Marketing 30 (7):
602–13. doi:10.1002/mar.20631
Kerr, G., and J. Richards. 2021. “Redefining Advertising in
Research and Practice.” International Journal of
Advertising 40 (2):175–98. doi:10.1080/02650487.2020.
1769407
Kim, D. Y., and H. Y. Kim. 2021. “Influencer Advertising
on Social Media: The Multiple Inference Model on
Influencer-Product
Congruence
and
Sponsorship
Disclosure.” Journal of Business Research 130:405–15.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.02.020
Kotler, P. 2000. Marketing Management: The Millennium
Edition. Vol. 10. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kumar, A. A. 2021. “Semantic Memory: A Review of
Methods, Models, and Current Challenges.” Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review 28 (1):40–80. doi:10.3758/s13423-02001792-x
Kumar, A. A., M. Steyvers, and D. A. Balota. 2022. “A
Critical Review of Network-Based and Distributional
Approaches to Semantic Memory Structure and
Processes.” Topics in Cognitive Science 14 (1):54–77. doi:
10.1111/tops.12548
Lascelles, A. 2022. “What’s the Alternative to Russian
Vodka?.” ft.com, April 21. https://www.ft.com/content/
7a035276-9b2f-40ea-8836-32af636bf3cf.
Lederer, C., and S. Hill. 2001. “See Your Brands through
Your Customers’ Eyes.” Harvard Business Review 79 (6):
125–33.
Lee, J. S., H. Chang, and L. Zhang. 2022. “An Integrated
Model of Congruence and Credibility in Celebrity
Endorsement.” International Journal of Advertising 41
(7):1358–81. DOI: 10.1080/02650487.2021.2020563
Levine, L. J., and R. S. Edelstein. 2009. “Emotion and
Memory Narrowing: A Review and Goal-Relevance
Approach.” Cognition & Emotion 23 (5):833–75. doi:10.
1080/02699930902738863
Lindquist, K. A., A. B. Satpute, and M. Gendron. 2015.
“Does Language Do More than Communicate Emotion?”
Current Directions in Psychological Science 24 (2):99–108.
doi:10.1177/0963721414553440
Lodish, L. M., M. M. Abraham, J. Livelsberger, B. Lubetkin,
B. Richardson, and M. E. Stevens. 1995. “A Summary of
Fifty-Five in-Market Experimental Estimates of the
Long-Term Effect of TV Advertising.” Marketing Science
14 (3_supplement):G133–40. doi:10.1287/mksc.14.3.G133
Macdonald, E. K., and B. M. Sharp. 2000. “Brand
Awareness Effects on Consumer Decision Making for a
Common, Repeat Purchase Product: A Replication.”
Journal of Business Research 48 (1):5–15. doi:10.1016/
S0148-2963(98)00070-8
Mak, M. H., and H. Twitchell. 2020. “Evidence for
Preferential Attachment: Words That Are More Well
Connected in Semantic Networks Are Better at
Acquiring New Links in Paired-Associate Learning.”

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 27 (5):1059–69. doi:10.
3758/s13423-020-01773-0
Martinez, D., and P. O’Rourke. 2020. “Differential
Involvement of Working Memory Capacity and Fluid
Intelligence in Verbal Associative Learning as a Possible
Function of Strategy Use.” The American Journal of
Psychology 133 (4):427–51. doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.133.4.
0427
McAlister, A. R., S. J. Kelly, M. S. Humphreys, and T. B.
Cornwell. 2012. “Change in a Sponsorship Alliance and
the Communication Implications of Spontaneous
Recovery.” Journal of Advertising 41 (1):5–16. doi:10.
2753/JOA0091-3367410101
McCracken, G. 1989. “Who Is the Celebrity Endorser?
Cultural Foundations of the Endorsement Process.”
Journal of Consumer Research 16 (3):310–21. doi:10.
1086/209217
Meenaghan, J. A. 1983. “Commercial Sponsorship.”
European Journal of Marketing 17 (7):5–73. doi:10.1108/
EUM0000000004825
Meyers, A. 2021. “Nike, Coca-Cola Are the Brands Most
Associated with the Olympics.” Morning Consult,
August 13. https://morningconsult.com/2021/08/13/olympic-brands-association-poll/.
Mizik, N. 2014. “Assessing the Total Financial Performance
Impact of Brand Equity with Limited Time-Series Data.”
Journal of Marketing Research 51 (6):691–706. doi:10.
1509/jmr.13.0431
Mogaji, E., F. A. Badejo, S. Charles, and J. Millisits. 2022.
“To Build My Career or Build My Brand? Exploring the
Prospects,
Challenges
and
Opportunities
for
Sportswomen as Human Brand.” European Sport
Management Quarterly 22 (3):379–97. doi:10.1080/
16184742.2020.1791209
Nelson, D. L., C. L. McEvoy, and L. Pointer. 2003. “Spreading
Activation or Spooky Action at a Distance?” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 29 (1):42–52. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.29.1.42
Nelson, D. L., C. L. McEvoy, and T. A. Schreiber. 2004.
“The University of South Florida Free Association,
Rhyme, and Word Fragment Norms.” Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers 36 (3):402–7. doi:10.
3758/bf03195588
Nelson, D. L., G. M. Dyrdal, and L. B. Goodmon. 2005.
“What Is Preexisting Strength? Predicting Free
Association Probabilities, Similarity Ratings, and Cued
Recall Probabilities.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 12
(4):711–9. doi:10.3758/bf03196762
Nelson, D. L., K. Kitto, D. Galea, C. L. McEvoy, and P. D.
Bruza. 2013. “How Activation, Entanglement, and
Searching a Semantic Network Contribute to Event
Memory.” Memory & Cognition 41 (6):797–819. doi:10.
3758/s13421-013-0312-y
Nelson, D. L., V. M. McKinney, N. R. Gee, and G. A.
Janczura. 1998. “Interpreting the Influence of Implicitly
Activated Memories on Recall and Recognition.”
Psychological Review 105 (2):299–324. doi:10.1037/0033295x.105.2.299
Nguyen, C., J. Romaniuk, M. Faulkner, and J. Cohen. 2018.
“Are Two Brands Better than One? Investigating the
Effects of Co-Branding in Advertising on Audience

JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING

Memory.” Marketing Letters 29 (1):37–48. doi:10.1007/
s11002-017-9444-3
Nguyen, H. T., Y. Zhang, and R. J. Calantone. 2018. “Brand
Portfolio Coherence: Scale Development and Empirical
Demonstration.” International Journal of Research in
Marketing 35 (1):60–80. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2017.11.003
Ochsner, K. N. 2000. “Are Affective Events Richly
Recollected or Simply Familiar? The Experience and
Process of Recognizing Feelings Past.” Journal of
Experimental Psychology. General 129 (2):242–61. doi:10.
1037/0096-3445.129.2.242
Parmentier, M.-A., and E. Fischer. 2012. “How Athletes
Build Their Brands.” International Journal of Sport
Management and Marketing 11 (1/2):106–24. doi:10.
1504/IJSMM.2012.045491
Parmentier, M. A., and E. Fischer. 2021. “Working It:
Managing Professional Brands in Prestigious Posts.”
Journal of Marketing 85 (2):110–28. doi:10.1177/
0022242920953818
Pinello, C., P. M. Picone, and A. M. L. Destri. 2022. “CoBranding Research: Where We Are and Where We
Could Go from Here.” European Journal of Marketing 56
(2):584–621. doi:10.1108/EJM-02-2021-0073
Ping, O. L. 2021. “Lululemon and Peloton in Legal Feud over
‘Copycat’ Products.” Marketing Interactive, November 30.
https://www.marketing-interactive.com/lululemon-andpeloton-in-legal-feud-over-copy-cat-products.
PQ Media. 2021. “PQ Media Intellicast.” https://www.pqmedia.com/newsletters/pq-media-intellicast-issue-1-october2021/.
Roy, D. P., and T. B. Cornwell. 2003. “Brand Equity’s
Influence on Responses to Event Sponsorships.” Journal
of Product & Brand Management 12 (6):377–93. doi:10.
1108/10610420310498803
Russell, C. A. 2019. “Expanding the Agenda of Research on
Product Placement: A Commercial Intertext.” Journal of
Advertising 48 (1):38–48. doi:10.1080/00913367.2019.
1579690
Sandberg, J., and M. Alvesson. 2021. “Meanings of Theory:
Clarifying Theory through Typification.” Journal of
Management Studies 58 (2):487–516. doi:10.1111/joms.
12587
Schachter, S., and J. Singer. 1962. “Cognitive, Social, and
Physiological Determinants of Emotional State.”
Psychological Review 69 (5):379–99. doi:10.1037/
h0046234
Schmidt, S., and M. Eisend. 2015. “Advertising Repetition:
A Meta-Analysis on Effective Frequency in Advertising.”
Journal of Advertising 44 (4):415–28. doi:10.1080/
00913367.2015.1018460
Simmons, C. J., and K. L. Becker-Olsen. 2006. “Achieving
Marketing Objectives through Social Sponsorships.”
Journal of Marketing 70 (4):154–69. doi:10.1509/jmkg.70.
4.154
Sloutsky, V. M., H. Yim, X. Yao, and S. Dennis. 2017. “An
Associative account of the Development of Word
Learning.” Cognitive Psychology 97:1–30. doi:10.1016/j.
cogpsych.2017.06.001
Smith, S. M., and S. C. Moynan. 2008. “Forgetting and
Recovering the Unforgettable.” Psychological Science 19
(5):462–8. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02110.x

329

Srivastava, R. K., and A. D. Shocker. 1991. Brand Equity: A
Perspective on Its Meaning and Measurement.
Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.
Statista. 2022. “Global Advertising Spending 2000-2024.”
February 17. https://www.statista.com/statistics/1174981/
advertising-expenditure-worldwide/.
Swaminathan, V., A. Sorescu, J. B. E. Steenkamp, T. C. G.
O’Guinn, and B. Schmitt. 2020. “Branding in a
Hyperconnected World: Refocusing Theories and
Rethinking Boundaries.” Journal of Marketing 84 (2):
24–46. doi:10.1177/0022242919899905
Tehan, G. 2010. “Associative Relatedness Enhances Recall and
Produces False Memories in Immediate Serial Recall.”
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology ¼ Revue
Canadienne de Psychologie Experimentale 64 (4):266–72. doi:
10.1037/a0021375
Thomson, M. 2006. “Human Brands: Investigating
Antecedents to Consumers’ Strong Attachments to
Celebrities.” Journal of Marketing 70 (3):104–19. doi:10.
1509/jmkg.70.3.104
Tulving, E., and Z. Pearlstone. 1966. “Availability versus
Accessibility of Information in Memory for Words.”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 5 (4):
381–91. doi:10.1016/S0022-5371(66)80048-8
Verde, M. F. 2010. “Conjunction Errors in Recognition:
Emergent Structure and Metacognitive Control.” Journal
of Memory and Language 63 (4):476–88. doi:10.1016/j.
jml.2010.08.002
Verhellen, Y., J. Eelen, N. Dens, and P. De Pelsmacker.
2016. “The Short-and Long-Term Impact of Brand
Placement in an Advertiser-Funded TV Program on
Viewers’ Attitudes toward the Sponsor Brand and Its
Main Competitor.” International Journal of Advertising
35 (6):932–48. doi:10.1080/02650487.2015.1087089
Walraven, M., T. H. A. Bijmolt, and R. H. Koning. 2014.
“Dynamic Effects of Sponsoring: How Sponsorship
Awareness Develops over Time.” Journal of Advertising
43 (2):142–54. doi:10.1080/00913367.2013.835754
Washburn, J. H., B. D. Till, and R. Priluck. 2000. “CoBranding: Brand Equity and Trial Effects.” Journal of
Consumer Marketing 17 (7):591–604. doi:10.1108/
07363760010357796
Watkins, M. J., and O. C. Watkins. 1976. “Cue-Overload
Theory and the Method of Interpolated Attributes.”
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 7 (3):289–91. doi:10.
3758/BF03337192
Weeks, C. S., M. S. Humphreys, and T. B. Cornwell. 2018.
“Why Consumers Misattribute Sponsorships to NonSponsor Brands: Differential Roles of Item and Relational
Communications.” Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Applied 24 (2):125–44. doi:10.1037/xap0000159
Wheeler, M. A. 1995. “Improvement in Recall over Time
without Repeated Testing: Spontaneous Recovery
Revisited.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 21 (1):173–84.
Yang, Y., M. Shi, and A. Goldfarb. 2009. “Estimating the
Value of Brand Alliances in Professional Team Sports.”
Marketing Science 28 (6):1095–111. doi:10.1287/mksc.
1090.0513

