Communications of the Association for Information Systems
Volume 37

Paper

8-2015

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews
Mathieu Templier
Department of Management Information Systems, Université Laval, mathieu.templier@sio.ulaval.ca

Guy Paré
Research Chair in Information Technology in Health Care, HEC Montréal

Follow this and additional works at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/cais

Recommended Citation
Templier, M., & Paré, G. (2015). A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 37, pp-pp. https://doi.org/10.17705/
1CAIS.03706

This material is brought to you by the AIS Journals at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has been accepted for
inclusion in Communications of the Association for Information Systems by an authorized administrator of AIS
Electronic Library (AISeL). For more information, please contact elibrary@aisnet.org.

C

ommunications of the

A

ssociation for

I

nformation

S

ystems

Research Paper

ISSN: 1529-3181

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature
Reviews
Mathieu Templier

Guy Paré

Department of Management Information Systems,
Université Laval
mathieu.templier@sio.ulaval.ca

Research Chair in Information Technology in Health
Care, HEC Montréal

Abstract:
Given that the synthesis of cumulated knowledge is an essential condition for any field to grow and develop, we
believe that the enhanced role of IS reviews requires that this expository form be given careful scrutiny. Over the past
decade, several senior scholars have made calls for more review papers in our field. While the number of IS review
papers has substantially increased in recent years, no prior research has attempted to develop a general framework
to conduct and evaluate the rigor of standalone reviews. In this paper, we fill this gap. More precisely, we present a
set of guidelines for guiding and evaluating IS literature reviews and specify to which review types they apply. To do
so, we first distinguish between four broad categories of review papers and then propose a set of guidelines that are
grouped according to the generic phases and steps of the review process. We hope our work will serve as a valuable
source for those conducting, evaluating, and/or interpreting reviews in our field.
Keywords: Literature Review, Standalone Review Paper, Research Synthesis, Review Methodology, Methodological
Guidelines, Review Quality.

The manuscript was received 28/03/2014 and was with the authors 3 months for 3 revisions.

Volume 37

Paper 6

pp. 112 – 137

August

2015

113

1

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Introduction

Although the information systems (IS) field is relatively young compared to other social science fields
(King & He, 2005), it has grown considerably since the early 1960s. Indeed, the domain’s maturity is
evidenced by the increasing volume of published IS research, the emergence of well-established journal
outlets (Chen & Hirschheim, 2004), and the development of IS research perspectives and theories
(Baskerville & Myers, 2002; Webster & Watson, 2002). As another sign of maturity, IS has recently
become a reference field for studies in psychology, education, marketing, and other management
domains (King & He, 2005).
However, to further its progress, the domain still needs to consolidate its research tradition. It has become
increasingly difficult for researchers to remain knowledgeable of the many aspects of IS research.
According to Card (2012), one obstacle to scientific progress is that researchers are limited in their ability
to retain, organize, and synthesize earlier knowledge while staying abreast of new scientific contributions.
Similarly, Cooper (2009) notices that an increased quantity of scientific inquiry has resulted in growing
specialization in the social sciences. As a result, “time constraints make it impossible for most social
scientists to keep up with primary research except within a few topic areas of special interest to them”
(Cooper, 2009, p. 2). Since individual studies incrementally contribute to a larger understanding of a
phenomenon of interest, building scientific knowledge requires cooperation and interdependent research
work (Cooper, 2009). By uncovering prior knowledge, literature reviews offer foundations for further
scientific research and are, thus, essential to any field’s development. In the IS domain, the increasing
amount of research and its rapid diffusion also call for reliable ways of integrating the findings of prior
studies (Bandara, Miskon, & Fielt, 2011). In this era of information overload, it is essential that IS
researchers engage in the process of research synthesis.
Hart (1999, p. 13) defines a literature review as:
the selection of available documents (both published and unpublished) on the topic, which
contain information, ideas, data and evidence written from a particular standpoint to fulfill certain
aims or express certain views on the nature of the topic and how it is to be investigated, and the
effective evaluation of these documents in relation to the research being proposed.
A literature review can either serve as the background for an empirical study or as an independent,
standalone piece that provides a valuable contribution in its own right (Jesson, Matheson, & Lacey, 2011;
Okoli & Schabram, 2010). The former, which can consist of a section in a journal paper or a chapter in a
graduate thesis, is the most common type of review. The purpose of the review section or chapter is to
help a researcher “acquire an understanding of (the) topic, of what has already been done on it, how it has
been researched, and what the key issues are” (Hart, 1999, p. 1). In addition, the background section
helps to contextualize the study’s contributions and justify its approaches, research methods, tools,
questions, and methods (Levy & Ellis, 2006a).
The second type, called here standalone literature review, is a “journal-length article whose sole purpose
is to review the literature in a field, without any primary data…collected or analyzed” (Okoli & Schabram,
2010, p. 2). Such reviews are conducted for many different purposes (e.g., to make sense of existing
knowledge on a particular topic, facilitate theory development, synthesize the extant literature on widely
studied and mature areas, or identify research domains where further investigation is needed) (Webster &
Watson, 2002; King & He, 2005; Okoli & Schabram, 2010). While providing a critical account of prior
research might represent the sole objective of some reviews (Cooper, 1988), authorial critique can play a
role (to different degrees) in all review types, which we illustrate in Section 2. In short, high-quality
standalone reviews provide a valuable and trustworthy account of past research that other researchers
might seek out for inspiration and use to position their own studies. In this line of thought, prior research
has shown that review papers frequently become “core” or “milestone” papers in a field (Garfield, 1982;
Paré, Trudel, Jaana, & Kitsiou, 2015; Rowe, 2014). Further, review papers play an important role in
fostering fields as reference fields. They represent a key source of knowledge for new scholars and
doctoral students entering a field and for those researchers outside the field.
Moreover, in light of the calls for increased use of evidence-based management (i.e., the systematic use
of the best empirical evidence to improve management practice) (Pfeffer & Sutton, 2006; Rousseau,
Manning, & Denyer, 2008; Reay, Berta, & Kohn, 2009), review papers become essential tools for

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

114

summarizing or synthesizing the extant literature in all applied fields such as management, marketing,
finance, human resources, and information systems.
When rigorously conducted, reviews represent powerful information sources for researchers and
practitioners looking for existing evidence to guide their decision making and managerial practices. The
evidence-base paradigm in information systems aims to inform decisions about issues such as the
adoption of new systems, software development methods and tools, and governance models because
decision makers rely on and draw on comprehensive literature reviews (Oates, Edwards, & Wainwright,
2012). Like Atkins and Louw (2000) and Oates (2011), we call for the use of more high-quality review
papers that synthesize available knowledge for professional practice.
The relevance of publishing standalone literature reviews in the IS field was first underscored by the
creation of the Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ) review department in 2001. This
department, which later became MISQ Theory and Review, is an outlet for review papers that synthesize
prior research and aims to facilitate the dissemination of that knowledge (Watson, 2001). Its mission is to
“accelerate the accumulation of IS knowledge” and “provide important input in setting directions for future
research” (Webster & Watson, 2002, p. xiii). The lack of high-quality research syntheses is seen as a
potential barrier to theoretical and conceptual progress in the IS field (Levy & Ellis, 2006a; Webster &
Watson, 2002). For this reason, senior IS scholars have called for more review papers to foster the field’s
development and cumulative tradition (e.g., King & He, 2005; Rowe, 2014; Schwarz, Mehta, Johnson, &
Chin, 2007; Watson, 2001; Webster & Watson, 2002;). To address the abovementioned problems and
help information systems academics keep abreast with developments in our field, Foundations and
Trends in Information Systems, a new journal fully dedicated to review papers, was launched in 2014.
According to Webster and Watson (2002), one of the challenges in integrating previous research and
advancing knowledge is scholars’ lack of familiarity with the methods used for structuring and presenting
reviews. The issue of quality is a critical aspect that should be discussed and examined when producing
or assessing standalone literature reviews (Paré et al., 2015). Indeed, calls for more IS review papers
emphasize quality standards. Since literature reviews serve as “benchmarks” for other researchers in a
field, they should cover the relevant literature to date and earn readers’ confidence about the validity,
reliability, and relevance of their findings. More specifically, we suggest that a research synthesis’s quality
involves three dimensions: rigor, relevance, and methodological coherence between the review’s
components and its objectives. Rigor refers to the soundness of the research process (Ogawa & Malen,
1991; Tobin & Begley, 2004). Without rigor, research has no scientific value and makes no contribution to
knowledge (Morse, Barrett, Mayan, Olson, & Spiers, 2002). Rigor is a desired goal that is met by
satisfying criteria such as internal validity, external validity, reliability, and objectivity (Morse et al., 2002;
Ogawa & Malen, 1991). Relevance refers to the review’s utility and usefulness. As we mention above,
standalone literature reviews are conducted for many different purposes, such as to analyze the progress
of a specific stream of research, to aggregate findings or reconcile equivocal results of prior studies, to
review the application of a theoretical model or a methodological approach, to develop a new theory or
research model, and to provide a critical account of prior research on a particular topic (Cooper, 1988).
Lastly, methodological coherence refers to the “congruence between the research question and the
components of the method” (Morse et al., 2002, p. 18). Methodological coherence links rigor and
relevance, and validates the fit between a review’s goals and the methodological guidelines chosen to
attain them.
In this paper, we focus on methodological rigor because it is essential to research quality. Indeed, rigor is
particularly important for reviews that are intended as milestones for future research. However, as Paré et
al. (2015) stress, the discussion on methodological rigor in relation to review paper remains highly
abstract and is thus prone to subjectivity and judgment on the part of researchers, assessors, and editors.
Indeed, “in order for the reader—be it a researcher, a policy maker or a practitioner—to benefit from the
evidence in the literature on a certain IS topic or subject, it is important to present an informative
explanation about how the review was conducted” (Paré, Trudel, & Jaana, 2012, p. 19). Misconceptions
about the methods used for conducting standalone literature reviews also raise issues related to rigor. In
this regard, literature reviews are no different from other methodologies. A review’s quality and coherence
emerge from the application of a structured approach with specific guidelines. As Cooper (2009) states,
“integrating separate research projects into a coherent whole involves inferences as central to the validity
of knowledge as the inferences involved in drawing conclusions from primary data analysis” (p. 3).
Therefore, in light of the growing interest in standalone reviews in the IS field, we posit that greater
attention should be paid to the specific criteria used to evaluate their rigor.

Volume 37

Paper 6

115

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Several fields, such as health sciences (e.g., Liberati et al., 2009; Higgins & Green, 2008), nursing (e.g.,
Cronin, Ryan, & Coughlan, 2008; Kirkevold, 1997; Whittemore, 2005), software engineering (e.g.,
Kitchenham & Charters, 2007), and social psychology (e.g., Cooper, 1982) have developed a strong
tradition of review methods. However, what constitutes a rigorous and well-conducted review has received
little attention so far. The few available guidelines either focus on a specific type of review (e.g., theoretical
or systematic) or fail to provide comprehensive and specific recommendations. Consequently, in this
paper, we fill this gap by helping researchers, reviewers, and editors to properly assess IS reviews’
methodological rigor. While our framework covers all types of standalone reviews (see Section 2), it also
highlights the guidelines that apply to particular forms of research syntheses. Ultimately, we provide a
baseline from which researchers can use to evaluate and properly conduct standalone literature reviews
in the IS field.
In Section 2, we describe the major phases and steps that are at the basis of standalone reviews and
present four distinct categories of review papers with their objectives, characteristics, and challenges. In
Section 3, we propose a set of guidelines for conducting rigorous IS literature reviews and specify to
which review forms they apply. We believe that carefully considering these guidelines is likely to help the
broader IS research community make informed judgments about review papers’ contributions to a
cumulative tradition. Finally, in Section 4, we conclude the paper.

2

Background

2.1

General Procedure for Conducting Literature Reviews

As a preliminary step, we sought out existing guidelines for standalone reviews. As expected, our search
resulted in few sources from the IS field. Indeed, “the rigorous, standardized methodology that has
developed from the health sciences and other fields is virtually unknown in information systems research”
(Okoli & Schabram, 2010, p. 6). However, several relevant and useful sources emerged from other fields
that have a stronger tradition in review methods and evidence-based practice. These include the health
sciences and health information domains (e.g., Liberati et al., 2009; Higgins & Green, 2008), software
engineering (e.g., Kitchenham & Charters, 2007), social psychology (e.g., Cooper, 1982; Cooper, 2009),
and management and organization science (e.g., Rousseau et al., 2008; Wolfswinkel, Furtmueller, &
Wilderom, 2013).
According to Kitchenham and Charters (2007), the process of conducting an effective literature review
comprises several discrete activities. The authors argue that literature reviews involve stages that can be
grouped into three main phases: (1) planning, (2) carrying out, and (3) reporting. The activities associated
with planning include choosing a research question and developing a protocol. The second phase
involves many activities, such as searching for and selecting pertinent and available documents on the
topic, assessing the quality of the selected studies, and extracting, analyzing, and synthesizing the data.
The last phase encompasses writing the review and developing strategies for disseminating the results to
potentially interested parties. In this paper, we limit our analysis to the first two phases.
According to Kitchenham and Charters (2007), most medical and social science methodologists agree
about the major steps involved in conducting a literature review. The six steps that comprise our
framework reflect the main activities involved in developing and conducting a research synthesis: (1)
formulating the problem, (2) searching the literature, (3) screening for inclusion, (4) assessing quality, (5)
extracting data, and (6) analyzing and synthesizing data (see Figure 1). Note that the proposed sequence
of steps need not be followed in a linear manner. Indeed, another important trait of the review process is
its iterative nature: many activities are initiated during the planning phase and later refined during
subsequent phases (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). We describe the six steps in the following
paragraphs.
Formulating the problem: authors must justify the need for a standalone literature review (Kitchenham &
Charters, 2007; Webster & Watson, 2002), identify the review’s purpose (Okoli & Schabram, 2010), and
define the concepts or constructs at the heart of the synthesis (Cooper, 2009; Webster & Watson, 2002).
They need to specify which research questions they are addressing (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). As
Jesson et al. (2011) stress, the research questions guide the entire study design because they underscore
the type of information that is needed, inform the search for and selection of relevant literature, and guide
the subsequent analysis.

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

116

Searching the literature: the data in a literature review includes the relevant information included in each
primary study (Cooper, 2009). Before selecting and extracting data, the first step in collecting data
involves searching through the literature. At this time, researchers identify a range of information sources
and single out the studies that require further analysis. Primarily, researchers need to choose a population
of studies (Cooper, 1982). According to Webster and Watson (2002), the literature search “ensure[s] that
(reviewers) accumulate a relatively complete census of relevant literature” (p. xvi). When conducting a
literature review, researchers want their results to pertain to all the extant studies on the problem (Cooper,
1982). Therefore, the specified search strategy and procedures, data sources, and search restrictions are
critical if the researcher is to identify and retrieve all the relevant studies.
Screening for inclusion: the data collection process in a literature review involves both identifying primary
studies and evaluating their applicability (Levy & Ellis, 2006a; vom Brocke et al., 2009). Indeed, once a
group of potential primary studies has been identified, researchers must analyze them to determine their
relevance (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). A set of rules and selection criteria will provide a basis for
including or excluding certain studies. This exercise requires a significant investment on the part of
researchers, who must ensure enhanced objectivity and avoid mistakes (Liberati et al., 2009).

Formulating the
problem

This step requires authors to define the review’s objective(s),
provide definitions of key concepts and justify the need for a
review article.

Searching the
literature

This is the beginning of the data collection phase. At this time,
authors must identify a range of information sources as well
as the studies that are pertinent to the review.

Screening for
inclusion

The next step of the data collection phase includes evaluating
the applicability of the studies previously identified and
selecting or excluding them.

Assessing quality

This step involves assessing the methodological quality of the
primary studies.

Extracting data

This step involves gathering applicable information from each
of the primary studies included in the review.

Analyzing and
synthesizing data

This last step requires authors to organize, compare, collate,
summarize, aggregate or interpret the information previously
extracted in order to suggest a new contribution to knowledge.

Figure 1. General Procedure for Conducting Literature Reviews

Assessing quality: in addition to screening studies for inclusion, researchers may need to formally
assess the studies’ quality to refine what ones they include or not, determine whether or not the
differences in quality affect their review’s results, or guide how they analyze the data and interpret the
findings (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Assessing quality mostly pertains to appraising the research
design and methods used in the primary studies. Indeed, researchers must assess these studies against
recognized methodological standards (Jesson et al., 2011; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Ascribing
quality scores to each study makes it possible to reflect on the extent to which the selected paper address
possible biases and maximize validity (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007).
Extracting data: this step involves gathering applicable information from each primary study included in
the review and deciding what is relevant to the problem of interest (Cooper, 1982). Indeed, the type of

Volume 37

Paper 6

117

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

data that should be recorded depends mainly on the research question (Okoli & Schabram, 2010).
However, important information may also be gathered about how the primary study was conducted, the
research design and methods, or statistical results (Cooper, 2009).
Analyzing and synthesizing data: researchers must collate, summarize, aggregate, organize, and
compare the evidence extracted from the primary studies. The extracted information must be presented in
a meaningful way that suggests a new contribution to knowledge (Jesson et al., 2011). Researchers are
also expected to interpret the cumulative evidence and discuss the findings and conclusions derived from
the data (Cooper, 1982). Webster and Watson (2002) warn researchers that literature reviews should be
much more than lists of papers and should provide a coherent lens to make sense of extant knowledge on
a given topic.

2.2

Types of Literature Reviews

We concur with Cooper (1988) that there exist various forms of reviews that differ considerably in terms of
fundamental objectives, motivations, and means by which they are conducted. In fact, considerable
confusion and many ambiguities surround the use of the term “review” (Paré et al., 2015). Indeed,
researchers have used numerous terms to depict their review methods and approaches, such as
“narrative review” (e.g., Joseph, Ng, Koh, & Ang, 2007), “theoretical review” (e.g., Varey, Wood-Harper, &
Wood, 2002), “critical review” (e.g., Fichman, 1992), “descriptive review” (e.g., Yang & Tate, 2009),
“comprehensive review” (e.g., Liu, Min, & Ji, 2008), “systematic review” (e.g., Williams, Dwivedi, Lal, &
Schwarz, 2009), and “meta-analysis” (e.g., King & He, 2006). For this reason, we distinguish the several
types of standalone reviews before we develop a set of guidelines or criteria for assessing rigor.
We adopted an iterative approach in categorizing review types. We started out by searching and
reviewing works by leading authors and methodologists. Backward and forward searches allowed us to
uncover additional relevant material. Over the years, some scholars have discussed methodological
issues related to research synthesis and proposed dimensions along which to distinguish between types
of literature reviews (e.g., Cooper, 1988; Gough, Thomas, & Oliver, 2012; Grant & Booth, 2009; King &
He, 2005; Paré et al., 2012; Rousseau et al., 2008). For instance, Cooper (1988) proposes a set of core
characteristics along which the various types of review papers may differ. These characteristics include
the review’s main area of interest, its primary focus, the reviewers’ perspective, the breadth of the
literature search, the techniques used to organize the data, and the intended audience. By analyzing,
comparing, and combining the descriptions and definitions from the abovementioned sources, we
extracted four overarching categories of standalone reviews that we describe next. More precisely, we
grouped and analyzed those dimensions that focused specifically on review aims and approaches.
Indeed, because research objectives should suggest the components of the methods, they were the focus
of our analysis. Hence, we developed four review categories that differ in terms of their suitability for
synthesizing different forms of research findings (i.e., input), their appropriateness for answering specific
research questions (i.e., process), and their intended outcomes (i.e., output). Table 1 describes the main
characteristics of these four categories. Note that a particular review might pursue several objectives and,
hence, share key characteristics that belong to different review types (Cooper, 1988). For instance,
Joseph et al. (2007) conduct a narrative review to summarize the extant knowledge on IT turnover and
propose a conceptual model of IT turnover intention that they validate through a meta-analytic review
procedure. They then combine findings of the narrative review and the meta-analysis to develop a richer
and more comprehensive model of IT turnover. Successfully conducting or evaluating hybrid reviews such
as this one first requires a thorough understanding of the characteristics and methodological issues
related to each review type involved and of their rationale. We believe the conceptual framework we
introduce in this papers will help members of our research community better understand the basic
principles of review methods and make more-informed choices about their designs.
Each review type should respect specific methodological requirements that are consistent with its general
objective. Indeed, “clarity about the dimensions along which reviews vary provides a way to develop
review methods further and to make critical judgments necessary for the commission, production,
evaluation, and use of reviews” (Gough et al., 2012, p. 8). According to Oxman (1994), designing a
research synthesis involves several decisions that must be aligned with the review’s specific purpose and
its main focus. Each review type, along with an adapted package of methodological guidelines and
techniques, is indeed best suited to certain objectives, questions, or issues. Researchers widely accept
that producing scientific knowledge depends very much on the tools and techniques that they apply
(Pinsonneault & Kraemer, 1993). Since “better legitimization of every choice made during the review

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

118

process enhances the value of a review” (Wolfswinkel et al., 2013, p. 45), the methods and techniques
used must be well suited to the review and, thus, carefully chosen. In the next several pages, we describe
and illustrate each review type.
First, narrative reviews summarize previously published research on a topic of interest. They focus on
concepts and theories, research methods, or research outcomes (Paré et al., 2012). They mainly
assemble and synthesize extant literature and provide readers with a comprehensive report on the current
state of knowledge in the area under investigation. Narrative reviews do not propose novel
conceptualizations, criticize a body of literature, or validate a theory; instead, these review types “serve a
scientific field by providing a much-needed bridge between the vast and scattered assortment of articles
on a topic and the reader who does not have the time or resources to track them down” (Baumeister &
Leary, 1997, p. 311). Such reviews are particularly useful for gathering a large and diverse volume of
existing research on a subject (Dixon-Woods, Agarwal, Young, Jones, & Sutton, 2004). Narrative reviews
often serve as an appropriate starting point for future inquiries and research developments and help
researchers to determine and refine research questions or hypotheses (Cronin et al., 2008).
Very few sources offer guidelines for conducting rigorous narrative reviews (Baumeister & Leary, 1997).
King and He (2005, p. 667) also note a lack of commonly accepted or standardized procedures:
“researchers are relatively free to design their review strategy in terms of selecting relevant papers,
categorizing research characteristics, and framing outcomes”. In other words, researchers do not usually
explain how they searched, selected, and synthesized their narrative reviews’ primary studies (Paré et al.,
2012). For this reason, narrative reviews are more prone to subjectivity than other review types. Efforts
have been made to increase rigor and improve knowledge about conducting such reviews (e.g., Cronin et
al., 2008; Green, Johnson, & Adams, 2006; Levy & Ellis, 2006b). Indeed, there is a growing number of
well-structured narrative reviews in the IS field that present methodological details about the review
process (Paré et al., 2012).
Table 1. Example of Format for Tables (Source)
Developmental

Cumulative

Aggregative

Primary study
focus

Allow researchers to gather studies that focus on Require studies that focus
thematically dissimilar concepts and findings
on similar concepts

Require close
conceptual and
operational
definitions

Primary study
design

Allow researchers to combine both conceptual and empirical studies with
varying methods and designs

Require empirical
studies that follow
the same design

General
objective

Map the current state
of knowledge and
identify gaps in prior
research

Assemble previous
research to develop an
innovative approach to
the topic of interest

Compile cumulative
Pool prior data and
evidence from earlier
findings to test
research in order to
specific theories
identify patterns and draw
and hypotheses
overall conclusions

Literature
coverage

Cover a representative Cover studies that are
set of the literature by
central or pivotal to a
including a sample that topic area and include a
is illustrative of the
sample that considers
larger population
all important aspects

Cover the literature in detail by identifying and
including all pertinent data

Logic of
synthesis

Follow a logic of configuration by drawing
conclusions based on a coherent assembly of
findings

Follow a logic of assimilation by confirming
findings based on the repetition of evidence

Product

Narrative summary of
knowledge in a topic
area

Conceptual framework,
theoretical model,
methodological
guidelines, etc.

Pooled summary of a
specific research stream

Evidence-based
validation of a
theoretical model

Domain of
generalizability

Allow researchers to
generalize inferences
to a particular
population of studies

Allow researchers to
generalize theories,
concepts, or new ideas
to their domain of
applicability

Allow researchers to
generalize inferences to a
particular population of
studies

Allow researchers
to generalize
hypotheses to a
pre-specified unit
of analysis

Output

Process

Input

Narrative

Since narrative reviews summarize a research stream and, therefore, generalize their conclusions to a
particular group of studies, researchers must adopt strategies for gathering a representative literature
sample and follow structured procedures for analyzing and synthesizing the evidence (Levy & Ellis,

Volume 37

Paper 6

119

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

2006a). Cooper (1988) defines a representative coverage strategy as identifying and selecting earlier
studies that typify a larger group. Authors of these reviews should also discuss the characteristics that
make the sample illustrative of a larger population. As per Sandelowski, Voils, and Barroso’s (2006) and
Sandelowski, Voils, Leeman, and Crandell’s (2012) definition, data analysis in narrative reviews relies on
a logic of configuration. The authors distinguish between two broad categories of research syntheses
based on different logics: configuration and assimilation. The configuration of findings refers to the
arrangement of complementary evidence into a coherent argument (Sandelowski et al., 2006). Findings
from previous studies usually address different aspects of the phenomenon of interest and are, therefore,
linked and organized. Both narrative and developmental (see below) reviews mainly follow the
configuration logic. The assimilation of findings reduces or averages evidence to make empirical
statements (Gough et al., 2012; Sandelowski et al., 2012). Narrative reviews confirm findings through the
repetition of thematically similar evidence.
Bélanger and Carter’s (2012) paper represents an exemplar of a highly structured narrative review. In this
paper, the authors explore the most important theories, findings, and approaches that researchers have
used to study diverse electronic government platforms and services. To provide this historical synopsis,
the authors examine two samples of e-government papers: the most highly cited e-government papers
according to ISI Citations Index, and e-government research published in the Association for Information
Systems (AIS) Senior Scholars’ basket of journals. They clearly state their selection criteria and list the
papers they include in distinct appendices. They also detail their coding procedures and inter-rater
reliabilities for the classification of primary studies in an appendix. Their analysis of the extant literature
reveals significant insights about the metamorphosis of e-government research over time. The authors’
discussion of the gaps and opportunities for further work provides researchers with a starting point to
investigate e-government phenomena.
Second, developmental reviews provide a research community with new conceptualizations, research
models, theories, frameworks or methodological approaches. In general, they develop innovative ideas or
approaches grounded in previous research from a particular body of knowledge. Developmental reviews
are particularly valued for proposing new theoretical foundations, for developing new approaches to
address existing research problems on a more mature topic, and for giving directions for further
improvements (Webster & Watson, 2002). Developmental reviews usually adopt a theoretical (Webster &
Watson, 2002) or a critical stance (Carnwell & Daly, 2001). As such, developmental reviews could
propose new conceptualizations or theoretical approaches or could critically analyze previous knowledge
and offer constructive information on problematic areas. Hence, the primary contribution of developmental
reviews usually lies in the novelty of the proposed ideas and, therefore, goes beyond simply gathering and
synthesizing prior studies.
As is the case with narrative reviews, authors of developmental reviews rarely explain the methods they
used (Wolfswinkel et al., 2013). Guidelines for conducting rigorous developmental reviews have, however,
been proposed in an effort to increase thoroughness and transparency (Webster & Watson, 2002).
Examples of developmental approaches include realist synthesis (Pawson, Greenhalgh, Harvey, &
Walshe, 2005), grounded theory review (Wolfswinkel et al., 2013), integrative review (Torraco, 2005),
meta-synthesis (Hoon, 2013) and meta-ethnography (Noblit & Hare, 1988). Rigorous developmental
reviews offer greater contributions and have a better chance of being published (Webster & Watson,
2002; Wolfswinkel et al., 2013). According to Torraco (2005), authors of developmental reviews are
expected to identify a topic or issue that is appropriate for review, search and retrieve the most significant
and relevant literature on that topic, analyze or critique the extant literature, and propose new concepts,
theories, frameworks, or perspectives through one or more forms of synthesis.
Developmental reviews are usually highly iterative in nature. Authors start with a broad research topic that
they will refine into a more nuanced question as evidence from studies informs the topic (Hoon, 2013).
Thus, they can select and adapt the components of their methods as they develop the review (Gough et
al., 2012). In the IS domain, Webster and Watson (2002) propose a method for structuring and presenting
developmental reviews. The process is centered on two key methodological elements; namely, a
structured search strategy for identifying relevant studies, and a concept-centric approach to analyzing,
contextualizing, and synthesizing prior works. Developmental reviews usually adopt a central search
strategy in to include both empirical and conceptual studies that consider all the important aspects of the
phenomenon of interest. Cooper (1988) defines central or pivotal coverage as the identification and
description of important efforts that provide direction to a field. From these seminal research works,
reviewers might extend their search to accumulate a relatively complete census of the extant literature

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

120

(Webster & Watson, 2002). As with narrative reviews, developmental reviews follow a logic of
configuration for analyzing diverse and complementary evidence. They may use various approaches and
classifying techniques to coherently organize and make sense of the diverse streams that emerge from
the primary studies (Hoon, 2013; Torraco, 2005; Webster & Watson, 2002). Developmental reviews
emphasize the conceptual contribution of their outcomes, rather than formally assessing their findings’
validity (Grant & Booth, 2009). Outcomes are usually evaluated and validated against criteria of logical
reasoning and the value of the theoretical contribution.
DeLone and McLean’s (1992) seminal paper on IS success provides a good example of a developmental
review that adopts a theoretical stance. In this paper, the authors express the motivation that, if IS
research is to make a contribution to the world of practice, it is essential to define a measure of IS success
that will be used to evaluate IS policies, practice, and procedures. In recognition of this importance, they
conduct a literature review of previously published empirical and conceptual studies that have attempted
to measure various dimensions and factors pertaining to IS success. Taken together, these studies
provide a representative sample of the work conducted in this particular domain from 1981 to 1988.
Subsequently, the authors present a conceptual framework with six interrelated categories of IS success,
which they use to organize the extant IS research in this area and discover patterns and commonalities.
Based on this framework, they integrate the multiple dimensions of IS success that they discovered from
the literature review and propose a comprehensive conceptual model of IS success to guide future
research efforts. This developmental review represents one of the most highly cited papers in the IS field
today.
For their part, Parker and Castleman (2009) propose a developmental review that adopts a critical stance.
They evaluate the individual suitability of theories and frameworks in investigating e-business adoption in
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). To do so, the authors “take stock” of the available evidence
in the extant literature and use a plethora of studies to illustrate that SMEs are idiosyncratic in nature
when it comes to adopting e-business. Then, they critically analyze and evaluate existing theories and
frameworks to examine whether this idiosyncratic nature was captured sufficiently when explaining ebusiness adoption decisions. Based on this critical appraisal, the authors conclude that all commonly used
theories omit important aspects of small-firm idiosyncrasy and, thus, highlight the need for a new
integrated framework that will more accurately predict SMEs’ e-business adoption intentions. In addition,
they offer preliminary ideas on this framework to direct future research efforts.
Third, cumulative reviews compile empirical evidence to map bodies of literature and draw overall
conclusions regarding particular topics of interest. As with narrative reviews, they synthesize extant
literature on a particular topic to provide readers with a comprehensive description of the current state of
knowledge in the area. However, the diversity of the primary studies under scrutiny and their underlying
logic of analysis are different. Specific methodological approaches for cumulative reviews have been
proposed that differ in terms of the nature of the research area and the range of analysis methods they
use. Such approaches include scoping review (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Levac, Colquhoun, & O’Brien,
2010), mapping review (Anderson, Allen, Peckham, & Goodwin, 2008; Petersen, Feldt, Mujtaba, &
Mattsson, 2008), and descriptive review (King & He, 2005). When looking at emerging topics, the primary
contribution of scoping or mapping reviews lies in their ability to evaluate the size and scope of available
literature on a particular subject matter and inform researchers about a new area for future research
(Arksey & O’Malley, 2005). When looking at more-mature areas, descriptive reviews determine, through
frequency analyses, the coverage of the research field and the extent to which a body of empirical studies
supports or reveals any interpretable patterns or trends with respect to pre-existing propositions, theories,
methodologies, or findings (King & He, 2005; Petersen et al., 2008).
Cumulative reviews are much less iterative than the two previous types because reviewers must first
identify a clear research question (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005). In fulfilling their objectives and ensuring the
generalizability of results, researchers usually employ structured search methods to identify as many
relevant studies as possible, and collect an exhaustive sample of published works on a topic (Arksey &
O’Malley, 2005). According to Cooper (1988), researchers following an exhaustive coverage strategy
should strive to include all relevant literature to base conclusions on all available materials. Further,
researchers should accurately gather significant information from the chosen works. At this stage,
applying a clear, replicable and consistent approach is recommended to avoid any potential outcome
biases. Cumulative reviews tend to follow a logic based on assimilation; that is, they compile findings that
are thematically similar. As a result, such reviews usually adopt an analytic framework: they classify
techniques or thematic analyses in order to make sense of the data and comprehensively summarize

Volume 37

Paper 6

121

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

earlier evidence. By using evaluation criteria, authors of cumulative reviews extract characteristics of
interest, such as publication year, research methods, data collection techniques, and direction or strength
of final outcomes (e.g., positive, negative, or non-significant) from each study to produce quantitative
results in the form of frequency analyses (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Bandara et al., 2011; King & He,
2005). In doing so, authors of cumulative reviews may claim that their findings represent the “state of the
art” in a particular area or domain (King & He, 2005).
Dubé and Paré’s (2003) paper on positivist IS case study research represents an exemplar of a
cumulative review. These authors determine the extent to which the field had advanced in its operational
use of case study methods. To do so, they performed a systematic search in seven major IS journals over
a 10-year period to identify a representative number of empirical papers that employed the case study
method. In all, they identified 183 case papers. Subsequently, they developed and used a coding scheme
with pertinent evaluation criteria and attributes to code each paper and collectively gauge the extent to
which positivist case study research in IS has or has not exploited the methodological guidelines that have
been made available by leading methodologists. They formally validate the coding scheme and obtained a
satisfactory inter-rater agreement rate from this process. They employed frequency analysis to inform the
research community about the trends and patterns in the use of positivist case study research. As we
mention earlier, while providing a critical account of prior research represents the sole objective of some
developmental reviews, authorial critique can play a role in other forms of research synthesis as in the
present cumulative review. Indeed, Dubé and Paré (2003) critically appraise the level of methodological
rigor in prior case research and their overall assessment, which is somewhat equivocal, serves as an
instrument to reflect on our progress and identify potential areas for improvement.
Lastly, aggregative reviews bring together prior findings and test specific research hypotheses or
propositions. By rigorously collating and pooling prior empirical data, aggregative reviews are particularly
valued for providing evidence-based validations of pre-specified theoretical models and propositions. As a
result, such reviews support evidence-based practice, a movement that developed in the field of medicine
in the early 1990s (Montori & Guyatt, 2008). Indeed, aggregative reviews have been advocated as
essential to synthesizing the accumulated knowledge on a particular subject and supporting evidencebased management (Briner, Denyer, & Rousseau, 2009; Rousseau et al., 2008). These types of reviews
can take three general forms; namely, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and umbrella reviews (also
known as overviews of reviews) (Higgins and Green, 2008), all of which use various qualitative or
quantitative synthesis approaches and techniques (Paré et al., 2012). The distinction between systematic
and meta-analytic reviews lies in the techniques used to analyze data, which are respectively qualitative
or quantitative in nature. Further, whereas systematic and meta-analytic reviews collate data from
previous empirical studies, overviews of reviews build on evidence available from previous systematic
reviews or meta-analyses on the topic (Paré et al., 2012). Over the years, aggregative reviews have
become increasingly popular across a broad spectrum of research domains including medicine, nursing,
public health, medical informatics, education, and management.
Aggregative reviews follow “explicit, systematic methods that are selected with a view to minimizing bias,
thus providing more reliable findings from which conclusions can be drawn and decisions made” (Higgins
and Green, 2008, p. 6). A variety of guidelines have been proposed for conducting aggregative reviews in
various scientific domains including health sciences (e.g., Liberati et al., 2009; Higgins & Green, 2008;
Shea et al., 2007), software engineering (e.g., Kitchenham & Charters, 2007), social psychology (e.g.,
Cooper, 1982), and information systems (e.g., Okoli & Schabram, 2010; Oates et al., 2012). A rigorous
and consistent procedure for executing aggregative reviews involves the a priori definition of a clear set of
research objectives and questions that will guide the development of a structured review protocol (Higgins
& Green, 2008; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). As with cumulative reviews, aggregative reviews require
an exhaustive search and selection strategy in order to identify and gather all the relevant literature that is
available (Higgins & Green, 2008; Liberati et al., 2009; Oxman, 1994). By gathering and combining close
replications of prior evidence, aggregative reviews follow a logic of assimilation. They are also expected to
consider potential errors, biases, or flaws in the available evidence (Higgins & Green, 2008; Kitchenham &
Charters, 2007). Indeed, formal appraisal of the quality of primary studies is necessary for substantiating
results. Overall, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and umbrella reviews are recognized as instrumental
in summarizing accurately and reliably vast amounts of research evidence. In short, compared to the
previous types of research syntheses, aggregative reviews follow higher standards of rigor and quality
because they provide an explicit, comprehensive, and reproducible account of an existing body of
knowledge (Okoli & Schabram, 2010).

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

122

Turner, Kitchenham, Brereton, Charters, and Budgen (2010) offer a good example of a meta-analytic
review that examines whether the technology acceptance model (TAM) is an accurate predictor of actual
system use. In following a systematic review process, the authors present the narrow research questions
the study addresses, the search strategy and criteria (inclusion and exclusion) they used to identify
relevant empirical studies, the methods they used to assess the quality of the selected studies, and the
strategy they used to extract their data. Originally, these authors planned to perform an effect-size based
meta-analysis. However, due to the heterogeneity of reporting of the primary studies in terms of the TAM
used or the statistical method used, they conducted a vote-counting meta-analysis instead of a full effectsize meta-analysis. From a methodological perspective, this study contains a wide array of elements (e.g.,
quality assessment of primary studies) that are required to ensure the clarity and transparent reporting of
a quantitative systematic review. Furthermore, it highlights the importance of considering and
investigating, before pooling data into a meta-analysis, the diversity of methods and measures across the
included studies (i.e., heterogeneity).

3

Guidelines to Evaluate Standalone Literature Reviews

To develop a comprehensive set of methodological guidelines, we searched for recommendations on how
to conduct rigorous standalone literature reviews. Our review is developmental in nature. Therefore, we
followed a highly iterative search strategy in order to identify relevant studies that cover all phases of the
review process and consider all types of reviews in our taxonomy. As a first step, we reviewed the
reference lists of the abovementioned sources (e.g., Cooper, 1988; Gough et al., 2012; Grant & Booth,
2009; King & He, 2005; Paré et al., 2012; Rousseau et al., 2008). We selected those papers that offer
practical or pragmatic guidelines on how to perform literature reviews. As expected, a rapid screening of
the identified paper showed that they mainly propose guidelines for aggregative reviews. For this reason,
we decided to perform a purposeful search on the other review methods. We consulted the ISI Web of
Knowledge (Thomson Reuters) database and the Google Scholar search engine. We conducted the
search using the terms “review”, “research synthesis”, and “research syntheses” in conjunction with any of
the following keywords: “descriptive”, “integrative”, “quantitative”, “critical”, and “narrative”. We added
several additional references to our initial list. As a final step, we validated our list of papers using the
backward and forward search techniques. Table 2 presents the list of key references that we used to help
build our set of criteria. As far as was possible, we included trustworthy papers and papers that are
considered pivotal in their own field: except for those papers published in the last three years, the papers
in our list were highly cited (each had an average of 810 citations). As the table shows, we identified key
references for each of the four review categories included in our framework, although we associated the
majority with aggregative reviews.
As a second step, we carefully scrutinized each paper in Table 2. At first, we extracted for each step of the
review process all available recommendations and pragmatic advice from the selected references. Next,
from carefully examining each recommendation, we grouped the extracted guidelines under broader
categories. For instance, we grouped the various recommendations regarding the search process (e.g.,
search databases and registers, scan important journals manually, contact experts for references, follow
the backward and forward approaches, search the references from reports or key studies) under the
common attribute “Use a combination of approaches and data sources”. Similarly, the general guideline
“Conduct parallel independent data extraction” comprises various specific recommendations (e.g., involve
multiple researchers in the extraction process, assess inter-rater consistency, ensure that all researchers
understand the extraction protocol, and use consensus and arbitration to resolve disagreements). In
consequence, we developed a list of 19 guidelines that we divided into the different phases and steps
depicted in our general framework (see Table 3).
Table 2. List of Included Papers for the Development of the Guidelines
Narrative

Developmental

Cumulative

Arksey & O’Malley (2005)

X

Bandara et al. (2011)

X

Carnwell & Dally (2001)

Aggregative

X

Cooper (2009)
Cronin et al. (2008)

X
X

Higgins & Green (2008)

Volume 37

X

Paper 6

123

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Table 2. List of Included Papers for the Development of the Guidelines
Kitchenham & Charters (2007)

X

Levac et al. (2010)
Levy & Ellis (2006a)

X
X

Liberati et al. (2009)

X

Okoli & Schabram (2010)

X

Oxman & Guyatt (1988)

X

Oxman (1994)

X

Pawson et al. (2005)

X

Petersen et al. (2008)

X

Shea et al. (2007)

X

Torraco (2005)

X

Webster & Watson (2002)

X

Whittemore (2005)
Wolfswinkel et al. (2013)

X
X

As a third and final step, we reflected on the usefulness and necessity of each activity, or guideline, in the
review process by questioning how it satisfied a specific purpose in terms of the study’s methodological
rigor. Cooper (1988) maintain not only that the process of reviewing the extant literature is in itself a
scientific methodology, but that it should deserve the same attention to design and rigor as primary study
methodologies. In fact, “each methodological decision at each stage of a synthesis may enhance or
undermine the trustworthiness of its conclusion or, in common social science terms, can create a threat to
the validity of its conclusion” (Cooper, 2009, p. 11). As we mention previously, the term rigor
encompasses various principles and approaches that aim to minimize bias and error in the review process
(Ogawa & Malen, 1991). For our own purposes, we focused on four criteria that have been proposed to
reach the goal of rigor; namely, internal validity, objectivity, external validity, and reproducibility (Davies &
Dodd, 2002; Morse et al., 2002; Tobin & Begley, 2004). First, we define internal validity as the extent to
which the review represents accurately the phenomena it is intended to describe or explain (Hammersley,
1987). Internal validity should reflect the soundness in the choice of approach, including the decisions
related to the sources searched, the keywords used, the period of time covered, the criteria used for
selecting papers, or the type of data extracted. Second, we define objectivity as the extent to which a
review’s findings are determined by the objects of the inquiry and not by the researchers’ biases and
values. To claim objectivity, the review process should establish “that data and interpretations of the
findings are not figments of the inquirer’s imagination, but are clearly derived from the data” (Tobin &
Begley, 2004, p. 392). Methods for overcoming such bias involve mainly a consistent observance of the
review protocol and a parallel verification of sensitive elements of the process. Third, we define external
validity as the extent to which the findings have applicability in other contexts (Beck, Keddy, & Cohen,
1994). External validity refers to the review conclusions’ generalizability and involves two targets (Cooper,
1982). For narrative, cumulative, and aggregative reviews, findings should pertain to a larger population of
studies comprising previous research on the topic of interest. Developmental and aggregative reviews
should also generalize their findings across the unit of analysis that is of interest to the topic area; for
instance, the domain of applicability of a particular theory. Whereas reviewers are constrained by the
domains studied in primary research, they exert control over external validity through their choice of which
sources to consider and how to search and select papers(Cooper, 1982). Lastly, reproducibility measures
the extent to which the review is repeatable, traceable, and clearly documented. Reproducibility of a
research synthesis is attained through thoroughly documenting the review method and process, including
the search, selection, extraction, and analysis performed in the review. Reproducibility is essential to
determine whether a review’s findings would be the same if the process was replicated (Beck et al., 1994;
Coryn, 2007).

Table 3. List of Included Papers for the Development of the Guidelines

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

124

Table 3. List of Included Papers for the Development of the Guidelines
Narrative

Developmental

Cumulative

Aggregative

reviews

reviews

reviews

reviews

Step 1: Formulating the problem
Specify the review’s primary goal(s)









Clearly define the review’s key concept(s)
and establish its boundaries













Step 2: Searching the literature
Specify the search procedure in sufficient
detail
Use a combination of data sources and
search approaches









Avoid restrictions that are not based on the
research question(s)










Adopt strategies to minimize publication bias
Step 3: Screening for inclusion
Specify the screening and selection
procedures in sufficient detail





Conduct parallel independent assessment of
studies for inclusion













Use inclusion criteria that reflect the research
question(s)





Identify and be explicit about duplicate
studies


Include studies from reputable sources



1

Step 4: Assessing quality
Use recognized quality assessment tools



Consider the quality assessment in the
selection of studies or the interpretation of
the findings


Step 5: Extracting data

Specify the type of information to be
extracted
Use a structured procedure for data
extraction



Conduct parallel independent data extraction

















Step 6: Analyzing and synthesizing data
Report the appropriate standards for the
synthesis of the results



Describe the logical reasoning and
justifications behind the findings
Summarize the included studies in detail

3.1










Step 1: Formulating the Problem

Formulating the problem includes guidelines associated with identifying the review’s purpose and its
central topic’s definition. This step is one of the most sensitive in the review process and goes beyond
rigor. Indeed, this step also pertains to the other dimensions of review quality as indicated previously;
namely, relevance and methodological coherence. Besides its methodological quality, a review’s utility is
evaluated against the relevance of the problem it aims to address. Even if it is rigorously conducted, a
review addressing a problem that is not germane and relevant would have low value for its audience. In
short, researchers must motivate the problem as being both timely and appropriate and, accordingly,

1

Such a guideline is detrimental in the case of aggregative reviews and, hence, should be avoided.

Volume 37

Paper 6

125

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

justify why they conducted their review. Further, this step will guide the researchers in choosing an
appropriate design and provide the structure for the next phases of the review process (Jesson et al.,
2011; Levac et al., 2010). The alignment between methodological components of the review process and
the research questions directly contributes to the goal of methodological coherence. Therefore,
appropriately formulating the problem is required for all review categories. Nevertheless, for cumulative
and aggregative reviews, formulating the problem serves the additional purpose of reproducibility because
clear definitions of the problem and key concepts should help the reader understand the review process
and outcomes and ensure that the review is repeatable.

3.1.1

Specify the Review’s Primary Goal(s)

Defining the research objectives (or research questions) represents one of the most important steps to be
taken in any study, be it an empirical study, a conceptual piece, or a review paper. Hence, researchers
must satisfactorily motivate the need for their conducting a standalone review (Okoli & Schabram, 2010).
As we mention earlier, standalone review papers can be undertaken to analyze the progress of a specific
stream of research, to aggregate findings or reconcile equivocal results of prior studies, to review the
application of one theoretical model or one methodological approach, to develop a new theory or research
model, or to provide a critical account of prior research (Cooper, 1988). For instance, Jeyaraj, Rottman,
and Lacity (2006) justify their aggregative review by stressing the richness and diversity of the IT-based
innovation research stream and underlining the existence of conflicting and contradictory findings on the
antecedents of adoption. In general, authors of a review must be explicit about the objectives they pursue
since they are closely related to the form or category of review.

3.1.2

Clearly Define the Key Concept(s) and Establish the Review’s Boundaries

All authors of reviews must necessarily exclude a multitude of work that lies near the boundary of their
problem domain, even if they are works that other reviewers might choose to include. To solve this issue,
researchers must define the key concept(s) at the heart of their review (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Cooper,
2009; Webster & Watson, 2002). Another characteristic is the research materials to which the review
directs its main attention. Indeed, this guideline serves to distinguish relevant from irrelevant studies
(Cooper, 2009). Narrative and developmental reviews usually start with a wide focus that is narrowed
down throughout the process, whereas cumulative and aggregative reviews are often concerned with
using predefined concepts and precise boundaries (Gough et al., 2012; Hoon, 2013). Drawing on Cooper
(1988) and Whittemore (2005), literature reviews can potentially direct their focus in one or more of the
following areas: research findings or outcomes, concepts, theories or research models, and research
methods. Like primary goals, these areas of focus are not mutually exclusive, and some reviews might
have more than one focus with varying degrees of attention.

3.2

Step 2: Searching the Literature

This step includes guidelines associated with identifying potentially relevant studies. Searching for
relevant literature is critical for all review categories, though the choice about the population of studies will
differ according to the review’s objectives. Indeed, the literature search mainly refers to the goal of
external validity. For narrative reviews, researchers should identify a sample of studies that is
representative of the research stream of interest. For developmental reviews, researchers should
accumulate a sample of studies that covers all important aspects of the topic of inquiry (Webster &
Watson, 2002). In such reviews, researchers usually conclude the search and selection process when it
reaches conceptual saturation. For their part, when conducting cumulative or aggregative literature
reviews, researchers want their results to pertain to all the studies deemed relevant for the problem
(Cooper, 1982; Petersen et al., 2008). Hence, searching the literature attempts to include all potential
papers associated with the topic of interest. Researchers also need to thoroughly document their search
process when performing cumulative and aggregative reviews to contribute to reproducibility.

3.2.1

Specify the Search Procedures in Sufficient Detail

Literature reviews draw exclusively on the information included in primary studies to provide clear answers
to research questions. Therefore, searching for and identifying relevant studies is one of the most critical
tasks. To ensure a high level of rigor during this process, researchers should determine and follow a
rigorous search strategy (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). The authors must clearly answer questions such
as “where to search, which terms to use, which sources are to be searched, time span, and language”

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

126

(Levac et al., 2010, p. 3). Further, for cumulative and aggregative reviews, the authors must be explicit in
describing their approach and justifying their decisions (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Okoli & Schabram,
2010). This is important to assure the reader that all the pertinent and important literature has been
considered (Oxman, 1994; Okoli & Schabram, 2010). This information is also critical for replication
purposes and for further updates (Liberati et al., 2009). Important information on the search procedure
that should be reported includes the data sources (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009), the
search terms used (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Okoli & Schabram, 2010), and the number of hits for
each source (Higgins & Green, 2008; Liberati et al., 2009). Wu and Lederer’s (2009) meta-analysis on the
technology acceptance model provides a good example of how to clearly specify the search and
identification procedures. The authors specify the types of studies included in their review, the sources
that were used to locate the studies and the detailed procedure followed to retrieve the studies. Such
precisions allowed them “to maximize the number of studies, reduce the source bias, and thus increase
the power of the meta-analysis” (p. 424).

3.2.2

Use a Combination of Data Sources and Search Approaches

A high-quality review should also cover all aspects of the relevant literature related to the initial research
question(s) (Webster & Watson, 2002). Retrieving information from only one source is likely to not
adequately answer the question(s) (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009). As such, it’s
important to combine multiple sources and approaches to ensure the search’s comprehensiveness. The
commonly used sources in standalone reviews are electronic databases such as ABI/Inform, ISI Web of
Knowledge, PubMed, JSTOR, and IEEE Xplore (Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Shea et al. (2007) suggest
that at least two complementary electronic databases should be used to scan the extant literature on a
given topic. Further, other authors recommend that electronic databases be used in combination with
alternative search approaches, such as manually scanning journals and conference proceedings and
contacting experts on the topic of interest (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Okoli and Schabram, 2010).
Webster and Watson (2002) also propose that backward searches (identifying and examining references
cited in an paper of interest) and forward searches (identifying and considering papers that cite a
particular paper) be conducted. Turner et al. (2010) provide a good example of how multiple sources can
be combined. In addition to the papers obtained through electronic searches, they include all the relevant
references from a previous review on the same topic and performed a backward search.

3.2.3

Avoid Restrictions That Are Not Based on the Research Question(s)

When a review is concerned with the generalizability of its findings, then it should ideally capture all the
studies of interest. Indeed, researchers “must select and justify a search strategy that is appropriate for
(the) research question” (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007, p. 17). Ideally, restrictions pertaining to the
publication language, statu,s and date should be avoided unless the limitations correspond to the
boundaries of the review itself (Higgins & Green, 2008). When restrictions are applied, authors should
report them (Liberati et al., 2009) and clearly justify them (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007).

3.2.4

Adopt Strategies to Minimize Publication Bias

Publication bias refers to the problem that significant (and supporting) results are more likely to be
published than non-significant (and non-supporting) results. Publication bias is particularly harmful for the
internal validity of aggregative reviews because such reviews test hypotheses and theories. Therefore,
researchers should address this issue by adopting strategies such as scanning grey and unpublished
literature or contacting experts on the topic of interest to locate unpublished material (Kitchenham &
Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009). For instance, in their meta-analysis, Wu and Lederer (2009) include
doctoral dissertations and conference proceedings to minimize the risk of publication bias. They also sent
an inquiry for working papers and conference proceedings to the IS community through the AISWorld
mailing list.

3.3

Step 3: Screening for Inclusion

A broad and comprehensive search is likely to yield many papers that are not relevant to the research
question(s) (Oxman & Guyatt, 1988). Therefore, researchers must select the appropriate papers among
those retrieved during their initial search. To claim that their results have internal validity, all review types
should include only those papers that are appropriate and relevant for conducting the synthesis.
Researchers should ask themselves if each paper addresses the problem under inquiry and helps them

Volume 37

Paper 6

127

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

answer the research question (Pawson et al., 2005). As a proxy to appraise the quality of the included
studies and thus increase their internal validity, narrative and developmental reviews might also restrict
the selection of studies based on the expected quality and reputation of the sources. Further, for
cumulative and aggregative reviews, researchers should make important efforts when selecting studies to
enhance objectivity and avoid research bias (Liberati et al., 2009). Oxman and Guyatt (1988) recommend
a systematic, explicit, and rigorous screening/selection procedure to protect against biased selection of
studies. These authors show how two reviews that investigate the same question include two highly
different sets of primary studies and, as a result, produce diametrically opposed conclusions. Lastly, as for
the previous steps, researchers need to thoroughly document their selection process to contribute to their
study’s reproducibility.

3.3.1

Specify the Screening and Selection Procedures in Sufficient Detail

Researchers should be explicit about how they selected or chose studies to ensure greater transparency
and allow replicability (Oxman, 1994; Okoli & Schabram, 2010; Higgins and Green, 2008). According to
Kitchenham and Charters (2007), selecting studies is a multi-stage process. Researchers should first
initially screen the titles and abstracts against their inclusion criteria to decide whether they are worth
reading or not (Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Next, they should thoroughly examine the full papers to ensure
compliance with their inclusion criteria (Higgins & Green, 2008). In addition to the screening procedure,
researchers should report appropriate information on this stage, such as their inclusion criteria (Oxman &
Guyatt, 1988; Liberati et al., 2009; Okoli & Schabram, 2010), the number of excluded studies at each
stage with reasons for exclusion (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009), and the final
number of included studies (Liberati et al., 2009). Liberati et al. (2009) also advise using a diagram flow to
summarize the study selection process. Hauge, Ayala, and Conradi’s (2010) review on the adoption of
open source software provides a good example of how to apply this guideline.

3.3.2

Conduct Parallel Independent Assessment of Studies for Inclusion

The procedure for selecting studies should minimize biases and the potential for errors of judgment
(Oxman, 1994) to ensure and validate the objectivity and consistency of the inclusion process. According
to Oxman and Guyatt (1988), “expert assessment of primary research studies generally results in a level
of disagreement that is both extraordinary and distressing” (p. 700). As such, researchers should have
their studies independently assessed to minimize their errors and subjectivity (Kitchenham & Charters,
2007; Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Disagreements should be discussed and resolved using techniques such
as consensus or arbitration (Higgins and Green, 2008; Kitchenham and Charters, 2007). The level of
agreement between researchers could also be measured using the Cohen Kappa statistic (Higgins &
Green, 2008; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007).

3.3.3

Use Inclusion Criteria that Reflect the Research Question(s)

According to Okoli and Schabram (2010), research studies must explicitly state on what criteria they
based their judgment. As Oxman (1994) mentions, “the criteria used to select studies for inclusion should
be consistent with the (research) focus” (p. 649). Therefore, the criteria required for study inclusion are
usually based on the study’s content and refer to the research question and/or topic of interest (Cooper,
2009; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009; Okoli & Schabram, 2010; Petersen et al., 2008),
the theories and constructs included in primary studies (Levy & Ellis, 2006a), or the research design and
methodology the primary studies follow (Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Other criteria might be based on
practical considerations such as the publication status, language, years considered, and a lack of or
missing information (Liberati et al., 2009; Okoli & Schabram, 2010). Using such pragmatic selection
criteria reflects trade-offs between satisfactorily answering the research question and practically managing
the review (Okoli & Schabram, 2010) and should be used with caution (Liberati et al., 2009). In conducting
aggregative reviews, which validate theories by repeating primary evidence, reviewers should first contact
the primary authors of those studies that lack important information to obtain the missing information
before deciding to include them or not (Oxman & Guyatt, 1988; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). A good
example of how to clearly justify the choice of inclusion criteria is provided in Robey, Im, and Wareham’s
(2008) review on inter-organizational information systems. The authors indicate that “because [their]
primary interest is assessing theoretical trends and future directions, [they] restrict [their] review to
empirical articles because they best demonstrate the influence of theoretical choices on the production of
research findings” (p. 499).

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

3.3.4

128

Identify and Be Explicit About Duplicate Studies

“Duplicate publication can take various forms, ranging from identical manuscripts to reports describing
different numbers of participants and different outcomes” (Higgins & Green, 2008, p. 152). Duplicate
studies might also involve multiple reports of similar or different results from the same sample. Including
multiple publications associated with the same data set can be harmful, especially for cumulative and
aggregative reviews, which base their conclusions on repeated evidence. Therefore, researchers should
find ways to identify duplicates and make proper decisions regarding their inclusion or not (Kitchenham &
Charters, 2007). For instance, Ma and Liu (2004) report that they “carefully checked the sample (of the
included studies) to make sure they were not based on the same data” (p. 63). Similarly, Wu and Lederer
(2009) “ensured the uniqueness of each study by carefully comparing its description and statistical data
with those others” (p. 424). Authors usually remove duplicates from their sample, although some choose
to average results from publications pertaining to the same study.

3.3.5

Include Studies from Reputable Sources

This guideline is specific to narrative and developmental reviews because they adopt coverage strategies
that emphasize important contributions to the topic of interest. Contrarily, this guideline should be avoided
in the case of aggregative reviews because it could introduce a form of publication bias. Authors of
cumulative reviews could apply such restrictions depending on their research questions. Since narrative
and developmental reviews usually do not formally assess the quality of the primary studies they include
(see step 4), they must find other ways to ensure the quality of the evidence on which they base their
conclusions (Levy & Ellis, 2006a). For instance, authors often recommend that researchers should limit
their search to top-tier journals and conferences (Levy & Ellis, 2006a). In the same vein, Webster and
Watson (2002) suggest starting the search process with leading journals, where the major contributions
are most likely to be found.

3.4

Step 4: Assessing Quality

Whereas the previous step deals mainly with the relevance of primary studies, this step includes
guidelines associated with evaluating the rigor of the included papers. In this paper, the quality
assessment process refers to a formal evaluation of the methodological quality as it has been defined by
leading methodologists (e.g., Higgins & Green, 2008; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Shea et al., 2007).
Over the years, the process of quality appraisal has emerged as a formal and recommended guideline,
particularly for certain types of aggregative reviews such as systematic reviews and meta-analyses
(Whittemore, 2005). Indeed, in order to claim internal validity of their findings, aggregative reviews require
high-quality primary evidence that they pool to validate theories and hypotheses. In these reviews, quality
assessment usually refers to two main issues. First, internal validity is the extent to which the design,
methods, execution, and analysis of the individual studies minimize or avoid potential sources of bias
(Higgins & Altman, 2008). Second, external validity refers to “the extent to which the results of a study
provide a correct basis for generalizability to other circumstances” (Jüni, Altman, & Egger, 2001, p. 42). If
individual studies included in a review contain methodological deficiencies or invalid results due to
systematic errors and flawed designs, then these studies might distort the findings of the review and
introduce bias in its conclusions (Liberati et al., 2009; Oxman & Guyatt, 1988). For aggregative reviews,
quality assessment usually leads to the exclusion of primary studies or guides researchers when
interpreting their results. Other types of standalone reviews are often implicit regarding the evaluation of
the methodological quality of their primary studies, Yet, assessing the quality of such reviews may, in fact,
provide a valuable aspect of the narrative or descriptive component of a review or a lens for interpreting
their findings.

3.4.1

Use Recognized Quality Assessment Tools

According to Oxman and Guyatt (1988), “important aspects of the design and conduct of each primary
study should be critiqued and the standard used in these critiques made explicit” (p. 700). When
conducting aggregative reviews, researchers should assess the quality of the primary studies by using
recognized assessment tools and checklists such as those proposed by Pinsonneault and Kraemer (1993)
for survey research, Dubé and Paré (2003) for positivist case research, and Paré, Cameron, Poba-Nzaou
and Templier (2013) for ranking-type Delphi studies. Turner et al. (2010) and Hauge et al. (2010) provide
good examples of how to perform such quality assessment. Both reviews rely on checklists that cover

Volume 37

Paper 6

129

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

various aspects related to the definition of the variables and their respective measures, the description of
the research method, and the reporting of the results.

3.4.2

Consider the Quality Assessment in the Selection of Studies or the Interpretation of
the Findings

Okoli and Schabram (2010) suggest that the quality-assessment process might serve two non-mutually
exclusive purposes. First, the results might assist researchers when selecting primary studies. For
instance, a researcher could apply a minimum quality threshold for including papers for further analysis.
Second, researchers might consider the potential impact of methodological quality on their review’s
findings. In fact, researchers recommend investigating whether quality differences provide explanations
for variations in results (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Quality scores might also serve to moderate the
results of individual studies when aggregating those results and further guide the interpretation of the
findings and the recommendations for future research (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007).

3.5

Step 5: Extracting Data

This step includes guidelines for the gathering and extracting applicable information from each study.
According to Bandara et al. (2011), this step includes determining what to capture and how to capture
things effectively. All categories of reviews are concerned with this step because the outcome of
extracting data is the primary material for analysis, which needs to be accurate and meaningful
(Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Cooper (2009) suggests that errors or bias in extracting data can lead to
a misrepresentation of the studies in the following analysis and, therefore, decrease the conclusions’
internal validity. When extracting data, authors of developmental, cumulative, and aggregative reviews
should also avoid bias and errors and ensure consistency. Extracting data for developmental reviews
usually includes some thematic coding and conceptual classification and, therefore, involves making
interpretations and judgments. Confidence in the results is achieved through an objective coding and
extraction procedure. Further, for cumulative and aggregative reviews, a clear description of what and
how the data was extracted serves the additional purpose of reproducibility.

3.5.1

Specify the Type of Data to Be Extracted

Authors of cumulative and aggregative reviews should plan and specify the type of data they plan to
extract from their primary studies (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Higgins & Green, 2008) and propose a
strategy to collect data (Higgins and Green, 2008). Most of the recorded data usually provide evidence
about the a priori research questions (Okoli and Schabram, 2010). Nevertheless, important information
about how the primary study was conducted, the research design and methods, or statistical results might
also be gathered (Cooper, 2009). Dubé and Paré’s (2003) review paper on rigor in IS case research
clearly specifies the type of information gathered from the primary studies. The authors also provide a
table that lists the coded variables that they included in their analysis.

3.5.2

Use a Structured Procedure for Data Extraction

In addition to the type of information extracted, authors of cumulative and aggregative reviews should
document clearly how they extracted their data for reproducibility purposes (Higgins and Green, 2008).
For all review categories, using a standardized “data extraction form” (Bandara et al., 2011; Higgins &
Green, 2008; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Okoli & Schabram, 2010), a set of “bespoke forms” (Pawson
et al., 2005), a “data charting form” (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Levac et al., 2010), or a “classification
scheme” (Petersen et al., 2008) is a widely recommended approach for structuring this process. The data
extraction form should allow researchers to collect all the information needed to address their research
question(s) (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Several alternative methods have also been proposed, such
as using an indexing or summary system (Cronin et al., 2008) or a concept-centric approach that involves
using a concept matrix to extract key information from the selected studies (Webster & Watson, 2002).
Jeyaraj et al.’s (2006) review on IT innovation adoption and diffusion provides a good example of how to
structure the data extraction process. The authors first identified a list of dependent and independent
variables from the primary studies. Then, they created a coding template “in order to uniformly code the
findings between independent variables and dependent variables” (p. 5). They further developed a coding
scheme that helped them assign values to the relationship between variables. The authors provide
practical examples of how they used the coding scheme in their review.

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

3.5.3

130

Conduct Parallel Independent Data Extraction

The procedures used for extracting data should minimize biases and judgment errors. Therefore,
researchers need to extract data in a reliable and consistent manner. Kitchenham and Charters (2007)
recommend that two researchers independently perform the data extraction exercise in order to minimize
errors and reduce potential bias. They suggest that at least a random sample of the primary studies be
cross-checked by two or more members of the research team. Further, as for the screening and selection
procedure, data that researchers have extracted should be compared and disagreements discussed and
resolved (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Also, the Cohen Kappa statistics can be used to measure the
level of agreement between researchers (Higgins & Green, 2008; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). Higgins
and Green (2008) further recommend using clear instructions and decision rules about coding the data in
order to facilitate the consistency of the data-extraction process.

3.6

Step 6: Analyzing and Synthesizing Data

The last step refers to using appropriate techniques to make sense of the information gathered and to
appropriately reporting the review results: “During data analysis, the separate data points collected by the
researcher are summarized and integrated into a unified picture” (Cooper, 2009, p. 16). Analysis and
synthesis can be done following different methods and approaches. For instance, narrative and
developmental reviews usually present verbal descriptions of the data contained in primary studies,
whereas cumulative and aggregative reviews might complement the narrative summary with quantified
data, such as a frequency analysis or more-complex statistical methods (King & He, 2005). Consequently,
even though all forms of reviews attempt to synthesize prior evidence and present findings that are both
valid and reliable, objectives in terms of rigor and methodological guidelines will significantly vary among
the different categories of reviews. As for the previous steps, cumulative and aggregative reviews also
require a thorough documentation of the analysis and synthesis process for reproducibility.

3.6.1

Report the Appropriate Standards for the Synthesis of the Results

As Cooper (2009) mentions, “rules for summarizing and integrating data from the individual studies might
be inappropriate and lead to incorrect cumulative results” (p. 249). Errors in analyzing and synthesizing
data are particularly detrimental for aggregative reviews that validate theories and test hypotheses. A
strategy to protect the analysis and synthesis process from potential internal validity threats is to be as
explicit as possible about the approaches, procedures, and assumptions for analyzing data (Cooper,
1982; Kitchenham & Charters, 2007). This also makes the review process easier to replicate (Cooper,
2009). Likewise, researchers should report their review’s results in sufficient detail to allow the reader to
critically assess the foundations of the authors’ conclusions (Oxman & Guyatt, 1988). Liberati et al. (2009)
propose a list of appropriate standards that researchers should report when presenting their review’s main
results. For instance, in the case of a meta-analysis, the authors should present the sample size and the
estimated effects with their confidence intervals and the pooled effect estimates across studies with a
confidence interval for each relationship (Liberati et al., 2009). Such information is commonly shown in a
table or a forest plot (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007; Liberati et al., 2009). Authors of meta-analyses
should also assess the consistency of the data using statistics such as the I² index (Liberati et al., 2009).
In the case of narrative systematic reviews, authors should explicitly present the qualitative inferences,
make their conclusions as transparent as possible, and explain conflicting results (Cooper, 2009; Liberati
et al., 2009; Oxman & Guyatt, 1988). They should also undertake a sensitivity analysis; for instance, by
repeating the analysis and comparing the results for subgroups of studies (Kitchenham & Charters, 2007;
Liberati et al., 2009). Sensitivity analyses are much less straightforward for qualitative syntheses, but
researchers could consider the possibility of conducting sub-group analyses (Kitchenham & Charters,
2007).

3.6.2

Describe the Logical Reasoning and Justifications Behind the Findings

Because developmental reviews focus mainly on creating new research concepts, models, theories, or
frameworks, the authors should clearly demonstrate how key outcomes emerged from the analysis and
synthesis of the extant literature. Moreover, a developmental review’s outcomes are usually validated
against criteria of analytical logic, creativity, and added value. As Webster and Watson (2002) mention,
the reasoning and justifications behind the findings stand for a crucial part of the data analysis and
synthesis process. Presenting the underlying logic and conceptual reasoning also helps the reader to
follow the connections between the research purpose, the analysis and synthesis of the evidence, and the

Volume 37

Paper 6

131

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

outcome of the review (Torraco, 2005). Researchers can use various forms and methods of logical
reasoning to make sense of the evidence from previous studies. For instance, Webster and Watson
(2002) suggest that researchers should justify their findings and propositions by using a combination of
theoretical explanations, past empirical findings, and practical examples. Torraco (2005) suggests other
approaches such as using a guiding theory or competing models in order to provide a coherent structuring
of the evidence. For their part, Wolfswinkel et al. (2013) recommend using grounded theory to analyze the
content of the selected studies because it provides “disciplined ways of analyzing and integrating findings
and insights” (p. 47).

3.6.3

Provide a Detailed Summary of the Included Studies

All forms of reviews should contain figures or tables that descriptively summarize the included studies’
characteristics and findings (Higgins & Green, 2008; Levac et al., 2010; Pawson et al., 2005). Narrative,
developmental, and cumulative reviews usually demonstrate both the reliability and accuracy of their
findings through a clear and structured reporting strategy (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Levy & Ellis, 2006a;
Pawson et al., 2005). Therefore, researchers should trace the usage and non-usage of primary materials
(Pawson et al., 2005) and, thus, describe the chain of evidence and how they constructed their findings
from the data they extracted (Levy and Ellis, 2006a). In addition, for cumulative reviews, researchers
should explicitly describe all characteristics of the included studies, such as the overall number of studies,
years of publication, research methods, context of the studies, or characteristics relevant to the population
(Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Levac et al., 2010). In the case of aggregative reviews, Liberati et al. (2009)
recommend reporting study-level information on the main characteristics of the primary studies included in
the review. Indeed, “publication of summary data from individual studies allows the analyses to be
reproduced, and other analyses…to be investigated” (Liberati et al., 2009, p. 17). In addition, descriptive
summaries may help in demonstrating appropriate relevance, representativeness. and generalizability
pertinent to the population of studies (Cooper, 2009). As an example, DeLone and McLean’s (1992)
review clearly indicates which primary studies supported each dimension of their IS success framework.

4

Discussion and Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we address the growing issue of review papers’ methodological rigor. After identifying four
broad categories of reviews, we propose a list of 19 methodological guidelines that cover all steps of the
review process and grouped them under the six following general headings: (1) formulating the problem,
(2) searching the literature, (3) screening for inclusion, (4) assessing quality, (5) extracting data, and (6)
analyzing and synthesizing data. Our framework is also comprehensive inasmuch as it covers all
categories of reviews that are published in the IS field and also highlights those guidelines that apply to
particular forms of reviews. Indeed, we contend that the set of guidelines we propose here covers all the
main aspects of the review process and can be used appropriately for all forms of reviews. Note that we
found only two sources that include guidelines for conducting narrative reviews. This confirms the lack of
commonly accepted methods and procedures associated with this particular review type (Baumeister &
Leary, 1997; King and He, 2005). At the same time, Paré et al. (2015) observes that narrative reviews are
the second most important type of reviews published in leading IS journals. As such, more effort is needed
to improve our collective knowledge about how to conduct and evaluate narrative reviews.
To the best of our knowledge, no prior research has attempted to develop such a comprehensive set of
guidelines to evaluate standalone reviews. As a first attempt to demystify the rigor associated with review
papers, our framework is broadly integrative, and we realize that particular review types (e.g., systematic
review, scoping review, meta-analysis) deserve more attention. For instance, the aggregative category
includes systematic reviews, vote-counting reviews, meta-analyses, and overviews of reviews. Hence,
there is a need for further discussion about the various forms and nature of literature reviews in our field.
Paré et al.’s (2015) recent work on the types of review papers is a valuable contribution at this point and
one of the first attempts to provide a descriptive account of IS researchers’ current review behaviors and
practices. Next, while a comprehensive and general framework is relevant, it is also important to caution
researchers that there are no sets of specific rules and recommendations that apply to all types of
reviews. Therefore, it is imperative to rely on guidelines that take into account the singularity of each
review type. We acknowledge that we propose a series of general guidelines and realize that not all
review papers have to implement all facets of these guidelines. Future work could develop in more detail
the appropriate rules and recommendations that need to be followed for each type of review.

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

132

Further, we believe our framework’s value rests on two principal elements since it applies to both the
process of conducting and the output of a review paper (see Table 1). As we mention previously, a
method is a tool available to researchers to produce new knowledge. The Oxford Dictionary’s2 definition of
a tool involves two meanings: both “a device…used to carry out a particular function” and “a thing used to
help perform a job”. While methodologists faithfully consider the impact of the method on the output’s
quality, they frequently neglect practical considerations and ease of use. However, a strong and valuable
methodology should improve the rigor of research work and help ease researchers in conducting their
own studies. Therefore, for each guideline, we propose specific strategies and describe available rules of
thumb that can help researchers in conducting their reviews. By decomposing the whole process of
reviewing into less complex and more manageable tasks, our guidelines also provides a framework that
should be useful to researchers and journal reviewers and editors. We believe our work also serves an
important educational purpose were it introduced to doctoral students in research methods seminars.
Ultimately, by providing the IS community with a structured approach to reviewing and a better
understanding of review methods, we hope to reduce the effort required in the future to produce rigorous
and effective standalone literature reviews. In that respect, future work could decompose each guideline
into more detail, help operationalize the guiding principles into practical strategies, and discuss the range
of methodological practices available at each step. For instance, vom Brocke et al. (2009) investigate the
methodological rigor specifically associated with the search process. Other contributions could focus on
the remaining steps of the review process. Notably, the last step (analyzing and synthesizing) is one of the
less documented. Indeed, data analysis techniques and processes are hard to evaluate because they
usually involve mental activities and reasoning mechanisms that are difficult to state formally. Only
recently have authors, such as Wolfswinkel et al. (2013) and Hoon (2013), proposed structured methods
and approaches to rigorously analyze data from prior literature. Further developments are definitely
needed in this particular area.
Regarding reviews’ output, we believe a careful consideration of the guidelines listed in Table 3 is likely to
enhance the overall rigor of review papers. To validate the contribution of our framework to the
methodological rigor of the output, we reviewed the various guidelines available at each step and
compared their appropriateness in answering specific issues of internal validity, external validity,
objectivity, and reproducibility. Therefore, we hope our work will provide a baseline from which to proceed
with conducting and evaluating standalone reviews in the IS field. However, while we regard the list of
attributes in Table 3 to be a positive sign, we caution IS researchers not to treat this list as a cookbook
recipe. While these guidelines might contribute to rigor, they do not guarantee it. Indeed, simply reporting
a procedure does not necessarily guarantee that it was performed appropriately or effectively.
Nevertheless, to further mature the IS field, we hope our framework will help the research community
make an informed judgment about their respective contributions to a “cumulative tradition” in our field.
Further research could test the applicability of our framework by exploring the current practices of IS
researchers and assessing the extent to which they adopt and implement the recommended approaches
and guidelines in conducting standalone reviews. Using our list of guidelines, future work could also
develop and validate an instrument and apply it to the IS research in order to provide an in-depth
evaluation of the methodological rigor of standalone reviews. In addition, future research could be directed
toward the relevance dimension of quality. As we mention previously, a review rigorously conducted but
addressing a problem that is not relevant would have low value for its audience. Standalone literature
reviews play an important role in evaluating a research domain by inspiring and providing directions for
further research (Webster & Watson, 2002). In this way, review papers frequently become “core” or
“milestone” papers in a field (Garfield, 1982; Paré et al., 2012). Relevance is quite possibly a substantial
explanation for this kind of influence of review papers on research streams. Therefore, the issue of
relevance deserves further scrutiny and more careful consideration.
To conclude, we expect this research essay to contribute to the growing interest in stand-alone literature
reviews and the recent trends of evidence-based management. Like Paré et al. (2015) and Rowe (2014),
we believe that the enhanced role of IS review papers requires that this expository form be given careful
scrutiny. We hope the framework and series of detailed guidelines proposed here will serve as a valuable
framework for those interested in evaluating or properly conducting literature reviews both within and
outside our field.

2

http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/

Volume 37

Paper 6

133

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Acknowledgments
We thank the editors of the special issue, the two anonymous reviewers, and Anne-Marie Croteau and
Ana Ortiz de Guinea for their helpful and constructive comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. We
also gratefully acknowledge HEC Montréal, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada, and the Fonds de Recherche du Québec—Société et Culture—for providing financial support for
this research.

References
Anderson, S., Allen, P., Peckham, S., & Goodwin, N. (2008). Asking the right questions: Scoping studies
in the commissioning of research on the organisation and delivery of health services. Health
Research Policy and Systems, 6(7), 1-12.
Arksey, H., & O’Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. International
Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8(1), 19-32.
Atkins, C., & Louw, G. (2000). Reclaiming knowledge: A case for evidence-based information systems.
Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Information Systems, 39–45.
Bandara, W., Miskon, S., & Fielt, E. (2011). A systematic, tool-supported method for conducting literature
reviews in information systems. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 19th European
Conference on Information Systems, Helsinki, Finland.
Baskerville, R. L., & Myers, M. D. (2002). Information systems as a reference discipline. MIS Quarterly,
26(1), 1-14.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1997). Writing narrative literature reviews. Review of General
Psychology, 1(3), 311-320.
Beck, C. T., Keddy, B. A., & Cohen, M. Z. (1994). Reliability and validity issues in phenomenological
research. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 16(3), 254-267.
Bélanger, F., & Carter, L. (2012). Digitizing government interactions with constituents: An historical review
of e-government research in information systems. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 13, 363-394.
Briner, R. B., Denyer, D., & Rousseau, D. M. (2009). Evidence-based management: Concept cleanup
time? The Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(4), 19-32.
Card, N. A. (2012). Applied meta-analysis for social science research. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Carnwell, R., & Daly, W. (2001). Strategies for the construction of a critical review of the literature. Nurse
Education in Practice, 1(2), 57-63.
Chen, W., & Hirschheim, R. (2004). A paradigmatic and methodological examination of information
systems research from 1991 to 2001. Information Systems Journal, 14(3), 197-235.
Cooper, H. M. (1988). Organizing knowledge syntheses: A taxonomy of literature reviews. Knowledge in
Society, 1(1), 104-126.
Cooper, H. M. (2009). Research synthesis and meta-analysis: A step-by-step approach (4th ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cooper, H. M. (1982). Scientific guidelines for conducting integrative research reviews. Review of
Educational Research, 52(2), 291-302.
Coryn, C. L. S. (2007). The “holy trinity” of methodological rigor: A skeptical view. Journal of
Multidisciplinary Evaluation, 4(7), 26-31.
Cronin, P., Ryan, F., & Coughlan, M. (2008). Undertaking a literature review: A step-by-step approach.
British Journal of Nursing, 17(1), 38-43.
Davies, D., & Dodd, J. (2002). Qualitative research and the question of rigor. Qualitative Health Research,
12(2), 279-289.

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

134

DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (1992). Information systems success: The quest for the dependent
variable. Information Systems Research, 3(1), 60-95.
Dixon-Woods, M., Agarwal, S., Young, B., Jones, D., & Sutton, A. (2004). Integrative approaches to
qualitative and quantitative evidence. London, UK: Health Development Agency.
Dubé, L., & Paré, G. (2003). Rigor in information systems positivist case research: Current practices,
trends, and recommendations. MIS Quarterly, 27(4), 597-636.
Fichman, R. G. (1992). Information technology diffusion: A review of empirical research. Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Information Systems, 195–206.
Garfield, E. (1982). ISI’s “new” index to scientific reviews: Applying Research front specialty searching to
the retrieval of the review literature. Current Contents, 39, 5-12.
Gough, D., Thomas, J., & Oliver, S. (2012). Clarifying differences between review designs and methods.
Systematic Reviews, 1(28), 1-9.
Grant, M. J., & Booth, A. (2009). A typology of reviews: An analysis of 14 review types and associated
methodologies. Health Information & Libraries Journal, 26(2), 91-108.
Green, B. N., Johnson, C. D., & Adams, A. (2006). Writing narrative literature reviews for peer-reviewed
journals: Secrets of the trade. Journal of Chiropractic Medicine, 5(3), 101-117.
Hammersley, M. (1987). Some notes on the terms “validity” and “reliability”. British Educational Research
Journal, 13(1), 73-81.
Hart, C. (1999). Doing a literature review: Releasing the social science research imagination. London,
United Kingdom: Sage.
Hauge, Ø., Ayala, C., & Conradi, R. (2010). Adoption of open source software in software-intensive
organizations—a systematic literature review. Information and Software Technology, 52(11), 11331154.
Higgins, J. P. T., & Altman, D. G. (2008). Assessing risk of bias in included studies. In J. P. T. Higgins & S.
Green (Eds.), Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions (pp. 187–241).
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Higgins, J. P. T., & Green, S. (2008). Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions.
Chichester, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons.
Hoon, C. (2013). Meta-synthesis of qualitative case studies: An approach to theory building.
Organizational Research Methods, 16(4), 522-556.
Jesson, J., Matheson, L., & Lacey, F. M. (2011). Doing your literature review: Traditional and systematic
techniques. London, UK: Sage.
Jeyaraj, A., Rottman, J. W., & Lacity, M. C. (2006). A review of the predictors, linkages, and biases in IT
innovation adoption research. Journal of Information Technology, 21(1), 1-23.
Joseph, D., Ng, K.-Y., Koh, C., & Ang, S. (2007). Turnover of information technology professionals: A
narrative review, meta-analytic structural equation modeling, and model development. MIS
Quarterly, 31(3), 547-577.
Jüni, P., Altman, D. G., & Egger, M. (2001). Assessing the quality of controlled clinical trials. British
Medical Journal, 323(7303), 42-46.
King, W. R., & He, J. (2006). A meta-analysis of the technology acceptance model. Information &
Management, 43(6), 740-755.
King, W. R., & He, J. (2005). Understanding the role and methods of meta-analysis in IS research.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 16, 665-686.
Kirkevold, M. (1997). Integrative nursing research—an important strategy to further the development of
nursing science and nursing practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 25(5), 977-984.
Kitchenham, B., & Charters, S. (2007). Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software
engineering (EBSE Technical Report EBSE-2007-01).

Volume 37

Paper 6

135

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Levac, D., Colquhoun, H., & O’Brien, K. K. (2010). Scoping studies: Advancing the methodology.
Implementation Science, 5(69), 1-9.
Levy, Y., & Ellis, T. J. (2006a). A systems approach to conduct an effective literature review in support of
information systems research. Informing Science: International Journal of an Emerging
Transdiscipline, 9, 181-212.
Levy, Y., & Ellis, T. J. (2006b). Towards a framework of literature review process in support of information
systems research. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2006 Informing Science and IT
Education Joint Conference, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P. C., Loannidis, J. P. A., Clarke, M.,
Devereaux, P. J., Kleijnen, J., & Moher, D. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: Explanation and
elaboration. PLoS Med, 6(7), e1000100.
Liu, Z., Min, Q., & Ji, S. (2008). A comprehensive review of research in IT adoption. Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 1-5.
Ma, Q., & Liu, L. (2004). The technology acceptance model: A meta-analysis of empirical findings. Journal
of Organizational and End User Computing, 16(1), 59-72.
Montori, V. M., & Guyatt, G. H. (2008). Progress in evidence-based medicine. The Journal of the
American Medical Association, 300(15), 1814-1816.
Morse, J. M., Barrett, M., Mayan, M., Olson, K., & Spiers, J. (2002). Verification strategies for establishing
reliability and validity in qualitative research. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 1(2), 1322.
Noblit, G. W., & Hare, R. D. (1988). Meta-ethnography: Synthesizing qualitative studies. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Oates, B. (2011). Evidence-based information systems: A decade later. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Information Systems, Helsinki, Finland.
Oates, B., Edwards, H., & Wainwright, D. (2012). A model-driven method for the systematic literature
review of qualitative empirical research. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
Information Systems, 1-18.
Ogawa, R. T., & Malen, B. (1991). Towards rigor in reviews of multivocal literatures: Applying the
exploratory case study method. Review of Educational Research, 61(3), 265-286.
Okoli, C., & Schabram, K. (2010). A guide to conducting a systematic literature review of information
systems research. Sprouts, 10(26), 1-46.
Oxman, A. D. (1994). Checklists for review articles. British Medical Journal, 309(6955), 648-651.
Oxman, A. D., & Guyatt, G. H. (1988). Guidelines for reading literature reviews. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 138(8), 697-703.
Paré, G., Cameron, A. F., Poba-Nzaou, P., & Templier, M. (2013). A systematic assessment of rigor in
information systems ranking-type Delphi studies. Information & Management, 50(5), 207-217.
Paré, G., Trudel, M. C., & Jaana, M. (2012). Stand-alone literature reviews in information systems
research: Development of a taxonomy of review types and assessment of current practices. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the 2012 ASAC Conference—Information Systems Division, St
John’s, Canada.
Paré, G., Trudel, M. C., Jaana, M., & Kitsiou, S. (2015). Synthesizing information systems knowledge: A
typology of literature reviews. Information & Management, 52(2), 183-199.
Parker, C. M., & Castleman, T. (2009). Small firm e-business adoption: A critical analysis of theory.
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 22(1/2), 167-182.
Pawson, R., Greenhalgh, T., Harvey, G., & Walshe, K. (2005). Realist review—a new method of
systematic review designed for complex policy interventions. Journal of Health Services Research
& Policy, 10(S1), 21-34.

Volume 37

Paper 6

Communications of the Association for Information Systems

136

Petersen, K., Feldt, R., Mujtaba, S., & Mattsson, M. (2008). Systematic mapping studies in software
engineering. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in
Software Engineering, 71-80.
Pfeffer, J., & Sutton, R. I. (2006). Evidence-based management. Harvard Business Review, 84(1), 62-74.
Pinsonneault, A., & Kraemer, K. L. (1993). Survey research methodology in management information
systems: An assessment. Journal of Management Information Systems, 10(2), 75-105.
Reay, T., Berta, W., & Kohn, M. K. (2009). What’s the evidence on evidence-based management?
Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(4), 5-18.
Robey, D., Im, G., & Wareham, J. D. (2008). Theoretical foundations of empirical research on
interorganizational systems: Assessing past contributions and guiding future directions. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 9(9), 497-518.
Rousseau, D. M., Manning, J., & Denyer, D. (2008). Evidence in management and organizational science:
Assembling the field’s full weight of scientific knowledge through syntheses. The Academy of
Management Annals, 2(1), 475-515.
Rowe, F. (2014). What literature review is not: Diversity, boundaries and recommendations. European
Journal of Information Systems, 23, 241-255.
Sandelowski, M., Voils, C. I., & Barroso, J. (2006). Defining and designing mixed research synthesis
studies. Research in the Schools, 13(1), 29-40.
Sandelowski, M., Voils, C. I., Leeman, J., & Crandell, J. L. (2012). Mapping the mixed methods–mixed
research synthesis terrain. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 6(4), 317-331.
Schwarz, A., Mehta, M., Johnson, N., & Chin, W. W. (2007). Understanding frameworks and reviews: A
commentary to assist us in moving our field forward by analyzing our past. Database for Advances
in Information Systems, 38(3), 29-49.
Shea, B. J., Grimshaw, J. M., Wells, G. A., Boers, M., Andersson, N., Hamel, C., Porter, A. C., Tugwell,
P., Moher, D., & Bouter, L. M. (2007). Development of AMSTAR: A measurement tool to assess the
methodological quality of systematic reviews. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 7(1), 10-17.
Tobin, G. A., & Begley, C. M. (2004). Methodological rigour within a qualitative framework. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 48(4), 388-396.
Torraco, R. J. (2005). Writing integrative literature reviews: Guidelines and examples. Human Resource
Development Review, 4(3), 356-367.
Turner, M., Kitchenham, B., Brereton, P., Charters, S., & Budgen, D. (2010). Does the technology
acceptance model predict actual use? A systematic literature review. Information and Software
Technology, 52(5), 463-479.
Varey, R. J., Wood-Harper, T., & Wood, B. (2002). A theoretical review of management and information
systems using a critical communications theory. Journal of Information Technology, 17(4), 229-239.
vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Niehaves, B., Riemer, K., Plattfaut, R., & Cleven, A. (2009). Reconstructing
the giant: On the importance of rigour in documenting the literature search process. Proceedings of
the 17th European Conference on Information Systems, 2206–2217.
Watson, R. T. (2001). Introducing MISQ review—a new department in MIS Quarterly. MIS Quarterly,
25(1), 103-106.
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature
review. MIS Quarterly, 26(2), xiii–xxiii.
Whittemore, R. (2005). Combining evidence in nursing research: Methods and implications. Nursing
Research, 54(1), 56-62.
Williams, M. D., Dwivedi, Y. K., Lal, B., & Schwarz, A. (2009). Contemporary trends and issues in IT
Adoption and diffusion research. Journal of Information Technology, 24(1), 1-10.
Wolfswinkel, J. F., Furtmueller, E., & Wilderom, C. P. (2013). Using grounded theory as a method for
rigorously reviewing literature. European Journal of Information Systems, 22(1), 45-55.

Volume 37

Paper 6

137

A Framework for Guiding and Evaluating Literature Reviews

Wu, J., & Lederer, A. (2009). A meta-analysis of the role of environment-based voluntariness in
information technology acceptance. MIS Quarterly, 33(2), 419-432.
Yang, H., & Tate, M. (2009). Where are we at with cloud computing?: A descriptive literature review.
Proceedings of the 20th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, 807–819.

About the Authors
Mathieu Templier is Assistant Professor of Management Information Systems at the Faculty of Business
Administration at Université Laval, Québec City, Canada. His research interests focus on the adoption and
implementation of information systems, the impacts of information technology in organizations, and
research methods. His work has appeared in Information & Management, IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, the Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS) proceedings and the Administrative Sciences Association of Canada
Conference proceedings.
Guy Paré is Professor of Information Technologies and holder of the Research Chair in Information
Technology in Health Care at HEC Montréal. His current research interests involve the implementation
challenges and the impacts of electronic medical records systems and various forms of telemedicine. His
publications have appeared in top-ranked journals in the fields of information systems and medical
informatics. Professor Paré’s expertise has been sought by several leading organizations including the
World Health Organization, the Department of Health in France, Canada Health Infoway, and the Quebec
Ministry of Health and Social Services. He was elected a member of the Royal Society of Canada in 2012.

Copyright © 2015 by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on
the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information
Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on
servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to
publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via email from publications@aisnet.org.

Volume 37

Paper 6

