Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to
Charity and Ricardian Equivalence

James Andreoni
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Models of giving have often been based on altruism. Examples include charity and intergenerational transfers. The literatures on
both subjects have centered around neutrality hypotheses: charity is
subject to complete crowding out, while intergenerational transfers
are subject to Ricardian equivalence. This paper formally develops a
model of giving in which altruism is not "pure." In particular, people
are assumed to get a "warm glow" from giving. Contrary to the
previous literature, this model generates identifiable comparative
statics results that show that crowding out of charity is incomplete
and that government debt will have Keynesian effects.

I.

Introduction

The literatures on charitable giving and on Ricardian equivalence
both center around a neutrality hypothesis. In the charity literature,
government donations to a charity, financed by lump-sum taxes, will
crowd out private giving dollar for dollar (Warr 1982; Roberts 1984).
In the Ricardian equivalence literature, the consumption of parents
and heirs is independent
of the distribution of income among them
(Barro 1974). A similar result is found in Becker's (1974) Rotten Kid
theorem. While these neutrality results are discussed separately in the
literature, their theoretical foundations are really the same. All concern public goods: in models of charity, the charity is assumed to be a
I owe thanks to Theodore Bergstrom, Lawrence Blume, Russell Roberts, Richard
Steinberg, Hal Varian, James M. Walker, the editors, and some referees for helpful
comments. This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation grant
SES-882 1204.
[Journal of Political Economy, 1989, vol. 97, no. 61
? 1989 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/89/9706-00(1$01.50

1447
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1448

JOURNAL

OF POLITICAL

ECONOMY

public good, while in Ricardian models the benevolent parents care
about their heir; hence the consumption of the heir acts as a public
good within the family. Also, the demonstration of each is virtually
identical. Once one has proved that lump-sum taxes completely
crowd out private giving, then one can prove the neutrality of the
income distribution by constructing all redistributions as mixes of' a
neutral tax cut to one person and a neutral tax increase to another.
These two neutrality hypotheses, therefore, can be treated in tandem.
These hypotheses have many strong and well-known implications
(see Roberts [1984, 1987] and Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian [1986]
on charity and the survey by Bernheim [1987] on Ricardian equivalence). However, empirical evidence exists that contradicts neutrality.' In addition, many theoretical studies have demonstrated the
limits of the neutrality hypothesis. These have included the consideration of corner solutions (Bergstrom et al. 1986), liquidity constraints
(Hubbard and Judd 1986; Altig and Davis 1989), uncertain lifetimes
(Blanchard 1985), imperfect capital markets (Feldstein 1988), strategic giving (Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers 1985; Cox 1987), large
economies (Andreoni 1988a), and myopia (Shefrin and Thaler 1985).
Another natural hypothesis that has been suggested numerous times,
beginning with Becker (1974), is that people have a taste for giving:
perhaps they receive status or acclaim, or they simply experience a
"warm glow" from having "done their bit." While it is fairly obvious
that neutrality will be unlikely to hold with warm-glow giving, no
tractable expression of this effect has been modeled and explored.
Perhaps this is because it is less obvious what the comparative statics
will be or that identifiable comparative statics results are even possible.2
This paper develops a general model of' giving that includes a warm
glow. In this model, individuals are assumed to contribute to a public
good for two reasons. First, people simply demand more of the public
good. This motive has become known in the literature as "altruism."3
Second, people get some private goods benefit from their gift per se,

l On charity, see C'lotfelter (1985) for a discussion of' his and other results. See also
Schiff'(1985). On Ricardian neutrality, see Lucas and Stark (1985), (ox (1987), and the
empirical summary by Bernheim (1987). In addition to these, there are experimental
studies that demonstrate that the behavioral assumptions that are necessary for crowding out are contradicted in the laboratory (see Dawes and Thaler 1988; Andreori
1988b).
2 Earlier attempts at modeling this phenomenon have been based on Becker's (1974)
original suggestion and have encountered precisely this difficulty. See Steinberg (1987)
and the comment by McClelland (in press). As will be seen, this paper takes a different
approach.
3 The term was introduced by Barro (1974) and Becker (1974) and has been used
most recently by Roberts (1987).

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

IMPURE ALTRUISM

1 44(

like a warm glow. Because of this second and seemingly selfish motive,
this is called a model of "impure altruism." As will be seen, impure
altruism is a simple yet powerful approach to giving and is consistent
with empirical observations. With respect to charity, impure altruism
indicates that progressive taxation may actually increase charitable
giving rather than decrease it, as is commonly believed. The reason is
that the general equilibrium effects of taxation depend only on the
relative strengths of the warm-glow and altruism motives, not on
income elasticities. With respect to Ricardian equivalence, this paper
will show that if people "enjoy" making gifts or bequests, then the
warm-glow effects will always dominate altruism, and debt will always
have a Keynesian effect.
Section II develops the model of impure altruism. Section III discusses how the results apply to models of charitable giving, and Section IV discusses how they apply to Ricardian equivalence and the
economics of the family. Section V presents a conclusion.
II.

Impure

A.

The Model

Altruism

Assume for simplicity that the economy has only one private good
and one public good. The public good is assumed to be produced
from the private good by a simple linear technology and thus can be
measured in units of dollars. Individuals are endowed with wealth w,
that they allocate among their consumption
of' the private good xi,
gifts to the public good gi, and payment of lump-sum taxes Ti. All
taxes raised are devoted directly to the public good. There are n total
consumers.
Let G = Et'= I gi be the total private contributions to the public good,
and let T = E''= Trvbe the total public contributions. The total supply
of the public good is therefore Y = G + T. A standard model of
altruism would then write preferences as U, = Ui(xi, Y), so utility
depends only on private consumption
and the total supply of the
public good. At the opposite extreme, we could imagine a person who
cares nothing at all for the public good, but gives only for the warm
glow: U, = U,(x,, g,). The warm glow is an increasing function of what
is given. We could call such preferences "egoistic." It is reasonable to
expect, however, that preferences include a combination of both altruism and egoism: people care about the public good but receive a
warm glow as well. Thus we can write the utility function as
U, = U,(xi, Y, gi),

i = 1, . . . n,

(1)

where U, is assumed to be strictly quasi-concave and increasing in all
its arguments. Note that this function contains both altruism and
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1450

JOURNAL

OF POLITICAL

ECONOMY

egoism as special cases. Note also that g, enters the utility function
twice: once as part of the public good and again as a private good.4
Let G _ .=
, g, be the total private gifts of everyone but person i.
Under the assumption of Nash conjectures, givers treat G-i and T as
exogenous. Each individual solves the maximization problem
max Ui(xi, Y, gi)
xi, Y,gi

subject to xi +

g-i

=

Wi-Ti

G_ + g, + T = Y.
Let yi = gi + vi represent i's total contribution to the public good,
including both the voluntary component gi and the involuntary component Ti. The budget constraint can be written as xi + yl = wi. It also
follows that Y = E'. I y Let Y__ = yjsiYjbe the total gifts of everyone
but i. Substitute yi
Y - Y-1 into the problem above and in turn
substitute the budget constraint into the utility function. Then, by the
Nash assumption, the maximization problem is equivalent to
max Ui(wi + Y-_ - Y, Y, Y-

Y-

- Ti).

(2)

Differentiating
(2) with respect to Y and setting it equal to zero, we
can solve for the optimal level of Y for person i. We assume, except
where stated, that the equilibrium is interior, that is, g, > 0 for all i.5
Hence, we can write the solution to (2) as a function of the exogenous
components of the optimization problem,

Y =.fi(wi
or, equivalently,

+

by subtracting
yi =fi(wi

Y-i

Y-

Y-_

+

T),

from both sides,

+ Y_i, Y-1 + Ti) - Y

(3)

The first argument of (3) comes from the altruism argument of the
utility function, while the second argument of (3) comes from the
under pure alegoism argument of the utility function. Therefore,
truism, (3) would be a function of only its first argument: yi = f1(w, +
A model suggested by Becker (1974) in which utility is defined as Uj = Uj(xj, Ijoigj,
g,) is considered by Cornes and Sandler (1984) and Steinberg (1987). While the intent
of the Cornes-Sandler and Steinberg model is similar to that of the warm-glow model,
the two approaches supply remarkably different characterizations of the problem (see
n. 2).
' An assumption that is sufficient to guarantee positive gifts is limgo aUi/agi
While this particular condition will not be called on in succeeding analyses, it is important to note that an interior equilibrium under impure altruism can be guaranteed,
while no such condition exists for the pure altruism extreme. As we shall see, including
corner solutions is a simple and straightforward application of the results described by
Bergstrom et al. (1986).

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

IMPURE ALTRUISM

1451

Y-I) - Y-,. Notice that this formulation implies that pure altruists
treat giving by others, Y-i, as a perfect substitute for personal wealth,
wi. This is why Becker (1974) calls w- + Y_- "social wealth." Also, this
expression implies that only total giving yi is important, implying that
involuntary giving T, is a perfect substitute for voluntary giving gi.
This perfect substitutability
is at the heart of the neutrality hypothesis. Since a person is indifferent about the source of the donations to the public good, any constellation of taxes, transfers, and
contributions that leaves (xi, Y) unchanged (from some equilibrium)
for all i can be supported as an equilibrium; and, in general, there are
infinitely many such constellations.
Next, we can ask how the optimum changes with the introduction
of warm-glow giving. Notice that the warm-glow argument in (3), Y-_i
+ Ti, is the part of Y that i treats as exogenous. Hence, if altruism is
not pure, then giving by others is no longer a perfect substitute for
wealth, and giving through taxes is no longer a perfect substitute for
giving voluntarily. As can be verified by (2), when i compares constellations that leave (xi, Y) unchanged, i always prefers the one with the
most warm glow, that is, the highest gi. As a result, impure altruists
will be reluctant to swap g1 for either Tv or Y__ This unwillingness to
substitute perfectly across sources of giving will be crucial to the analysis of warm-glow giving.
To understand this, we must first examine the derivative properties
of f(wi
+ Y__, Y-1 + Ti). Call the derivative with respect to this first
a, where the a refers to the altruism component
of utility.
argument
If both charity and the private good are normal, then 0 < ft, < 1. We
can call the derivative with respect to the second argumentf,
since it
is derived from the egoistic component of the utility function. The
sign of fie is most easily seen by comparing (3) with the extreme cases.
= af/laY
For pure altruists, aflaw.
if we trade a dollar of w, for an
extra dollar of Y__, then the person would substitute perfectly by
reducing g? by a dollar. On the other hand, if the person is impurely
altruistic, then g? and Y_ . are imperfect substitutes: if we trade a dollar
of wi for an extra dollar of Y- _, then the person would be unwilling to
substitute perfectly by reducing g, by a dollar. Instead, g, will fall by
less than a dollar. This implies that aflawi ? af/laY.
Since afi/laY
+ fie, this implies fi, ? 0. This can also be seen to hold at the pure
fia
egoism extreme. If U, = Ui(xi, gi), then an individual's total gift y, will
be independent of the gifts of others. So fl/aY_ i = 1, which meansf,
+ fi, = 1. Given the normality assumption, this implies that, for pure
egoists, 0 < 1 - La = fie < 1.
We can now discuss the interaction between altruism and warmglow giving. One way to see this is to ask the following question: If we
were to decrease wi by one dollar, by how much would we have to
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1452

OF POLITICAL

JOURNAL

ECONOMY

increase Y__ in order to maintain neutrality, that is, to keep Y constant? If we have pure altruism, the answer is one dollar. Since people
are indifferent about the source of the contribution, if we decrease w
by a dollar and increase Yi by a dollar, then the person will simply
reduce gi by a dollar and restore the original equilibrium. Suppose
instead that a person is impurely altruistic. Then there will be some
stickiness in gi. Since gi and Y- i are no longer perfect substitutes, if wi
and Y_ are altered to keep w. + Y_. constant, then the person is no
longer willing to substitute perfectly away from gi. This implies that if
wi rises by one dollar, then Y_ needs to rise by less than a dollar to keep
Y constant. Indeed, at the pure egoism extreme, person i will simply
decrease gi by/fi,; hence Y_- need only increase by this amount.
This concept can be expressed formally by totally differentiating (2)
and setting it equal to zero: dY = f,,(dwi + dY-1) + f,,dY_1 = 0. Let Oti
be the ratio that solves this. Then by rearranging we see that
dY

I

fa
,

dwi

ti,? + te

We can see that oi has all the properties described above. If we have
pure altruism, then fie = 0, so ci = 1. For pure egoists, fi,, ? /i = 1, soo
that ot/ = [l. Impure altruists are in the middle:f,, a o, ' 1. Hence, oLi
serves to index altruism: the higher oti, the more willing the person is
to substitute gi for other sources of giving. Thus if oti > otl,,we shall say
that i is more altruistic than j.

B.

Neutrality

Consider first an increase in lump-sum taxes that are donated to the
public good. Following this, we can generalize the result to redistributions of income.
Without loss of' generality, let the taxes be changed on person 1.
Totally differentiating
the donation function of' person 1 yields
dy1 = fldYI

+ fle(dYI

= (fal + fl,
Substituting

dY

=

dy

-

+ dTi) - dYI

1)dY- I + fldTI.

dY - dyl and rearranging,
+

1

fij fia -f
f. , + l

dY + (1 -otl)dTI.

Totally differentiating
the remaining j
holding dT1 = 0, and rearranging, we get
du]

JI.

+ 'fie

1

we see that

dY,

j =

=

2....

2

(4)
n equations,

,

n.

(5)

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

IMPURE

1453

ALTRUISM

Solve for the general equilibrium comparative statics result by adding equation (4) and the n - 1 equations of (5). We then find that
ie
dy = 1 -,fi. + -fi
fil

i

= c(l

dY + (1 - a l)dv

+ .fie

(6)
-otl)dT,

where
C=
(1 ?

11

fi

If we assume that preferences are normal with respect to "social
wealth,"6 then 0 < /,,. +?f_
ti
1. This implies that 0 < c ? 1. Since 0 <
al ' 1, it follows that 0 ' dYIdT1? 1. But notice it can never be that
dY/dT1 = 1 since c = 1 would imply that at = fj, < 1. Thus it follows
that 0 ? dY/dT1 < 1.

This demonstrates that lump-sum taxes will, in general, only incompletely crowd out private giving. In fact, as can easily be seen
above, pure altruism (oi = 1) is both necessary and sufficient for
neutrality. Note also that the coefficient c in equation (6) is the same
regardless of who is taxed. Hence, equation (6) implies that the relative degree of crowding depends only on the degree of altruism of the
person whose taxes change. In particular, crowding is independent of
income, income elasticity, or income effects per se. Only the degree of
substitutability, oi, matters.7 T his illustrates the general force of the
theory: there will be less crowding out if the government levies taxes
on the less altruistic members of society, regardless of income, income
elasticities, or original gifts.
We can understand this result intuitively by noting that if i is purely
altruistic, then i will neutralize a tax all by himself. If Tv goes up by a
dollar, then i can reduce gi by a dollar and restore the original optimum; everyone else's gifts (both voluntary and exogenous) remain
unchanged. However, if i is impurely altruistic, then if Tvgoes up by a
dollar, i will be unwilling to substitute perfectly out of g,; hence g, will
fall by less than a dollar. As a result, there will be a net infusion of
social wealth economywide. This "income effect" will cause an increased demand for the public good.
6 This
assumption is necessary and sufficient to show that a Nash equilibriumi exists
and, moreover, is sufficient to show that the Nash equilibrium is unique and stable (see
Andreoni 1987).
7 To see this more precisely, suppose that at the initial
=
w,1 = UZt2,
equilibriumfl,
and YIl = Y2, so that income, income effects, and income elasticities are identical. How= 0. Then ot, < of.) = 1, and a tax oin person 1 would
ever, suppose that /f,. >f,
increase the public good while a tax on person 2 would be neutral.

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1454

JOURNAL

OF POLITICAL

ECONOMY

Next, we can apply this to redistributions of income. Since any kperson redistribution can be reconstructed as a series of two-person
redistributions, it is sufficient to state the result in terms of a twoperson transfer. Consider a redistribution that works through the tax
system. Without

loss of generality,

let dT1 = dT =

-dT2.

(The same

result can easily be shown to hold for direct redistributions, i.e.,
through dw rather than dT.) Then implementing this redistribution is
equivalent to implementing first the tax increase dT1 and second the
tax cut dT2. From our last result, the combined effect is
dY
dy =
dT
d

=

[C(1

=

C(O 2-

-

dY

dT

dT2

-

-

-

C(1 -

t2)]dT

o1)dT.

Hence, a redistribution of income will increase the total supply of the
public good if and only if the person receiving the transfer is more altruistic than the person losing income. Again, if all preferences are
purely altruistic, then the redistribution will be neutral.8 Note, too,
that neither initial wealth, initial gifts, nor income elasticities have any
direct bearing on the predicted outcome: only relative degrees of altruism matter.
Curiously, pure altruism is only a sufficient condition for redistributions to have a neutral effect on Y since Y will also be unchanged
if OI = Ox2. However, pure altruism is a necessary condition for the
redistribution to have a neutral effect on all consumption, including
xi. To see this, note that in equilibrium the total derivative of person
l's donation function would be
dydi

fia, fi

+ +fie
fie
ttn+

=

(1 -

-I

dY + (1 - o1)dTI

fl e
1)dT1.

Since dx1 = -dy 1, then dx I = 0 if and only if cI = 1. A similar result
holds for person 2.
The intuition for this result follows that for crowding out. If the
person receiving the tax cut is more willing to adjust her g to offset the
tax (i.e., is more altruistic) than the person receiving the tax increase,
8 If people were assumed also to gain utility from paying taxes, then utility would
have the form Uj = Ui(xI, Y, gi + 7i). It can easily be shown that lump-sum taxes will
completely crowd out private giving and that redistributions through the tax system will
also be neutral, but that redistributions outside of the tax system will not be neutral.

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

IMPURE

ALTRUISM

1455

then there will be a net positive infusion of social wealth economywide. The aggregate effect will be to increase the demand for the
public good.
III.

Implications for Charitable Giving

It is immediate that impure altruism is capable of explaining the
empirical regularities that the pure altruism model fails to explain. In
particular, free riding is not pervasive and crowding out is not complete. Moreover, the model suggests that many of the natural indices
used for policy analysis, such as relative donations, wealth, or income
elasticities, as well as much of the intuition gleaned from pure altruism models, may be inappropriate. For instance, Bergstrom et al.
(1986) show that only if the government taxes nongivers will the
policy increase private giving. Therefore, if giving is a normal good,
this implies that making the tax schedule less progressive would not
hurt charity markets and would be likely to help them. Under impure
altruism, however, this is not necessarily the case: neither wealth,
generosity, nor relative income elasticities have a direct bearing. If
those with lower income are more altruistic, regardless of income
elasticities, then more progressive taxation may promote rather than
discourage giving.9
This analysis has, of course, ignored the possibility that many people may be at corner solutions with respect to the public good, that is,
g, = 0. Therefore, suppose that the government raises taxes on a
nongiver, say person n + 1. Then dy +I = dT,, + l. Since f, + i = 0,
then ot, + 0= ?, and it follows from the analysis above that the general
equilibrium effect will be dY = cdT,,+ I Comparing this with (6), we see
that the two expressions differ by a proportion 1 - ox. Thus if we
believe that givers are motivated largely by altruism, then the difference between taxing a giver and taxing a nongiver may be substantial.
However, if we believe that people are motivated largely by warm
glow, then the relative difference may be quite small. As a point of
reference, if we assume that people are motivated only by warm glow,
then t = La. Using an estimate of this by Reece and Zieschang (1985)
(similar results are obtained with other studies), we see that a = .023,
which implies that the increase in Y generated by a tax on a giver
would be roughly 98 percent of the increase generated by a tax on a
nongiver. Curiously, this 2 percent prediction of crowding out is similar to Clotfelter's (1985) estimate of 5 percent.

9 Andreoni (1987) cites evidence that suggests that this is true.

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1456
IV.

JOURNAL

Implications
for Ricardian
the Rotten Kid Theorem

Equivalence

OF POLITICAL

ECONOMY

and

The results above naturally apply to public goods within the family.
First, consider the model of bequests. Parents are taken as altruistic:
they care about their own consumption, xlp, and the consumption of
their heir, X/. Since the heir also cares about x/,, it is a public good. In
Barro's (1974) proof, voluntary bequests act to "undo" involuntary
intergenerational
redistributions generated by government debt, as in
the pure altruism case above. Suppose, however, that parents feel an
obligation to future generations. Family heirlooms, custom, or social
status may all compel parents to leave bequests, or they may simply
use their wealth to (strategically) exert control or influence over their
heirs (Bernheim et al. 1985; Cox 1987). In each case the utility of
parents also depends on the size of their bequest: U1, = Up,(xl,, Xh, b).
The utility of heirs, on the other hand, depends only on their own
consumption:
Us, = U,(x1,). We are now back in the realm of impure
altruism. Parents are impurely altruistic with respect to their gifts to
heirs, while the heirs can be thought of as "purely altruistic" with
respect to their own consumption. As such, redistributions from children (more altruistic) to parents (less altruistic) will reduce the private
supply of the public good (the consumption of the heir). Parents will
be unwilling to perfectly substitute bequests for debt; hence they will
keep some of their new "wealth" for themselves.
Suppose instead that the young are making gifts to the old. Now the
consumption of the old is a public good. If the young get a warm glow
from giving, then the old are more altruistic with respect to their own
consumption.
A redistribution from the young (less altruistic) to the
old (more altruistic) will increase the supply of the public good (consumption of the old). Children will reduce their gifts, but not by the
full amount of the transfer. With this simple modification, we see that
debt is not neutral. Regardless of whether there are gifts or bequests,
a debt will have a Keynesian effect: consumption will increase in the
period the debt is incurred. Note also that this model will allow for
both gifts and bequests to occur simultaneously.
However, debt will
affect both the gift and bequest relationships similarly; hence Keynesian effects will still hold.
A similar result holds if we modify Becker's (1974, 1981) model of
the family. His Rotten Kid theorem states that a rotten kid who seeks
to maximize his own income is also working in the best interests of the
family. The reason is that the selfish acts of a rotten kid are simple
redistributions of income: when a rotten kid tries to secure more for
himself, the head of the household will neutralize this by adjusting the
allocations earmarked for the rotten kid. Alternatively, we could as-

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

IMPURE ALTRUISM

1457

sume that the head of the household is a "soft touch": he enjoys giving
to his kids, rotten or not. Since kids care only about their own allocations, they are more "altruistic" than their parents. If a rotten kid
takes actions that reallocate household income to himself, then his
actions will not be fully neutralized. Hence, if parents enjoy giving to
their kids, then rotten kids can increase their own consumption by
behaving in a rotten manner. In other words, it is not sufficient for
kids simply to be rotten: they must be spoiled rotten.
V.

Conclusion

That publicness generates neutrality in models of giving has been a
subject of' great interest and concern in recent years. Researchers
have considered generalizations ranging from market failure to myopia in order to explore the limits of neutrality. This paper considers
perhaps the most natural generalization: that people derive some
utility from the act of giving. When we consider the effects of such
warm-glow giving, we find that neutrality breaks down in an intuitive
and predictable way: government contributions to charity will incompletely crowd out private gifts, and intergenerational transfers via
debt will always have Keynesian effects. The reason is that the warm

glow makes private gifts imperfectsubstitutes for gifts fromt other
sources. As a result, people are unwilling to swap a dollar of g, for a

dollar of'T'or Y__, which is necessary for neutrality.
This work can be easily extended to subsidies to giving. Bernheim
(1986) and Bernheim and Bagwell (1988) have shown that even "distortionary"taxes may have neutral effects when preferences are altruistic. However, Andreoni (1987) shows that this too breaks down
when altruism is impure. Again, this is because the warm glow makes
the government's contribution, including the subsidy, an imperfect
substitute for gifts made directly. Hence subsidies, as indicated by

econometric studies, will increase net giving. Finally, this work also
suggests a dynamic study of the family to explore how impure altruism may affect savings rates and economic

growth in the presence of

debt.
References
Altig, David, and Davis, Steve J. "Government Debt, Redistributive Fiscal
Policies, and the Interaction between Borrowing Constraints and Intergenerational Altruism."J. Monetary E(fon. (1989), in press.
Andreoni, James. "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of 'Warmi-Glow'Giving." Manuscript. Madison: Univ. Wisconsin, 1987.
"Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large Economy: The Limits of
Altruism." J. Public Econ. 35 (February 1988): 57-73. (a)
This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

1458

JOURNAL

OF POLITICAL

ECONOMY

. "Why Ride Free? Strategies and Learning in Public Goods Experiments."J. Public Econ. 37 (December 1988): 291-304. (b)
Barro, Robert J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" J.P.E. 82 (November/December 1974): 1095-1117.
Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of Social Interactions." J.P.E. 82 (November/
December 1974): 1063-93.
. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1981.
Bergstrom, Theodore C.; Blume, Lawrence; and Varian, Hal. "On the Private Provision of Public Goods."J. Public Econ. 29 (February 1986): 25-50.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. "On the Voluntary and Involuntary Provision of Public Goods." A.E.R. 76 (September 1986): 789-93.
. "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory and Evidence." In
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 2, edited by Stanley Fischer. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1987.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Bagwell, Kyle. "Is Everything Neutral?"J.P.E. 96
(April 1988): 308-38.
Bernheim, B. Douglas; Shleifer, Andrei; and Summers, Lawrence H. "The
Strategic Bequest Motive." J.P.E. 93 (December 1985): 1045-76.
Blanchard, Olivier J. "Debts, Deficits, and Finite Horizons." J.P.E. 93 (April
1985): 223-47.
Clotfelter, Charles T. Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago: Univ.
Chicago Press (for NBER), 1985.
Cornes, Richard, and Sandler, Todd. "Easy Riders, Joint Production, and
Public Goods." Econ. J. 94 (September 1984): 580-98.
Cox, Donald. "Motives for Private Income Transfers."J.P.E. 95 (June 1987):
508-46.
Dawes, Robyn, and Thaler, Richard H. "Anomalies: Cooperation." J. Econ.
Perspectives 2 (Summer 1988): 187-98.
Feldstein, Martin. "The Effects of Fiscal Policies When Incomes Are Uncertain: A Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence." A.E.R. 78 (March 1988):
14-23.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Judd, Kenneth L. "Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy, and Consumption." Brookings Papers Econ. Activity, no. 1 (1986), pp. 150.
Lucas, Robert E. B., and Stark, Oded. "Motivations to Remit: Evidence from
Botswana."J.P.E. 93 (October 1985): 901-18.
McClelland, Robert. "Voluntary Donations and Public Expenditures in a Federalist System: A Comment." A.E.R. (in press).
Reece, William S., and Zieschang, Kimberly D. "Consistent Estimation of the
Impact of Tax Deductibility on the Level of Charitable Contributions."
Econometrica 53 (March 1985): 271-93.
Roberts, Russell D. "A Positive Model of Private Charity and Public Transfers."J.P.E. 92 (February 1984): 136-48.
. "Financing Public Goods."J.P.E. 95 (April 1987): 420-37.
Schiff, Jerald. "Does Government Spending Crowd Out Charitable Contributions?" Nat. TaxJ. 38 (December 1985): 535-46.
Shefrin, H. M., and Thaler, Richard H. "Life Cycle versus Self-Control Theories of Savings." Working paper. 1985.
Steinberg, Richard. "Voluntary Donations and Public Expenditures in a Federalist System." A.E.R. 77 (March 1987): 24-36.
Warr, Peter G. "Pareto Optimal Redistribution and Private Charity."J. Public
Econ. 19 (October 1982): 131-38.

This content downloaded from 131.172.036.029 on July 24, 2016 11:40:29 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

