Original Article

Brand management to protect brand
equity: A conceptual model
Received (in revised form): 7th May 2010

Simon D.M. M’zungu
has research interests that span corporate strategy, corporate brand management and brand governance.

Bill Merrilees
is Professor of marketing and his research interests encompass branding and innovation in a variety of contexts including
firms, cities, communities, retailing and franchising. His research has been published in the European Journal of Marketing,
Journal of Business Research, Industrial Marketing Management and Journal of Strategic Marketing. His publications also include
a joint book e-Retailing (Routledge) and he is a recent joint Guest Editor (with Dr Charles Dennis) of a Special Issue of
the European Journal of Marketing.

Dale Miller
is Senior Lecturer and her research spans branding in several domains including cities, communities, corporate branding,
corporate rebranding and not-for-profit branding, as well as retail innovation; and sustainable business. She has published
widely, including in the Journal of Business Research, European Journal of Marketing, Long Range Planning, International Journal
of Retail and Distribution Management, and Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services. Her publications also include book
chapters and the book, Retail Marketing: a Branding and Innovation Approach.

Correspondence:
Bill Merrilees
Department of Marketing,
Griffith Business School,
Griffith University, Gold Coast
Campus, QLD 4222, Australia
E-mail: bill.merrilees@griffith
.edu.au

ABSTRACT Corporate and product brands are increasingly accepted as valuable
intangible assets of organisations, evidence of which is apparent in the reported
financial value that strong brands fetch when traded in the mergers and acquisitions
markets. However, while much attention is paid to conceptualising brand equity, less
is paid to how brands should be managed and delivered in order to create and
safeguard brand equity. In this article we develop a conceptual model of corporate
brand management for creating and safeguarding brand equity. We argue that while
legal protection of the brand is important, by itself it is insufficient to protect brand
equity in the long term. We suggest that brand management ought to play an
important role in safeguarding brand equity and propose a three-stage conceptual
model for building and sustaining brand equity comprising: (1) adopting a brandorientation mindset, (2) developing internal branding capabilities, and (3) consistent
delivery of the brand. We put forward propositions, which, taken together, form
a theory of brand management for building and safeguarding brand equity.
We illustrate the theory using 14 cases of award-winning service companies. Their
use serves as a demonstration of how our model applies to brand management
practice.

Journal of Brand Management (2010) 17, 605–617. doi:10.1057/bm.2010.15
Keywords: corporate brand management; brand equity protection; brand orientation;
internal branding; consistent brand delivery

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

www.palgrave-journals.com/bm/

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

M’zungu et al

INTRODUCTION
The rising complexity of the business
environment caused by changing markets,
fragmentation of distribution and media
channels, and the increasing importance of
networks and emphasis on co-creation of
value between the organisation and its
customers, places greater emphasis on
the value and management of intangible
resources. Intangible resources play an
increasing role in differentiating organisations and creating competitive advantage
and include organisational capabilities,
competences, skills and knowledge as well
as brands.
There is growing realisation that brands,
corporate and product are important intangible assets of organisations. Evidence of
the importance of brands is apparent in the
reported financial value of major brands and
in the amounts that strong brands fetch
when traded in the mergers and acquisitions
markets. For example, the brand equity, in
financial terms, of strong global brands
represents a significant percentage of market
capitalisation. In 1999, the brand value of
the number one ranked brand Coca-Cola
was 59 per cent of its market capitalisation;
for number eight McDonald’s, this was 64
per cent; and 77 per cent for number
22 ranked BMW.1 However, although
practitioners and academics give much
attention to conceptualising brand equity, less
attention has been paid to how the brand
should be managed and delivered in order
to create and safeguard brand equity.
The aim of this article is to develop a
conceptual model of brand management for
creating and safeguarding brand equity.
First, the growing importance of intangible
assets to organisations is discussed. The discussion highlights that, although brand is
one of the organisation’s major intangible
assets, it is often excluded in some of the
literature discussing the management of
intangible assets. Second, different conceptualisations of brand equity are reviewed,

606

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

followed by a discussion of the means of
protecting brand equity, through both legal
and brand management processes. In the
discussion, we argue that legal protection
of the brand alone is insufficient to protect
brand equity and that brand management
ought to play an important role in safeguarding brand equity. We then develop
propositions, which taken together form a
theory of brand management for building
and protecting brand equity. The propositions comprising the theory are represented
as a conceptual model. The theory is then
illustrated using 14 cases of award-winning
service companies, notwithstanding that
the cases were not developed with our conceptual model in mind. Their use serves as
an exploratory way of testing our model’s
practicality.

LITERATURE REVIEW
The growing importance of intangible
resources to organisations
A steady shift is occurring from marketing
management, which stresses exchange of
tangible goods, customer focus, discrete
transactions, value determined in the marketplace and marketing as a decisionmaking and problem-solving function, to a
view of marketing as a social and economic
process.2 The emergent view attempts to
unify literatures from fragmented domains,
such as market orientation, including customer orientation,3 services marketing,4,5
relationship marketing,6,7 quality management,8 value and supply chain management,9 resource management,10 and network
analysis.11 The emphasis of the emergent
view is on the exchange of intangibles, specialised skills and knowledge and processes
and relationships for co-creating value with
customers.
Although brands are valuable intangible
assets that add value for business, they
are missing from the emergent view of
marketing.2 Other researchers note this

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

omission and argue for brand’s inclusion.12
In this article, we argue that brand is one
of the most important intangible assets of
the organisation, and therefore pay special
attention to the safeguarding of its value or
equity.

The brand equity intangible resource
Two perspectives of brand equity are prevalent, the cognitive customer-based13 and
a broader approach that combines the
former with the financial equity of the
brand.14,15 North American scholars such
as Aaker, Keller and Berry share the customer-based view of brand equity. Keller,13
for example, views brand equity as the level
of awareness and familiarity and the strength,
favourability and uniqueness of brand associations that the consumer holds in memory.
Brand equity exists when these cognitive
elements are high. Aaker16 conceptualises
brand equity in terms of five asset components that are the sources of brand equity:
brand loyalty, brand name awareness, perceived brand quality, brand associations (or
brand image), perceived quality and other
proprietary assets, such as patents, trademarks and channel relationships. For service
brands, in which the company is often the
brand, Berry17 suggests that brand meaning,
in addition to brand awareness, contributes
to brand equity. Brand meaning refers to
the customer’s dominant perceptions of the
brand. According to Berry, the presented
brand, external brand communications and
customer’s experience with the company
are the main sources of the consumer’s
perception of brand meaning.
Some European scholars and practitioners, on the other hand, adopt a broader
perspective of brand equity to combine the
customer-based perspective with the financial equity perspective of the brand. Of the
latter view, Kapferer14 and Feldwick15 view
brand equity in three distinct ways: (1) as
the total value of the brand – when it is
sold or on the company’s balance sheet; (2)

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

as a measure of the strength of the consumer’s attachment to the brand and (3) as
the description of the associations and beliefs
that the consumer has about the brand. The
first view represents the financial perspective of brand equity, while the second refers
to brand equity as brand loyalty and the
third to brand equity as brand image. The
combined view of brand equity is processbased whereby brand assets (such as awareness, reputation, deep values and patents)
produce brand strengths (such as market
share, market leadership and brand loyalty
as well as ability to fetch a price premium)
that result in brand value in financial
terms.14 Kapferer14 defines the brand’s
financial value as the ‘net discounted cash
flow attributable to the brand after paying
the cost of capital invested to produce
and run the business and the cost of marketing’ ( p. 14). However, the means of
safeguarding brand equity needs further
exploration.

Legal protection of brand equity
One form of protecting brand equity is
through legal instruments such as patents
and copyrights. Pharmaceutical companies,
for example, protect their high research and
development (R&D) investments through
patents. Companies can also protect their
logos as registered trademarks and literary
publishing houses protect their publications
via copyright laws. Although legal protection of brand equity is helpful, we contend
that it is not sufficient for long-term brand
equity protection.
The combined perspective of brand
equity, outlined above, suggests that organisational competence in managing the brand
could be the key to protecting brand equity
in the long term. Kapferer14 implicitly supports this assumption when he argues that
market share, brand loyalty and financial
value will result from correctly managing
brand identity over time. In other words,
in the long term, better management of

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

607

M’zungu et al

the brand leads to better performance
of the products and services represented
by the brand. Although legal protection of
brand might deter competitive infringement, it is the strategic management of the
brand, which results in a brand personality
with unique symbolic features and valued
experience to the customer, making the
brand more difficult for competitors to
copy.18 Strategic brand management, we
argue, can safeguard brand equity and provide a long-term platform for sustainable
competitive advantage to the organisation.

Brand management to build and
protect equity
The thesis of this article is that safeguarding
brand equity in the long term is conditional
on the firm’s competence in strategic brand
management. In order to survive in the
competitive environment, the brand needs
to reflect the strategic vision of the firm.
The literature review suggests that strategic
brand management rests on having a brand
orientation mindset and possessing internal
branding and brand delivery capabilities.
This suggests three stages of strategic brand
management for building and protecting
brand equity: (1) adopting a brand orientation mindset, (2) developing internal
branding capabilities and (3) consistent
delivery of the brand.

Brand orientation mindset
Brand orientation is ‘an approach in which
the processes of the organisation revolve
around the creation, development, and
protection of brand identity in an ongoing
interaction with target customers, with the
aim of achieving lasting competitive advantages in the form of brands’ (p.117).19 It is
a mindset that entails that management goes
beyond the marketing orientation with its
focus on customer satisfaction and competitors, to a more deliberate and active
development of brands that are imbued with
emotional and symbolic values. According

608

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

to Urde, brand orientation is ‘market orientation plus’ because it is also strategic in
nature.17 Brand orientation is therefore both
inside-out (strategic) and outside-in (market)
orientated.
Within the brand orientation mindset,
brands are regarded as strategic resources and
expressions of organisational identity, which
can be linked to the organisation’s competencies and the development of sustainable
competitive advantage. The identity acquired
through its brands represents the organisation’s overall goals, values and positions.
Urde19 argues that brand management is a
strategic mindset that challenges the market
orientation assumption that the customer is
always right. Brand building is seen as facilitating an interaction via symbols between
the organisation and its customers. This
entails creating a brand personality that provides meaningful and valued experiences to
its customers and other stakeholders.
Research by Wong and Merrilees20 concurs with the normative view of brand orientation proposed by Urde. Using a sample
of senior executives from 400 firms, Wong
and Merrilees empirically investigated
whether brand orientation can partly close
the marketing strategy–performance gap.20
They found that brand orientation moderates the path from marketing strategy to
brand performance. Companies with a high
brand orientation, according to the findings,
are able to get more out of their marketing
strategy than those with a low brand orientation. These companies achieve a higher
degree of focus on strategy development and
implementation. Marketing mix variables
receive greater attention, and consistency of
strategy execution across the firm is greater
in brand-oriented firms. This suggests that
brand orientation not only focuses on the
firm strategy but also acts as an interface between strategy and its implementation. Consequently, we argue that the path to creating
and safeguarding brand equity begins with the
adoption of a brand orientation mindset.

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

Internal branding and brand-oriented
corporate culture
Instead of simply seeing the brand from an
outside-in perspective, an inside-out perspective is also essential.21 The argument is
that it is no longer sufficient to simply position and communicate the brand externally.
The need to embed the ‘brand spirit’
throughout the organisation is widely recognised in order to have organisation-wide
support towards the brand strategy and
implementation.22 Brand spirit ensures that
management and employees are part of
brand reality and play an important part in
conveying the brand meaning when interacting with customers and other stakeholders.
A close link exists between the corporate
brand and corporate culture, which is more
critical in service organisations in which the
company is also the brand. The relationship
of culture to branding is succinctly expressed
by de Chernatony23 (p. 159):
The new branding paradigm is therefore
one which emphasises value through
employees’ involvement in relationship
building. Internally brand management
is becoming culture management
and externally it is customer interface
management. In the new branding mode
corporate branding internally signals
messages about the desired culture and
externally it reduces information overload
problems from line branding, decreasing
customers’ information processing costs.

Organisational culture and customer interface management are therefore key elements of internal branding. According to
de Chernatony, creating internal brand
reality starts with the inclusion of the human
resource management director in the brand
management team. Gulati23 concurs with
the strategic human resource perspective
of internal branding. Gulati implies that
changing the organisational structure,
incentives and relationships, so that they are

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

congruent with the strategy, facilitates culture and customer interface management,
enabling the brand to deliver its customerfocused promise.
On the basis of a study of three firms,
Gulati23 identifies four sets of internal branding activities that successful companies
engage in. These are coordination, cooperation, capability and connection. Coordination refers to establishing structural
mechanisms and processes that allow
employees to improve their focus on the
customer. Cooperation refers to encouraging organisational people, through cultural means, incentives and the allocation
of power, to work together for the customer. Capability development means
ensuring that the organisation’s people have
the skills to deliver customer-focused solutions. Capability also means clearly defining
career paths for employees with the requisite skills to deliver the brand. Connection
entails developing relationships with
external partners to deliver value to customers in a cost-effective way.
Ulrich and Smallwood24 extend the
notion of internal branding to include the
leadership qualities of management required
to build a leadership brand. They argue that
a leadership brand is one with a reputation
for developing exceptional managers with
a unique set of skills geared to fulfil the
customers’ and investors’ expectations.
Such a brand inspires faith that employees
and managers will consistently deliver the
firm’s promise. Concurring with the culture management perspective outlined
above, Ulrich and Smallwood argue that a
leadership brand is embedded in the organisation’s culture, through policies and
requirements placed on employees.24
In summary, based on the above discussion, internal branding necessitates recruiting
and hiring the right management team and
employees, and ensuring that management
team members have the leadership qualities
to build a leadership brand. A further

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

609

M’zungu et al

requirement is training employees so that
they have the requisite skills to deliver the
brand. In addition, internal branding includes motivating employees, through career
planning and incentives so that they live
the brand, and developing relationships
with external partners to deliver the brand
in an economic way. At the heart of internal
branding is a supportive organisational culture, which fosters a harmonious organisational climate.

Consistent brand delivery
Besides a brand orientation mindset and
internal branding, the literature suggests
that it is equally critical to deliver the brand
consistently. Consistent brand delivery
enhances the brand’s positive reputation
with customers. Brand reputation is one of the
brand’s major intangible assets.14 According
to Kapferer,14 brand managers are responsible for simultaneously building the business and brand value, with sales and brand
reputation used as the two key performance
indicators to index managers’ salaries.
Chaudhuri25 concurs with the view of
reputation as an important brand asset.
Chaudhuri investigates the relationship
between consumer-level perceptions of
brands (brand familiarity and uniqueness)
and market-level data on brand advertising
and brand equity outcomes (market share
and ability to charge premium price). The
research shows that, although advertising
and marketing are the main drivers of sales,
their influence on two market outcomes of
market share and ability to charge premium
price is mediated by brand reputation.
Advertising and the two market outcomes,
market share and ability to charge premium
prices, had no direct relationship. According
to the Chaudhuri’s model, brand familiarity
and brand uniqueness determine brand
reputation in the competitive market space.
In other words, brand reputation stems
from leveraging consumer-based consumer
assets, which in turn determines brand

610

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

strength, as discussed earlier.14,15 Consistent
delivery of the brand could aid brand familiarity and perceptions of brand uniqueness,
thus enhancing brand reputation.
A growing body of literature associates
brand reputation with constructs such as
credibility and trust.26,27 Delgado and
Munuera-Aleman27 view a brand as comprising a set of expectations that the brand
offers a certain type and level of value. ‘Providing this value on a consistent basis is at
the heart of building strong relationships
with consumers because they develop a
sense of trust that the brand will continue
to deliver that value’ according to Delgado
and Munuera-Aleman27 (p. 193). Trust
comprises two components, brand intentions and brand reliability. Brand reliability
refers to the ability and willingness of the
brand to deliver on the value promised.26
Brand reliability equates to consistent
delivery of the brand values. As such, consistent brand delivery is a determinant of
trust, which in turn influences reputation
and brand equity.
Erdem and Swait26 suggest that a brand
can signal credibility by possessing the
expertise to deliver the brand values and
being trustworthy. They define trustworthiness as the consumers’ perceptions of
the firm’s willingness to carry through on
promises made. This view reinforces the
need to deliver the brand consistently at
each touch point with stakeholders in order
to achieve trustworthiness and a positive
reputation. Thus, ensuring the consistent
delivery of the brand should be a key part
of a strategic brand management process for
creating and safeguarding brand equity.

TOWARDS A BRAND
MANAGEMENT THEORY TO BUILD
AND PROTECT EQUITY
We have combined findings from the literature review to propose ideas for delivering the brand in order to safeguard
brand equity. We have organised the ideas

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

as propositions at this stage, which collectively form a theory of brand promise
delivery.
P1 A brand orientation mindset is the
first essential requirement towards
safeguarding brand equity.
This proposition is based on the brand
orientation literature. Adopting the brand
orientation provides the entire business
organisation with a strategic focus and a
platform for creating customer and firm
value. We argue that brand orientation
focuses on strategy and culture development
and because it is market-orientation plus,
providing a bridge between strategy and
execution.18 Adopting a brand orientation
mindset enables the partial closure of the
gap between strategy and performance.20 P1
therefore sets the stage for all the other
propositions for safeguarding brand equity.
P2 Brand needs to be clearly defined
before it can be developed into a
strategic asset.
A clearly defined brand provides benefits
to both the organisation and stakeholders.
Within the organisation, it enables employees to understand the meaning behind
the presented brand.17 Clearly defining the
brand is a step to brand strategy development because it makes explicit the rational
and emotional benefits that customers and
other stakeholders can expect from the
brand.14
P3 Brand needs to be communicated so
that its meaning is understood internally and externally.
Communicating the brand is an essential
aspect of its implementation because it allows
employees to know what the brand stands
for, its values and aspirations. Doing so creates
a greater chance of employee buy-in and

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

commitment, which the literature suggests is
essential to consistent brand delivery. Communicating the brand could benefit the
customer because doing so could reduce customer’s information processing costs.21
P4 Internal branding provides a key platform for living the brand within the
organisation.
The literature review shows that building
a leadership brand is contingent on internal
branding. Internal branding facilitates the
development of a brand-oriented corporate
culture that results in senior management
commitment and employee buy-in to live
and deliver the brand. It enables management to examine the commitments that
organisational people make to one another
and to customers.24 Another benefit of
internal branding is that it allows reduction
of the functional silos within the organisation that prevent inter-functional cooperation, which distract from focusing on
delivering customer-focused solutions.23 P4
ensures that management and employees
live the brand.
P5a Corporate ability or expertise to deliver
the brand promise contributes to the
brand’s credibility with stakeholders.
The literature shows that one way to
achieve brand credibility is the ability or
expertise to deliver the brand promise.26
The brand’s credibility contributes to its
reputation with customers, which in turn
contributes to brand equity.27 P5a suggests
that organisation ability to deliver the brand
promise enhances brand reputation, which
is essential to brand equity building.
P5b Brand equity is conditional on consistent and reliable delivery of the
brand.
Brand reputation is an important brand
asset. The literature review shows reputation

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

611

M’zungu et al

Three-stage model of brand
management to build and protect
brand equity

Adopting brand orientation mindset
P1, P2 and P3 collectively form stage one
of the conceptual model. P1, in particular,
refers to the brand orientation mindset that
we consider a key ingredient to managing
the brand strategically. This mindset is
more critical to corporate brands, but is
equally relevant to product brands. It provides the platform for integrating activities
throughout the organisation, which create
sustainable competitive advantage for the
brand. Treating the brand as a strategic
resource allows management to create an
identity that defines the brand’s goals, values
and competitive position.
P2 provides a clear focus to brand orientation because it calls for the need to clearly
define the brand in terms of its purpose,
vision, values, competencies and aspirations.
This can be construed as brand strategy formulation. Until management can clearly
define the brand, its chances of being understood by staff, customers and other stakeholders, we believe, are severely curtailed.
P3 refers to the need to communicate
the brand because defining the brand
without communicating it to staff, customers and other stakeholders, leaves it
open to multiple interpretations at its various touch points. The perceived interpretations may not be congruent with the
brand defined by management via P2.

We combine the six propositions to form
the basis for a composite theory of brand
management to protect brand equity. We
call the new theory ‘the three-stage model
of brand management to build and protect
brand equity’. It is called a three-stage
model because there are three distinct stages
that together inform the brand management practice. The theory is concerned
with both building and protecting brand
equity. It assumes a strategic mindset for
managing the brand. The three stages of the
model are (1) adopting a brand orientation
mindset, (2) internal branding and (3) consistent brand delivery.

Internal branding
P3, P4 and P5a collectively form stage two
of our conceptual model. We consider
communicating the brand internally (P3)
an important step to brand strategy implementation. P4 refers to the need for
internal organisation-wide brand buy-in.
The organisation’s people and other network partners are critical to delivering the
brand. It is important that they internalise
and live the brand. P4 focuses the organisation on this aspect to ensure that the right
people are hired, trained, motivated and

is conditional among other things, on the
presence of trust. A brand is considered
trustworthy when customers perceive the
firms’ willingness to carry through on the
promises made by the brand.27 Trustworthiness exerts influence on consumers’
brand consideration and choice.26 P5a and
P5b together emphasise the need to develop
organisational expertise and gaining trust,
both of which contribute to reputation,
thereby enhancing brand equity.
P6 Brand recovery from perceived
breaches of promise is essential to safeguarding reputation.
A trusted brand is often forgiven by customers when they perceive a breach of
promise, and therefore the ability to recover
from mishaps could be an essential part of
managing the brand. Having a blue print
of brand delivery28 and planning for possible breaches of brand promise could guard
against reputation erosion and contribute
to brand equity protection. P6, therefore,
is essential to the long-term protection
of the brand’s reputation, an essential
component of brand equity.14

612

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

lead in a way that develops and sustains
their commitment to the brand.
P5a is an important component of
internal branding stage because it calls for
the need to ensure that the organisation has
the competence to deliver the brand. This
refers to management and staff competence,
as well as to availing resources, which bring
the defined brand to life.

clear comparison of the firms with respect
to branding. Second, the cases represent 14
award-winning cases in that sector. Third,
branding was a key component of the investigation, although other components were
also covered. Notwithstanding, the cases
were not conducted with our proposed
theory in mind, and therefore not all issues
were tested for all aspects of the model. We
now examine each proposition in turn.

Consistent brand delivery
P5b and P6 collectively comprise the third
stage of our conceptual model. P5b refers
to the need for consistent and reliable
delivery of the brand. Unless the brand is
delivered consistently, its meaning could
vary across its several touch points. Should
the way the brand is delivered differ from
its communicated meaning (its promise),
this could affect its reputation and hence
reduce its brand equity.
P6, which refers to the need to recover
from breaches of the communicated brand,
forms part of consistent brand delivery.
When the organisation’s people know that
brand recovery is taken seriously within
the organisation, they are more likely, we
believe, to be motivated to rectify the
breach. For customers, knowing that brand
recovery is taken seriously by the organisation could allow them to forgive the breach.
Customers could also be more likely to
attribute the breach to other forces outside
the brand’s control.

P1: A brand orientation mindset
is the first requirement towards
safeguarding brand equity

ILLUSTRATING THEORY OF
BRAND MANAGEMENT FOR
CREATING AND SAFEGUARDING
BRAND EQUITY USING 14 BEST
PRACTICE CASE STUDIES
Existing cases are used to illustrate the
propositions pertaining to the new theory
of brand management to protect brand
equity. The cases were taken from Berry29
for several reasons. First, all of the cases
relate to the service industry, facilitating a

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

All 14 cases seem to support the notion
that, for a service company, the company
is the primary brand rather than the product
(service). There was general support that all
the cases cultivated their brand – to communicate their ‘reason for being’ to customers and other stakeholders.
As an example, the Container Store
cultivated its brand through steadfast
adherence to its core strategy, a consistent
message, creative advertising, community
partnerships and living the brand through
its employees.
Additional examples were less holistic in
their support of the brand orientation concept, possibly because explicit articulation
of the brand orientation was rare in 1999
when the cases were finished.
Complementary evidence from the cases
indicated that each case had a strategic
focus. Strategic focus is not necessarily a
branding focus, but there is some overlap
in emphasis.

P2: Clear definition of brand
The cases use strong forms of both colour
(for example, green and white for Enterprise
Rent-A-Car) and symbols (cows for Chikfil-A). The Dial-A-Mattress name itself, as
well as its advertising, projects a consistent
message. Customers can buy Sealy, Serta or
Simmons brand mattresses very simply
(convenience) at good value.

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

613

M’zungu et al

Mid-west Express brand is famous for its
‘best care in the air’. At the Container Store,
the defining message remains constant –
‘get organized, save time and space and
simplify your life’.

P3: Communicate brand meaning
internally and externally
Internal communications was common
to communicate the brand internally. The
Container Store used a variety of internal
communication tactics.
However, two of the cases, Enterprise
Rent-A-Car and Midwest Express specifically
targeted employees as an audience for much
of their external advertising. The external
advertising not only sets the standard
expected from the service, but also builds
pride among the employees. The cleverness
of this approach is that advertisements not
only transfer information, but also help
build internal commitment (pride). This
means that targeting employees in external
advertising supports both P3 and P4, to
which we now turn.

P4: Platform for living the brand
within the organisation
At Chik-fil-A, a key marketing approach
has been to get the operators to take ownership of building the brand. The cows give
the brand a distinct personality across markets and the operators strengthen the brand
in their local markets. The local marketing
effort is supported by head office marketing
support.
New store openings at the Container Store
are facilitated by collaboration with a
local community charity. In addition to
community partnerships and a consistent
message (P2), the company builds its
brand by living it through the servicemindedness of its employees. Reinforced
through communications, the Container
Store brand is the responsibility of all
employees.

614

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

P5a: Corporate expertise to deliver
the brand
The award-winning firms were serious
about investing in employees in order to
deliver the brand. Induction or orientation
programmes were important. For example,
Midwest Express conducts a two-day orientation programme for 25 to 30 new
employees every week. The programme
emphasises service delivery by simulating
the experience of taking a flight. A ‘boarding
announcement’ is made before the first session and lunch is served on a parked Midwest Express plane. Orientation of the
company values is an important part of the
induction programme.
At the Container Store, an entire week of
induction is devoted to new employees,
both full-time and part-time. The principles (values) of the company are an integral
part of the induction programme.
Other case firms devote considerable
resources to training and continuous
learning. For example, Charles Schwab, Miller
SQA and Ukrop’s Super Markets operate their
own corporate ‘universities’. Dana Commercial Credit provides each employee with an
average of 60 hours of in-house training and
tuition-reimbursed education. The continuous learning reinforces the firms’ core
values. The various courses emphasise product knowledge and role playing. Coaching
is also employed. The Container Store uses
full-time coaches as well as less formal
coaching methods. At Dial-A-Mattress some
staff have one day of coaching a week
included in their job function.

P5b: Consistent and reliable delivery
of the brand
Although the role of external marketing
communications helps, Berry28 suggests
that nothing is more important than the
customers’ actual experiences with the
service. Being served freshly baked chocolate chip cookies as you relax in a comfortable leather seat on a Midwest Express jet

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

defines brand meaning and builds brand
equity more powerfully than any advertisement. Service with a smile also helps.
Enterprise Rent-A-Car connects emotionally with employees of local body shops,
auto repair shops and insurance companies
by taking donuts to them week after week,
by building personal relationships and especially by keeping their explicit and implicit
promises.
Chik-fil-A’s cows invite customers’ affection, but have to be backed up by customers’ experiences with the service.

P6: Capability for brand recovery
from perceived breeches
The emphasis in the cases studied seemed
to be on reducing the probability of service
errors and breakdowns in the first instance.
Adherence to the previous propositions and
a general pursuit of service excellence
facilitate this goal. Thus, there was limited
explicit discussion of service-recovery
methods. The inference was, nonetheless,
that there were adequate procedures for
handling service failures.
Most of the case firms empowered the
employee to solve problems if they occur.
A number say it is ok to make mistakes
(no blame), but focus instead on finding a
better way or fix the process. This approach,
of course, builds trust among the employees
and helps to achieve greater buy-in to the
brand.

DISCUSSION OF THE CASES
The 14 cases were not designed around a
research protocol using the model, and
therefore they are unable to do full justice
to validating the model. Notwithstanding,
each case did substantiate parts of the model.
Collectively, all propositions were supported. Understandably, there were different nuances in how particular propositions
were validated, reflecting the style of each
organisation.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

Overall, the theory is supported. Evidence
backs the newly proposed model of brand
management to protect brand equity. Previous research has been piecemeal, supporting
part of the model. Now a more comprehensive approach is articulated and supported.
The model helps integrate the entire brand
management process, from a broad mindset
and vision, through internal branding and
finally consistent brand delivery.

CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND
FUTURE RESEARCH
Although brand concepts and brand equity
have been widely researched in the past
two decades, less attention has been given
to brand management and brand delivery
to customers. The current article, with the
help of evidence from 14 cases, redresses
this gap by modelling the process from
brand vision to internal branding to brand
delivery.
The brand management process is elaborated using six propositions to conceptualise
the three stages. All of the six propositions
were supported, as was the three-stage
model.
One limitation is that only best practice
cases were used to illustrate the theory.
Other cases are likely to fall short of the
model. However, the model can be used
by other firms to improve their protection
of brand equity. Another limitation is that
a theoretical paper can only propose a
theory. Subsequent quantitative studies are
needed to fully test the theory.
Future research could include quantitative studies to test the theory. It would also
be interesting to examine the model in a
non-service context such as manufacturing.
Such studies could be either qualitative or
quantitative.

IMPLICATIONS FOR BRAND
EQUITY PROTECTION
The use of cases ensures that the model
is practical, because of linkages to best

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

615

M’zungu et al

practice service organisations. Successful
service firms are using the model in part at
least, and therefore it clearly has the potential to improve performance and brand
equity and protect brand equity.
The three-stage model is easy to follow
in practice and, in a sense, each proposition
is a helpful checklist to any firm. Notwithstanding, it would seem that relatively few
firms have fully embraced the model. Even
within our 14 best practice firms, only a
handful seemed to have made strong progress
with all propositions (although this may be
a limitation of the data). Thus, moving from
a partial to a full adoption of all the propositions could be beneficial. Furthermore,
there is scope to strengthen those situations
in which a proposition is only weakly supported. For example, regarding Proposition 2, sometimes the brand definition is
restricted to a brand slogan. Some of the
award-winning service firms (or any firm)
could benefit by imbuing greater meaning
to the corporate brand and communicating
that to all stakeholders.
In summary, the article progresses the
idea that successful branding is not just
about smart, creative brands, but also about
well planned and executed brand management. Strong brands need to be well articulated, communicated and developed
internally and delivered consistently. Intangible resources such as brands not only need
to be recognised, but also safeguarded
through well-designed brand management
methods, and not simply by legal means.

REFERENCES
(1) Aaker, D.A. and Joachimsthaler, E. (2000) Brand
Leadership. New York: Free Press.
(2) Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2004) Evolving to
a new dominant logic for marketing. Journal of
Marketing 68(1): 1–17.
(3) Kohli, A.K. and Jaworski, B.J. (1990) Market orientation: The construct, research propositions, and
managerial implications. Journal of Marketing
54(April): 1–18.

616

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

(4) Gronroos, C. (1994) From marketing mix to
relationship marketing: Towards a paradigm shift
in marketing. Asia-Australia Marketing Journal
2(August): 9–29.
(5) Gronroos, C. (2000) Service Management and
Marketing: A Customer Relationship Management
Approach. Brisbane: John Wiley.
(6) Berry, L.L. (1995) Relationship marketing of services: Growing interest, emerging perspectives. Journal
of Academy of Marketing Science 23(4): 236–245.
(7) Duncan, T. and Moriarty, S.E. (1998) A
communication-based marketing model for managing
relationships. Journal of Marketing 62(April): 1–12.
(8) Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A. and Berry, L.L.
(1988) SERVQUAL: A multi-item scale for measuring customer perceptions of service quality.
Journal of Retailing 64(Spring): 12–40.
(9) Normann, R. and Ramirez, R. (1993) From value
chain to value constellation: Designing interactive
strategy. Harvard Business Review 71(July-August):
65–77.
(10) Hunt, S.D. and Morgan, R.M. (1995) The comparative advantage theory of competition. Journal
of Marketing 59(2): 1–15.
(11) Achrol, R.S. and Kotler, P. (1999) Marketing in
the network economy. Journal of Marketing 63
(Special Issue): 146–163.
(12) Brodie, R.J., Glynn, M.S. and Little, V. (2006)
The service brand and the service-dominant logic:
Missing fundamental premise or the need for
stronger theory. Marketing Theory 6(3): 363–379.
(13) Keller, K.L. (1993) Conceptualising, measuring
and managing customer-based brand equity.
Journal of Marketing 57( January): 1–22.
(14) Kapferer, J.N. (2004) The New Strategic Brand Management: Creating and Sustaining Brand Equity Long
Term. London: Kogan Page.
(15) Feldwick, P. (1996) What is brand equity anyway,
and how you measure it? Journal of the Market
Research Society 38(2): 85–104.
(16) Aaker, D. (1992) The value of brand equity.
Journal of Business Strategy 13(4): 27–32.
(17) Berry, L.L. (2000) Cultivating service brand
equity. Journal of Academy of Marketing Science 28(1):
128–137.
(18) de Chernatony, L. and Riley, F.D.O. (1998)
Modelling the components of the brand. European
Journal of Marketing 32(11/12): 1074–1090.
(19) Urde, M. (1999) Brand orientation: A mindset for
building brands into strategic resources. Journal of
Marketing Management 15: 117–133.
(20) Wong, H.Y. and Merrilees, B. (2007) Closing the
marketing strategy to performance gap: The role
of brand orientation. Journal of Strategic Marketing
15(December): 387–402.
(21) de Chernatony, L. (1999) Brand management
through narrowing the gap between brand identity
and brand reputation. Journal of Marketing Management 15(1–3): 157–179.

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

Brand management to protect brand equity

(22) Simeos, C. and Dib, S. (2001) Rethinking
the brand concept: New brand orientation.
Corporate Communications: An International Journal
6(4): 217–224.
(23) Gulati, S. (2007) Silo busting: How to execute on
the promise of customer focus. Harvard Business
Review, 87(May), 98–108.
(24) Ulrich, D. and Smallwood, N. (2007) Building
a leadership brand. Harvard Business Review,
87( July–August), 93–100.
(25) Chaudhuri, A. (2002) How brand reputation
affects the advertising-brand equity link. Journal of
Advertising Research 42(3): 33–43.

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX Brand Management

(26) Erdem, T. and Swait, J. (2004) Brand credibility,
brand consideration, and choice. Journal of
Consumer Research 31(1): 191–198.
(27) Delgado-Ballester, E. and Munuera-Aleman, J.L.
(2005) Does brand trust matter to brand equity?
Journal of Product and Brand Management 14(3):
187–196.
(28) Shostack, G.L. (1987) Service positioning through
structural change. Journal of Marketing 51( January):
34–43.
(29) Berry, L. (1999) Discovering the Soul of Service. New
York: Free Press.

Vol. 17, 8, 605–617

617

