The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0263-4503.htm

International Committee
of the Red Cross: emblems
of humanity
Ann M. Torres
J.E. Cairnes Graduate School of Business and Economics,
National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

223
Received November 2008
Revised April 2009
Accepted April 2009

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to examine the branding and communications strategy of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). The ICRC is the world’s oldest non-religious
organisation dedicated to humanitarian relief. The ICRC’s remit includes civilian and military victims
of armed conflicts and internal disturbances, as well as human rights issues that transcend conflict
situations, such as disaster response and preparedness, health and care in the community and
humanitarian principles and values. The ICRC is the founding body of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement and coordinates the efforts of the National Societies and their International
Federation.
Design/methodology/approach – Various secondary sources are used to collate the information
from which the case study is developed.
Findings – The ICRC’s longevity is attributed to its ability to evolve, albeit at times slowly. However,
the environment in which the ICRC operates is changing rapidly. Like many international non-profit
organisations, the ICRC faces considerable challenges to ensure it remains relevant by responding to
the shifting environment in a flexible and creative manner. Consequently, the ICRC’s communication
efforts have become increasingly important.
Originality/value – The case study provides the opportunity to examine the branding and
communications strategy for a prominent non-profit organisation.
Keywords Brand identity, Branding, Marketing communications, Non-profit organizations,
International organizations
Paper type Case study

Introduction
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), established in 1863, is a neutral
organisation that works towards ensuring humanitarian protection. The ICRC (2005a),
head-quartered in Geneva, Switzerland, operates in more than 80 countries and employs
more than 12,000 staff. It is the world’s oldest non-religious organisation dedicated to
humanitarian relief and it has a unique place in international law. The ICRC acts as the
custodian of the Geneva Conventions and promotes adherence to International
Humanitarian Law (IHL); it is identified by the four 1949 Geneva Conventions as an
impartial humanitarian body (Casey and Rivkin, 2005). The ICRC is mandated to assist
victims of war and violence (Forsythe, 2005) and because of its mandate and legal status, Marketing Intelligence & Planning
Vol. 28 No. 2, 2010
it is distinct from intergovernmental agencies, such as United Nations organisations,
pp. 223-235
Limited
and from non-governmental organisations (NGOs). The agreements the ICRC q Emerald Group Publishing0263-4503
DOI 10.1108/02634501011029709
establishes with the authorities of the countries in which its delegations and missions

MIP
28,2

224

work, means the ICRC avails of immunities and privileges, which preserves its
neutrality and freedom ICRC (2005a).
Humanitarian network and mission
The movement
The Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, also known simply as the Movement,
encompasses three independent bodies: the ICRC, the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and the 186 National Societies. Each body has
its own status and none have authority over the other (Quelch and Laidler-Kylander,
2003). Together, the bodies work to uphold seven fundamental principles: humanity,
impartiality, neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity and universality. The
principle of humanity forms the central purpose of the Movement’s activities, which is
“to prevent and alleviate human suffering, without discrimination, and to protect
human dignity” (ICRC, 2005a, p. 9).
IFRC works with National Societies in responding to catastrophes and co-ordinating
development programmes with respect to disaster preparedness, health care and the
promotion of humanitarian values (IFRC, 2007). The National Societies form the core of
the Movement, which encompass 97 million volunteers, who “provide a wide variety of
services, ranging from disaster relief and assistance for the victims of war, to first aid
training and restoring family links” (IFRC, 2007, p. 5). The volunteers support public
authorities and their local knowledge enables the Movement to give assistance where it
is required. Indeed, “National Society volunteers are often the first on the scene when a
disaster strikes and remain active within affected communities long after everyone else
has come and gone” (IFRC, 2007, p. 5). It is this network of community-based volunteers
that gives the Movement a distinct advantage in addressing humanitarian challenges.
The ICRC manages the efforts of the National Societies and their International
Federation and, in times of conflict, it is the lead agency to coordinate relief activities.
In addition to humanitarian coordination and diplomacy, the ICRC assists dispersed
families, individuals deprived of their freedom, as well as the wounded and sick of
existing or emerging conflict (ICRC, 2007b). The ICRC’s delegations and missions
primarily employ nationals of the countries in which it works. In turn, these nationals
provide invaluable insights to their country’s socio-political context. Moreover, the
ICRC’s field research for producing:
[. . .] its budget projections for the following year is so thorough and impressive that it really
constitutes an early warning system for humanitarian crises; [. . .] Alert diplomats [pay]
careful attention to these ICRC budgetary reports as an early warning indicator (Forsythe,
2005, p. 312).

Unique position
The ICRC initially focused on the welfare of wounded soldiers in international war.
However, it has extended its remit to include “civilian and military victims of armed
conflicts and internal disturbances” (ICRC, 2005a, p. 1), as well as “human rights issues
that transcend conflict situations” (Forsythe, 2005, p. 2), such as “disaster response,
disaster preparedness, health and care in the community” (Quelch and
Laidler-Kylander, 2003, p. 1). Since the end of the cold war, the ICRC’s activities
have expanded considerably. As a consequence, of its increased international presence,

the ICRC has received more media attention, but as an organisation it is still poorly
understood. However, there are those working within the ICRC who are unconcerned
their organisation is not better understood by the general public; they believe the
organisation should “have a very low profile with the media and quite a high profile
with the prisoners” and victims they assist (Forsythe, 2005, p. 302).
A human rights official with the ICRC, best sums up the organisation’s unique
position:
We’re admired – we’ve won Nobel Peace Prizes[1] – but we’re not liked. We have to be the
one organization accepted by all sides, which means we can’t reveal what either side wants to
hear (Becker, 2002, p. 1).

It is suggested this inherent tension of opposites is what makes the ICRC a successful
organisation, perhaps spurring the organisation to seek creative innovations to
complex problems and situations. Nevertheless:
[. . .] the ICRC at the start of the twenty-first century is decidedly more professional and less
amateurish than ever before in its long history. It is more thoughtful about maximizing as
much as possible its independence, neutrality and impartiality (Forsythe, 2005, p. 310).

Moreover, the ICRC’s ability to evolve and change has facilitated its organisational
longevity. However, the complexities of its humanitarian activities make it challenging
to brand and promote the ICRC effectively.
Identity, brand equity and marketing in non-profit organisations
Visual identity
Visual identity is significant in the way in which an organisation presents itself to
relevant audiences; “its importance is usually sought in its relationship with corporate
identity, image, and reputation” (van den Bosch et al., 2006, p. 139). The elements that
typically constitute visual identity are: name, logo, colour palette, font type, and
perhaps a tagline; guidelines for their use should result in a consistent set of visual cues
that express an organisation’s fundamental nature (van den Bosch et al., 2006). Hence,
the elements of visual identity are the banners for a brand. Many non-profits are
increasingly aware that visual identity is the means by which to leverage their brand,
which essentially reflects their organisation’s commitment and ability to fulfil their
mission.
Unlike tangible products that have the advantage of providing visual cues through
packaging, non-profit organisations offer “services [that] are inherently invisible before
they are delivered and can only be assessed retrospectively. [Consequently, non-profit
organisations must] work harder to make themselves and their services visible”
(van den Bosch et al., 2006, p. 142). On the other hand, trust in non-profit organisations
“is substantially higher than trust in other groups such as business, government and
the media” (Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009, p. 57)[2]. Hence, the higher levels of
trust in non-profit organisations may translate into higher levels of brand equity,
which is essentially a measure of brand strength (Keller, 2003).
Brand equity and branding
Brand equity is typically viewed as the value of the brand encompassing the notions of
brand loyalty, brand awareness, perceived quality and brand associations (Keller,
2003; Aaker, 2007). Many believe building brand equity should be a priority for

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

225

MIP
28,2

226

non-profits, as having a strong brand is as essential for non-profits, as it is for
commercial organisations (Judd, 2004; Nissim, 2004; Voeth and Herbst, 2008).
However, the differences between for-profit and non-profit organisations suggest that
non-profits may build brand equity differently (Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009).
Oster (1995) outlines five areas in which non-profits differ significantly from
commercial enterprises: organisational structure, human resources, collaborative
focus, complex customers and mission driven. For example, the organisational
structure of non-profits is typically decentralised and flatter than for-profit
organisations. Employees working within non-profits are intrinsically motivated and
typically derive substantial non-pecuniary benefits from their work. The notion of
competition has less relevance for non-profits, and as a result, non-profits often pursue
a collaborative approach with competing agencies. A non-profit’s relationship with its
customers is not a market-based transaction. That is, those purchasing the services (i.e.
donors) from a non-profit must trust the non-profit to fulfil their mission in aiding
recipients. Similar to commercial enterprises, non-profits manage their organisation by
focusing on a mission; however, the role of the mission is substantially more important
for non-profits. Together, these five areas form the underlying drivers of brand
equity for non-profit organisations (Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009).
In developing a brand equity model for international non-profit organisations
engaged in development, advocacy and relief work, Laidler-Kylander and Simonin
(2009) identified four key variables: consistency, focus, trust and partnerships. Brand
consistency is closely allied to clarity and convergence (Keller, 2003); it is suggested
brand consistency is relatively more important for non-profits due to the “greater
complexity of brand audiences” (Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009, p. 63). As well,
“efforts to increase operational focus have a direct impact not only on brand equity, but
also effects organisational legitimacy and brand positioning” (Laidler-Kylander and
Simonin, 2009, p. 63). Brand trust is central to brand equity, and given “the disconnect
that exists between the purchasers and users of non-profit products and services,” trust
is critical to non-profits (Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009, p. 63). Partnerships
refers to co-branding alliances between non-profit and commercial organisations,
whereby high calibre partnerships may positively influence a non-profit’s brand
image, its potential to fund raise, and its ability to differentiate itself from competitors
(Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009).
Marketing strategies
As non-profits become more professional in their management practices, they are
embracing marketing techniques as a means to compete more effectively for donors’
share of purse. Further, non-profits “have learned significantly more about the value
and techniques of marketing through cause-related marketing partnerships [with]
businesses” (Knox and Gruar, 2007, p. 117). The marketing strategies of non-profits
differ from commercial organisations in several important ways (Chew, 2006; Knox
and Gruar, 2007). For instance, non-profits often pursue multiple non-financial
marketing objectives, they typically market for social change, and they may attract
more public attention, both favourable and unfavourable (Knox and Gruar, 2007). In
contrast to commercial enterprises, “marketing in [non-profits is] more contingent upon
a wider range of influential stakeholders” (Knox and Gruar, 2007, p. 116). As well, these
stakeholders may have complex relationships with non-profits and may also be

involved in developing the non-profits’ marketing strategies (Chew, 2006; Knox and
Gruar, 2007).
As part of their growing professional perspective, many non-profits have “begun to
undertake positioning at a more strategic level in arguably increasingly challenging
and competitive operating environments” (Chew, 2006, p. 341). Although political,
economic and social factors may contribute to positioning, “mission is the most
important distinguishing feature in [a non-profit’s] positioning strategy” (Chew, 2006,
p. 342). However, non-profits are progressively more aware that “simply having a good
cause [. . .] will never guarantee buy-in from a target market, any more than having
a great product will guarantee buy-in from commercial markets” (Hill, 2006, p. 59).
Hence, developing an integrated marketing plan, within which the communications
programme is located, has become essential for most non-profit organisations in
achieving their long-term goals (Valentine and Powers, 2006).
Emblems of humanity
Established in 1863, the International Committee for Relief to the Wounded, which
became the ICRC, adopted as its emblem the inverse of the Swiss flag: a red cross on a
white field (Quelch and Laidler-Kylander, 2003). Since then, the Red Cross and the
Red Crescent are among the most widely recognised and enduring symbols in the
world (IFRC, 2006). The Movement’s emblems not only identify the ICRC, the IFRC,
and the National Societies, but they also extend protection to humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as buildings and equipment during times of armed conflict.
“They are [emblems of protection] and their use is enshrined in international
humanitarian law” (IFRC, 2006, p. 3). Thus, the emblems indicate that persons or
objects displaying it are linked to the Movement and are carrying out tasks essential to
the Movement’s humanitarian mission. Because of their significance, there are rules
regulating the emblems’ use[3].
Considerable efforts are made to avoid confusion between the protective use and the
indicative use of the emblems. For example, in displaying the emblems in peacetime
activities every effort is made to ensure the emblems, whether displayed on persons or
objects are used indicatively, by only marking their connection with the Movement and
not conferring the right to protection under IHL (ICRC, 2007c). Hence, the emblems are
relatively small and are not placed on armlets or roofs. However, when the emblems are
used as a protective device, they should be sufficiently large to allow identification
from a considerable distance; as well, the emblems must retain their original form with
nothing added to the cross, the crescent, the diamond, or the white ground (ICRC,
2007c). Those working in the Movement take particular care to generate respect for the
emblems from every section of society, and most importantly to reinforce their
protective value (ICRC, 2007c). Thus, recognition of the Movement’s emblems and their
meanings must be absolutely clear if they are to serve their mission of humanitarian
protection.
Red Cross and Red Crescent
The ICRC’s single distinctive sign, a red cross, became an emblem of neutrality.
The emblem was adopted in 1864 by the original 16 signatories of the Geneva
Convention to confer legal protection on army medical services, volunteer aid workers
and the victims of armed conflict (ICRC, 2007a). Although the Red Cross was meant to

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

227

MIP
28,2

remain free of religious, political or other associations, to some Muslims it was
reminiscent of the Crusades. In response:
[. . .] the Ottoman empire declared that it would use a red crescent instead of a red cross as its
emblem, although it agreed to respect the Red Cross used by the other side (ICRC, 2007a, p. 2).

228

The ICRC was the first to use the Red Crescent during the Russo-Turkish war between
1877 and 1878 and the emblem, which is the reverse of the Ottoman flag, was officially
adopted in 1929.
Third emblem
Throughout the Movement’s history, several other symbols have been proposed, [as an
addition to the Red Cross and Red Crescent], [. . .] but only Iran’s Red Lion, used until the
Islamic revolution, has been allowed as an alternative to the cross or crescent (Griffin,
2005, p. 3).

In the past, the ICRC resisted petitions for another emblem, as it did not want to dilute
its brand. However, it was becoming increasingly evident there was a need for a third
emblem. Its creation was partly in response to finding a neutral symbol that would be
acceptable to all National Societies and states, and in particular to those that wish to
use neither the red cross nor the red crescent.
Unfortunately, National Societies and states that do not use either of the official
emblems are not recognised:
[. . .] as full members of the Movement [. . .] [which make] it impossible for the Movement to
achieve universality – one of its Fundamental Principles – and [raise] the prospect that
different emblems would continue to proliferate (ICRC, 2007a, p. 2).

The concern was that:
[. . .] if emblems grow more specific and more numerous, they will compromise the safety of
those the Red Cross has sworn to protect. While soldiers in the heat of battle can be relied on
to recognize perhaps two or three symbols of protection, expecting them to identify 200 or 300
isn’t reasonable (Giampietro and Smith, 2006, p. 1).

Moreover, a limited number of emblems serve as a unifying force by bringing people
from a variety of countries together under a common goal.
To address these issues, it was proposed to introduce an additional emblem, which
would allow the Movement to remain neutral in the twenty-first century:
It may seem madness to tamper with such a famous image, but in recent years, the Red Cross
has proved more of a target than a shield [. . .] the Movement has been caught in the crossfire
of renewed battles between symbols far older and more powerful: the cross of Christianity,
the crescent of Islam and Judaism’s Star of David (Griffin, 2005, p. 3).

Additional reasons for considering a new emblem were highlighted in a July 2001
review of the Red Cross brand in 15 countries by advertising agency Young &
Rubicam. The study found that while the Movement “had a high status in all of the
15 countries, people weren’t sure what the Red Cross actually did” (Griffin, 2005, p. 3).
That is, the bodies working in the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement were seen as
trustworthy and well-recognised, but people were unsure what they did or what they
were known for. More importantly, the Movement began to reassess what it was it

wanted to be known for. It was believed a new emblem would provide the Movement
with the opportunity to revitalise its brand (Quelch and Laidler-Kylander, 2005).

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

Red Crystal
Among the suggestions for the new emblem were a red crystal or red diamond, red
chevrons and another symbol resembling a pair of red brackets (Dowell, 2000). At the
Diplomatic Conference of December 2005, the states party to the Geneva Conventions
adopted the Third Protocol to the Geneva Conventions to endorse the Red Crystal.
“The Red Crystal, a square standing on one corner, is being promoted as a neutral third
symbol that could bridge religious differences” (Griffin, 2005, p. 3):

229

The crystal outline tends to suggest the shape of something wholly non-sectarian. [. . .] The
symbol is an empty vessel, a neutral shape, a sign of sign-ness. As such, it is hardwired in our
brains as something that simply means take notice (Giampietro and Smith, 2006, p. 1).

Availing of the new emblem, Magen David Adom (MDA), Israel’s official emergency
medical, disaster, ambulance and blood bank service, was accepted as a full member of
the ICRC at the 29th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held
in June of 2006 (ADL, 2006). The Rules of the Third Protocol outline that the MDA may
continue to use the Red Star of David as its sole indicative emblem within Israel. When
abroad, the MDA, depending on the circumstances, may either include the Red Star of
David inside the Red Crystal or use simply the Red Crystal[4].
The Red Crystal does not replace the Red Cross or the Red Crescent; it simply
broadens the choice of emblems and contributes to the universality of the movement
(ICRC, 2007a). Thus:
National Societies may use any one of these emblems [. . .] [and if a] National Society that uses
the red cross or red crescent emblem as its sign of identification, may, for indicative purposes,
temporarily use the red crystal in exceptional circumstances and to facilitate its work, both on
national and foreign territory (ICRC, 2007a, p. 2).

Although different emblems may be used in different areas of the world, each emblem
is recognised as belonging to the same Movement (Bessonette, 2003)[5].
As all three emblems have equal status under international law, it is hoped that
together they will provide the Movement with a comprehensive and lasting solution.
That is, by ending the proliferation of emblems it will strengthen their protective value.
Moreover, the emblems should provide the ICRC and other members of the Movement
with a more robust foundation on which to build marketing and communication
strategies.
Marketing and communications
Over the last few years, the ICRC’s (2006, p. 34) Marketing Unit has pursued a number
of large-scale research studies so as to develop its communication strategies and to
more effectively raise “awareness and influence attitudes on issues of importance”. The
ICRC has focused on two areas of research: examining the communication needs of key
audiences, regionally and globally (ICRC, 2007a, b, c); and measuring “perceptions of
and attitudes towards humanitarian action, the humanitarian environment, [as well as]
the ICRC logo and emblems” (ICRC, 2006, p. 34). Since 2004, the ICRC (2006) has also
participated in the annual Gallup Voice of the People omnibus survey, which measures
the views of approximately one billion global citizens. The Voice of the People surveys

MIP
28,2

230

are inclined to focus on the ICRC’s identity, as well as views and attitudes towards
neutrality and independent humanitarian action (ICRC, 2006, 2007a, b, c).
Advertising campaign
The findings from the ICRC’s research studies informed its 2006 print and television
campaign strategy, Abuse Grows Hatred. The campaign focused on detention and
emphasised the need to abide by the rules of the Geneva Conventions, which prohibit
the abuse of detainees (ICRC, 2006). The campaign goes further, stating that abuse and
torture perpetuate a cycle of violence. The animated film, created by the agency VCCP
(2006, p. 1) City, “dramatises the point that the ill-treatment of prisoners breeds hatred
within the families, communities and countries of the imprisoned”[6].
Online campaign
The ICRC, in May of 2008, as the official charity partner of the Union of European
Football Associations (UEFA) for EURO 2008, launched an online fund raising
campaign (www.scorefortheredcross.org). The campaign prompted internet users to
make donations in support of the Red Cross, where each donation is transformed into
virtual goals for the donor’s favourite side among the 16 qualifiers for EURO 2008. The
football team with the most goals wins the title of the Most Humanitarian Team of the
EURO 2008; the campaign’s winning team turned out to be Germany, followed by
Spain and The Netherlands. The proceeds from the campaign are designated for the
landmine victims in Afghanistan and to local projects of the 16 European Red Cross
societies associated with the campaign:
This collaboration with the sporting world in a festive competition like EURO 2008
represents an opportunity for the ICRC. It lays the basis for raising the awareness of a large
public in a playful way about sensitive topics of humanitarian concern, such as the situation
of mine victims in Afghanistan (ICRC, 2008, p. 1)[7].

Over the past ten years, in addition to financial contributions, UEFA has given the
ICRC various platforms for communicating on humanitarian topics. The UEFA web
site also has a link to the ICRC site and frequently provides information about ICRC
activities.
Web site
The ICRC (2007b, p. 68) web site (www.icrc.org) is available in seven languages and
consultation of the web site continues to rise worldwide; “approximately 107 million
page views were registered on the ICRC web site” in 2006. Peak usage of the ICRC web
site typically occurs around incidents of extraordinary disaster or armed conflict. For
example, in 2004 peak usage of the ICRC (2006, p. 34) web site was in March to May,
due to events in Iraq and in December due to the Asian tsunami. “In the autumn of 2005,
the number of hits peaked with hurricane Katrina and the South Asia earthquake”. In
response to operational needs and public communication requirements, the ICRC
continues to add new functions, such as the launch of “the RSS feed (a system that
makes it possible to deliver newly published press releases and other documents
directly to people’s desktops)” (ICRC, 2006, p. 34). While considerable efforts have also
been made to improve the web site’s editorial content so as to “strengthen the ICRC’s
positioning as a global and independent humanitarian organisation” (ICRC, 2006, p. 34).

Production, multimedia and distribution
“Building and maintaining credible and consistent products and an ICRC brand image”
have become more important priorities over the last few years (ICRC, 2005b, p. 30).
The ICRC has adopted an integrated, multimedia approach so as to respond to the
changing communication environment in a more flexible and creative manner. Each
year, the ICRC’s production, multimedia and distribution unit produce a number of
multimedia projects to enhance awareness of ICRC operations and programmes
worldwide. In 2006, the “ICRC produced some 40 print and audiovisual products and
distributed more than 7,000 films and 460,000 publications worldwide” (ICRC, 2007b,
p. 68). One of the unit’s more recent developments is a series of films, From the Field,
which give an insight as what it is like for civilians living in areas of conflict (ICRC,
2007b).
As part of its communications strategy, The ICRC (2005b, p. 30) aims to “distribute
institutional publications and videos effectively and efficiently, thereby ensuring that
products reached target audiences within 5-6 days”. To enhance the professionalism of
publications and films, “new corporate guidelines have been distributed to all
delegations and headquarters staff to improve recognition of ICRC communication
products by target audiences” (ICRC, 2006, p. 34). To enhance accessibility to a wider
audience, many of the field videos may be viewed on YouTube at: www.youtube.com/
icrcfilms
Public communications, information and translation
The ICRC’s communication division is quite extensive; and the media relations unit
within that division handles a full agenda. In 2006, the unit:
[. . .] issued 148 press releases, 78 news reports, 139 information bulletins and 97 briefing and
information notes, and organised 16 press conferences. [As well, the unit] produced and
issued 11 video news items to broadcasters worldwide and produced 6 news stories for use
with various target groups (ICRC, 2007b, p. 68).

The ICRC has developed its Library and Research Service to work as a public resource;
its catalogue offers more than 140,000 documents (e.g. books, periodicals, videos,
photos and CD-ROMs) on IHL, humanitarian work and ICRC activities. The unit
responds to requests for information from a variety of individuals and organisations
such as: National Societies, NGOs, academics, government departments and the media.
Given the multi-lingual nature of its work, the ICRC’s language services unit
translates, edits and proof reads over seven million words each year (ICRC, 2007b).
To enhance communication, the unit places considerable importance on using “the
appropriate wording and language for various target audiences worldwide” (ICRC,
2005b, p. 30). Those working within the unit firmly believe coherent and consistent use
of appropriate terminology are essential to the overall effectiveness of the ICRC’s
(2005b) communication documents.
Challenges ahead
The ICRC’s experiential longevity is important as the nature of armed conflict is
changing; the majority of present-day armed conflicts are taking place within the
territory of one state rather than between states. Moreover, “the multiplication and
complexity of conflicts and internal strife around the world represent a challenge to the

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

231

MIP
28,2

232

ICRC to maintain its rapid response capacity and avoid becoming over-stretched”
(DFID, 2003, p. 11). Also, natural disasters continue to destroy the lives of many people.
While diseases, old and new, cause extensive suffering and the “health services
struggle to cope with increasing demands. [Still, it is] the weakest around the
world [that] continue to suffer most” (Standing Commission of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, 2001, p. 9).
The ICRC’s approach for the twenty-first century is that of reflection. The ICRC has
recognised their communication efforts play an increasingly important role in the
organisation’s positioning and perception among various audiences. Moreover, the
preservation of the humanitarian emblems’ meanings and values is a continuing
consideration. Furthermore, the ICRC is exploring how new media may be employed
effectively, as part of its strategic development.
Case questions
.
How are the issues the ICRC faces similar/dissimilar to any other large
multinational organisation? How are the organisational challenges the ICRC face
affected by its participation in a network of organisations that constitute the
movement?
.
What are the differences, if any, in branding and positioning a non-profit
organisation vs a for-profit organisation?
.
How important are the Movement’s emblems to the organisational mission and
strategic objectives of the ICRC? Given the extensive efforts made to avoid
confusion between the protective use and the indicative use of the emblems, does
this distinction in use present any difficulties to the ICRC in developing
marketing and communications strategies?
.
As the ICRC invests considerable resources in its marketing and
communications efforts, how should it go about developing a strategy to
ensure it communicates effectively about actions within the Movement, as well
as powerfully about humanitarian issues?
Notes
1. The ICRC won its four Nobel Peace Prizes in 1901, 1917, 1944 and 1963 (Forsythe, 2005).
2. Some suggest, due to the high levels of trust attributed to them, international non-profit
organisations may evenbecome the new global super brands (Wootliff and Deri, 2001;
Laidler-Kylander and Simonin, 2009).
3. The ICRC does provide manuals in using the emblems for the protection of medical
transport, hospitals, hospital ships, coastal rescue craft and medical aircraft. Regulations on
the use of the Emblem of the Red Cross or the Red Crescent by the National Societies may be
found at: www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/57JMBG. Moreover, guidelines on the
use of the Red Cross emblem and the name and logo of the ICRC for fundraising purposes
may be found at: www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/5A6J7J?OpenDocument
4. Answers to frequent queries regarding the Red Crystal may be viewed at: www.icrc.org/
web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/emblem-questions-answers-281005?opendocument
5. A timeline of the emblems’ history may be found at: www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/
html/emblem-history. The emblems may also be viewed at: www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.
nsf/htmlall/emblem?opendocument

6. The campaign’s print advertisement and the animated film may be viewed at: www.icrc.org/
Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/video-spot-detention-010706
7. The video spot for the ICRC/UEFA online campaign for Euro 2008 can be seen at: www.icrc.
org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/score-for-the-red-cross-ytfilm-050508
References
Aaker, D. (2007), “Innovation: brand it or lose it”, California Management Review, Vol. 50 No. 1,
pp. 8-24.
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) (2006), Israel’s Magen David Adom and the International Red
Cross: The Long Road to Acceptance, Anti-Defamation League, June 22, available at: www.
adl.org/main_Israel/israel_red_cross.htm (accessed March 2008).
Becker, E. (2002), “Red cross man in Guantánamo: a ‘busybody,’ but not unwelcome”,
The New York Times, February 20, available at: www.nytimes.com/2002/02/20/world/
nation-challenged-captives-red-cross-man-guantanamo-busybody-but-not-unwelcome.
html?scp¼1&sq¼Red%20Cross%20man%20in%20Guant%C3%A1namo:%20a%20%
E2%80%98busy%20body,&st¼cse (accessed March 2008).
Bessonette, C. (2003), “Q&A on the news”, Cox News Service, November 26.
Casey, L.A. and Rivkin, D.B. (2005), “Double-red-crossed”, The National Interest, Vol. 79 March,
pp. 63-9.
Chew, C. (2006), “Positioning and its strategic relevance: emerging themes form the experience of
British charitable organizations”, Public Management Review, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 333-50.
DFID (2003), Working in Partnership with the International Committee of the Red Cross
2002-2006, Department for International Development, Stairway Communications for
DFID, London, available at: www.dfid.gov.uk/pubs/default.asp?move¼0&TypeID¼0&
TopicID¼0&CountryID¼0&LanguageID¼0&YearID¼0&FreetextID¼institutional%
20strategy%20Paper&Listby¼date (accessed March 2008).
Dowell, W. (2000), “A battle looms over the symbol for neutrality”, Time Magazine, October 23,
available at: www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,998318,00.html (accessed March
2008).
Forsythe, D.P. (2005), The Humanitarians: The International Committee of the Red Cross,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Giampietro, R. and Smith, K. (2006), “Crystal power for the Red Cross”, Businessweek, January 13,
available at: www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/jan2006/id20060113_913948.
htm?chan¼search (accessed March 2008).
Griffin, M. (2005), “Emblem crossed out by a crystal”, The Age, September 19.
Hill, R.M. (2006), “A social marketer’s response to ‘the development of a promotion plan to
improve public awareness for a non-profit agency’”, Social Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 12
No. 4, pp. 59-63.
ICRC (2005a), Discover the ICRC, International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, September,
available at: www.icrc.org/Web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/p0790 (accessed March 2008).
ICRC (2005b), ICRC 2004 Annual Report, International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, May,
available at: www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/section_annual_report_
2004?OpenDocument (accessed March 2008).
ICRC (2006), ICRC 2005 Annual Report, International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, May,
available at: www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/section_annual_report_
2005?OpenDocument (accessed March 2008).

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

233

MIP
28,2

234

ICRC (2007a), Emblems of Humanity: the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
Geneva, July, available at: www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/p0876 (accessed
March 2008), ICRC, Geneva.
ICRC (2007b), ICRC 2006 Annual Report, International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva,
May, available at: www.icrc.org/Web/Eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/section_annual_
report?OpenDocument (accessed March 2008).
ICRC (2007c), Study on Operational and Commercial and Other Non-operational Issues Involving
the Use of the Emblems, International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, October,
available at: www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/council-delegates-2007-strategy151007?opendocument (accessed March 2008).
ICRC (2008), Score for the Red Cross – Flash Video Spot, International Committee of the Red
Cross, Geneva, May, available at: www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/score-for-thered-cross-ytfilm-050508 (accessed March 2008).
IFRC (2006), Red Cross, Red Crescent, Red Crystal Emblems: Design Guidelines, International
Federation of the Red Cross, Geneva, June, available at: www.ifrc.org/publicat/styleguide/
rc-rc-rc-emblems-en.pdf (accessed March 2008).
IFRC (2007), The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement: At a Glance, International
Federation of the Red Cross, Geneva, November, available at: www.ifrc.org/who/society.
asp?navid¼03_07 (accessed March 2008).
Judd, N. (2004), “On branding and maintaining your organization’s brand in an AMC”,
Association Management, Vol. 56 No. 7, pp. 17-19.
Keller, K. (2003), Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring and Managing Brand
Equity, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall Pearson, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Knox, S. and Gruar, C. (2007), “The application of stakeholder theory to relationship marketing
strategy development in a non-profit organization”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 75
No. 2, pp. 115-35.
Laidler-Kylander, N. and Simonin, B. (2009), “How international non-profits build brand equity”,
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 57-69.
Nissim, B. (2004), “Nonprofit branding: unveiling the essentials”, Guidestar.org, October 2004,
available at: www.guidestar.org/DisplayArticle.do?forYear¼2004 (accessed March 2008).
Oster, S.M. (1995), Strategic Management for Nonprofit Organizations, Oxford University Press,
New York, NY.
Quelch, J. and Laidler-Kylander, N. (2003), International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies, Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA.
Quelch, J. and Laidler-Kylander, N. (2005), The New Global Brands: Managing Non-government
Organizations in the 21st Century, SouthWestern College Publishing, Boston, MA.
SCRCRC (2001), Strategy for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent, Standing Commission
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, Geneva, November, available at: www.icrc.org/web/
eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/5N2HNT (accessed March 2008).
Valentine, D.B. and Powers, R.T. (2006), “The development of a promotion plan to improve public
awareness for a non-profit agency”, Social Marketing Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 51-7.
van den Bosch, A.L.M., de Jong, M.D.T. and Elving, W.J.L. (2006), “Managing corporate visual
identity: exploring the differences between manufacturing and service, and profit-making
and non-profit organizations”, Journal of Business Communication, Vol. 43 No. 2,
pp. 138-57.
VCCP (2006), VCCP Creates Detention Ad for ICRC, VCCP, London, August, available at: www.
vccp.com/news/2006/aug.asp (accessed March 2008).

Voeth, M. and Herbst, U. (2008), “The concept of brand personality as an instrument for
advanced non-profit branding: an empirical analysis”, Journal of Nonprofit and Public
Sector Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 71-97.
Wootliff, J. and Deri, C. (2001), “NGOs: the new super brands”, Corporate Reputation Review,
Vol. 4 No. 2, pp. 157-64.

ICRC: emblems
of humanity

Further reading
Lawton, K. (2005), “International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies agree to add
new symbol, a Red Crystal”, Public Broadcasting System: Religion & Ethics NewsWeekly,
December 9.

235

About the author
Ann M. Torres is a Lecturer in Marketing at National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
Her research interests are in the relationship between markets and strategy, entrepreneurial
strategies and innovative marketing practices. Ann M. Torres can be contacted at: ann.
torres@nuigalway.ie

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

