511303
research-article2013

NVS44210.1177/0899764013511303Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector QuarterlyLiu et al.

Article

The Role of Internal
Branding in Nonprofit Brand
Management: An Empirical
Investigation

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly
2015, Vol. 44(2) 319­–339
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0899764013511303
nvsq.sagepub.com

Gordon Liu1, Chris Chapleo2, Wai Wai Ko3,
and Isaac K. Ngugi2

Abstract
Internal branding refers to an organization’s attempts to persuade its staff to buyin to the organization’s brand value and transform it into a reality. Drawing from
self-determination theory and leadership theory, we seek to develop a deeper
understanding of the process of internal branding in the nonprofit sector. More
specifically, we propose and examine the mediating effects of the staff’s emotional
brand attachment, staff service involvement, and the moderating effect of charismatic
leadership on the brand orientation behavior–organizational performance relationship
using data obtained from the representatives of 301 nonprofit organizations in
the United Kingdom. On a general level, the findings suggest that staff emotional
brand attachment and staff service involvement are linked to brand orientation and
organizational performance. Moreover, charismatic leadership increases the strength
of this linkage. All of these findings extend the literature on internal branding.
Keywords
brand orientation, staff emotional brand attachment, staff service involvement,
charismatic leadership, internal branding

Introduction
An organization’s brands, defined as a name, term, design, symbol, or any other feature that identifies one organization from another, have long been recognized by
1University of Bath, UK
2Bournemouth University, Dorset, UK
3Brunel University, Uxbridge, UK

Corresponding Author:
Gordon Liu, School of Management, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK.
Email: g.liu@bath.ac.uk

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

320

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

scholars as one of the most important assets of nonprofit organizations (NPOs; for
example, Ewing & Napoli, 2005; Hankinson, 2001). Prior studies suggest that NPOs’
brands play a critical role in attracting donation income and volunteers (Hankinson,
2002; Sargeant, Ford, & Hudson, 2008). Brand orientation refers to the practice of an
organization that deliberately creates, develops, and protects its brands with the aim of
achieving their organizational objectives. This has been widely studied in the context
of NPOs (e.g., Ewing & Napoli, 2005; Hankinson, 2000). One stream of literature
specifically focuses on exploring the theoretical foundations of brand orientation
behavior and its impact on an organization’s competitive advantage (Ewing & Napoli,
2005; Hankinson, 2002; Napoli, 2006). Despite the considerable amount of research
done on this area, three knowledge gaps remain. This research attempts to address
these three knowledge gaps.
First, this study contributes to the existing research on internal branding (e.g.,
Morhart, Herzog, & Tomczak, 2009; Punjaisri & Wilson, 2011) by providing a theoretical logic for understanding this phenomena. We propose and test a conceptual
framework that integrates self-determination theory and leadership theory to explain
the process of internal branding, together with the critical roles that leadership plays
in facilitating this process. Second, many researchers report a positive relationship
between brand orientation behavior and organizational performance (e.g., Hankinson,
2002; Napoli, 2006). Few studies have explored the intermediate mechanisms
explaining this relationship. Here, we propose and test a causal chain relationship
whereby an organization’s brand orientation behavior may influence its staff’s emotional brand attachment (the extent to which the staff have strong feelings toward that
organization’s brand) and staff service involvement (the degree to which the staff
perceive the services provided under the organization’s brand to be personally relevant to them), and ultimately lead to improved organizational performance. Third, the
recent literature on internal brand management has recognized the critical role that
leadership plays in facilitating the management process (e.g., Morhart et al., 2009;
Wieseke, Ahearne, Lam, & van Dick, 2009). In this study, we examine the effect of a
specific type of leadership style—charismatic leadership, a type of leadership that is
focused on inspiring subordinates to follow the leader’s attitudes and behavior
(Conger & Kanungo, 1998)—on internal brand management. There has been little
studied in this subject before, as most previous research has focused on the transactional and transformational leadership style (e.g., Morhart et al., 2009). This study
offers fresh insights into the importance of selecting a charismatic leader to manage
social mission–driven organizations. Finally, this study contributes to the brand orientation literature on a specific industry context, that is, NPOs. Empirical studies on
brand orientation that are relevant to the NPO context differ in nature from our current study. Although extensive studies have examined the direct relationship between
brand orientation behavior and organizational performance (Ewing & Napoli, 2005;
see also Hankinson, 2000; Napoli, 2006), only a few have specified the contingencies
through which this association might be shaped (e.g., Mulyanegara, 2011). This study
contributes to the existing pool of knowledge on brand orientation with regard to
NPO sector–specific applications.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

321

Liu et al.

H2a
Charismatic
Leadership

Brand Orientation
Behavior

H2b

Staff Emotional Brand
Attachment

Staff Service
Involvements

Performance

The Process of Internal Branding

H1

Figure 1. Conceptual model.

Note. The dotted lines represent direct effects that may be fully mediated.

Theory Development and Hypotheses
An organization’s brand can also be viewed as a promise that an organization has
made about the expected benefits of its products or services. Brands can be used to
distinguish its products or services from those of its competitors (Hankinson, 2004;
Sargeant et al., 2008). The literature suggests that an organization’s brand can be
developed through either external or internal activities, or sometimes both. External
activities emphasize using marketing techniques to communicate to external audiences (i.e., customers) to influence their thoughts, feelings, perceptions, images, experiences, beliefs, and attitudes toward an organization’s brand (e.g., Madhavaram,
Badrinarayanan, & McDonald, 2005). Conversely, the internal activities seek to promote the brands inside an organization for the purpose of ensuring that its internal
audiences, that is, employees, accept the value that the organization’s brand represents
and transform it into a reality when serving customers (Punjaisri & Wilson, 2011;
Thomson, de Chernatony, Arganbright, & Khan, 1999). In this study, we focus on
exploring the development of an organization’s brand through internal branding. We
begin by elaborating on the theoretical logic of our argument. Figure 1 presents our
conceptual framework and the associated hypotheses.
In developing this conceptual framework, we integrate two different theories commonly used to explain the brand building process or brand management: self-determination theory and leadership theory. The self-determination theory proposes that an
individual’s behavior is self-determined by internalizing externally encourage role
behaviors into intrinsic motivated acts (Deci & Ryan, 2004). In connection with the
concept of internal branding, extrinsic motives such as rewards and external demands
can be assimilated with the staff’s intrinsic values such as the acceptance of an organization’s brand value and behavior in reflecting the organization brand value. For

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

322

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

example, Morhart et al. (2009) suggest that internal branding can be viewed as a tactic
through which managers promote organization-wide, regulated behaviors (extrinsic
motives) in relation to brand building and hope that their employees will internalize
these as part of their role identity to become the representatives of the organization’s
brand. Leadership theory, on the other hand, is a school of thought that describes how
the traits, behavior, attitude, powers, charisma, and other characteristics of a leader can
influence the attitudes and behavior of his or her followers or staff (e.g., Hiller,
DeChurch, Murase, & Doty, 2011; Walter & Bruch, 2009). In connection with the
concept of internal branding, leadership activities can have a profound influence on
the staff’s attitudes and behaviors in reflecting the brand promise that the organizations wish to promulgate. For example, Vallaster and de Chernatony (2006) conducted
30 in-depth interviews and found that the organizational leaders serve as “integrating
forces” in facilitating the internal branding.
In this research, we propose that the integration of self-determination theory and
leadership theory can be used to explain the process of internal branding. We argue
that this is because both self-determination theory and leadership theory highlight the
important role of the managers in creating a favorable organizational environment for
the process of internal branding to take place. Self-determination theory argues that
individuals internalize the extrinsic motives into intrinsically motivated behaviors
(Deci & Ryan, 2004). In the sense, the outcomes of internalization depend on the
extrinsic motives and the different types of extrinsic motives can lead to very different outcomes. These extrinsic motives can be viewed as an organizational environment that managers create to persuade the staff to transform them into intrinsic
motivation (Deci & Ryan, 2004; Ryan & Deci, 2000). Leadership theory, on the other
hand, argues that, for the leaders to organize their followers to achieve a common
goal, they need to create an organizational environment that satisfies the followers’
needs (Hiller et al., 2011; Walter & Bruch, 2009). According to both theories of internal branding, whether or not the staff embrace organization’s brand values and transform them into reality depends on the organizational environment that managers
choose to create. As a result, self-determination theory and leadership theory complement each other in explaining the process of internal branding. Drawing on selfdetermination theory, we can make an assumption that an organization can only
engage in internal branding when its staff can internalize its brand value and are
willing to act accordingly when providing services (de Chernatony & Segal-Horn,
2003; Miles & Mangold, 2004; Shamir, House, & Arthur, 1993). However, it is
important to note that this internalization process may not be equally pronounced for
all situations. As discussed earlier, we can use leadership theory to predict how likely
it is that the followers will be willing to comply with the leaders to achieve common
goals (Wieseke et al., 2009). Taken together, we can argue that the staff will reflect
the brand value when serving customers, only if they determine their role identity as
representative of the organization brand, and leaders may play a critical role in facilitating this internalization process by persuading the staff to live the brand values. We
will now develop our hypotheses in detail.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

323

Liu et al.

The Causal Chain Relationship and Mediation Effects
From the perspective of internal branding, an organization attempts to persuade its
staff to buy-in to the organization’s brand value and transform it into a reality through
enabling them to have a clear understanding of its brand value (Morhart et al., 2009;
Vallaster & de Chernatony, 2006). Drawing on self-determination theory, we propose
a causal chain relationship with regard to the process of internal branding in which an
organization’s brand orientation behavior will enhance the staff emotional brand
attachment, then trigger the development of staff service involvement, and ultimately
lead to superior organizational performance. According to self-determination theory,
Ryan and Deci (2000) identified six stages of motivation (from extrinsic to intrinsic)
relatively to their autonomy: amotivation (lacking an intention to act), external regulation (performed activities because of an external demand), introjected regulation (performed activities because of a wish to avoid guilt or anxiety or attain ego enhancement
or pride), regulation through identification (performed activities because of identifying with personal importance), integrated regulation (performed activities because of
who they are—becoming part of himself or herself), and intrinsic motivation (selfdetermined activity). Moreover, the individual may originally be exposed to an activity because of one stage of motivation (i.e., introjected regulation—it is unnecessary
to have progressed through each stage of internalization with respect to a particular
regulation), and such exposure might allow the person to adopt another stage of motivation (i.e., integrated regulation). In this research, we argue that three components in
our framework, such as the organization’s brand orientation behavior, the staff emotional brand attachment, and the staff service involvement, represent the process of
internal branding and different stages of motivation as described earlier. With the
increasingly internalized organization’s brand value, the staff will adopt another stage
of motivation until full internalization (intrinsic motivation) occurs. Once the staff
fully assimilate the organization’s brand value, they will transform it into the reality
when serving customers. Thus, it will lead to superior organizational performance. We
elaborate our arguments below.
First, we propose that the organization’s brand orientation behavior is the starting
point for internal branding and represents the external regulation stage of motivation.
Urde, Baumgarth, and Merrilees (2013) suggest that brand orientation can be considered a strategic platform from which the top management systematically integrates the
organization’s mission, vision, and values into its brand. The concept of brand orientation is applicable to both the NPO (e.g., Ewing & Napoli, 2005; Hankinson, 2000) and
the for-profit organization (e.g. Baumgarth, 2010) context, and can be divided into two
aspects: behavioral and cultural. In the “cultural” aspect, brand orientation is a certain
type of organizational culture that represents the organization-wide beliefs, guidelines,
stories, systems, and symbols (Baumgarth, 2009; Hatch & Schultz, 2001). From the
“behavior” aspect, brand orientation is a series of concrete actions that are undertaken
when communicating an organization’s brand in a way that will influence the external
assessment of its reputation (Hankinson, 2002; Madhavaram et al., 2005). In this
research, we focus specifically on the behavior aspect of brand orientation.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

324

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

Brand orientation behavior comprises three types of concrete action in communicating an organization’s brand: orchestration, interaction, and affect (Ewing & Napoli,
2005; Napoli, 2006). Orchestration is the degree to which the organization effectively
communicates its brand promise to both its internal and external stakeholders.
Interaction is the degree to which an organization uses market feedback and responses
to inform its changes. Finally, the affect capability is the degree to which the organization understands the stakeholders’ preferences (both positive and negative) about the
brand. When an organization deliberately undertakes all three activities, Ewing and
Napoli (2005) suggest that it will become more capable of aligning its brand values
with the experiences of its internal and external stakeholders, and engaging in the
necessary brand-related activities to maximize the effects of the brand. Since the staff
must perform the actions to communicate to the stakeholders about the organization’s
brand to satisfy the managers’ demands, the brand orientation behavior represents the
external regulation stage of motivation according to self-determination theory. The
engagement of internal branding requires organizations to create and promote the
brand inside themselves that aligns the behavior of the staff with the brand values
(Punjaisri & Wilson, 2011). We argue that brand orientation behavior can play a vital
role in initiating the process because it forces the staff to develop a greater understanding of the meaning of the organization’s brand and feel that they are connected with it,
to communicate it to the organization’s stakeholders.
Second, we propose that staff emotional brand attachment is the first intermediate
variable in our framework and represents the integrated regulation stage of motivation.
In the personnel or customer psychology literature, emotional brand attachment has
often been defined as a relationship-based construct that reflects the emotional bond
connecting an individual with a specific brand (Malär, Krohmer, Hoyer, & Nyffenegger,
2011; Park, MacInnis, Priester, Eisingerich, & Iacobucci, 2010). A similar rationale of
emotional brand attachment has also been used to explain the emotionally charged
relationship between an NPO’s stakeholder and its brand (Voeth & Herbst, 2008).
Accordingly, we define staff emotional brand attachment, in this research, as to the
extent to which the staff have strong feelings toward the organization’s brand.
The exposure to the organization’s brand orientation behavior (external regulation)
allows the staff to consider that the organization’s brand is part of themselves, because
it gives the staff an opportunity to develop a better understanding about an organization’s brand and feel connected with it. Park et al. (2010) suggest that emotional brand
attachment depends on the degree to which individuals view a brand as being part of
themselves, reflecting who they are, and feel a personal connection between themselves and the brand. This kind of enthusiasm toward an organization’s brand is similar to the stage of motivation that Ryan and Deci (2000) describe as “integrated
regulation,” which occurs when identified regulations are fully assimilated with individuals’ self-evaluation and beliefs. The staff perceive their role as that of representatives of the organization’s brand, at this stage (emotional brand attachment), because
of who they are (i.e., integrated regulation), not because of the external demand. This
is in line with the suggestion by experts that there is a strong relationship between the
staff’s emotional connection with the organization’s brand and their willingness to

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

325

Liu et al.

deliver the quality of service that the brand promises (e.g., de Chernatony & SegalHorn, 2003; Punjaisri, Wilson, & Evanschitzky, 2009).
Third, we propose that staff service involvement is the second intermediate variable
in our framework and represents the stage of intrinsic motivation. Adopting the concept from product involvement as the level of involvement with an object, situation, or
action to determine the degree to which an individual perceives that concept to be
personally relevant (Celsi & Olson, 1988), service experts also use this rationale to
explain the degree of personal relevance of particular types of service (e.g., Ganesh,
Arnold, & Reynolds, 2000). As discussed earlier, the primary objective for NPOs is to
achieve their social mission through providing social services related to a particular
cause. Thus, staff service involvement, in the context of this study, refers to the degree
to which the staff perceive the services provided under the organization’s brand to be
personally relevant.
The staff can self-determine the services provided under the organization’s brand
by the extent to which they are interesting and important to them. If so, this means that
they feel that (a) they are part of the organization’s brand community, (b) they influence the organization’s brand value and feel capable of performing the organizational
activities that are consistent with the organization’s brand standard, and (c) they can
freely interpret and express their likes and dislikes about the value that the organization’s brand represents, as we can expect because of the organization’s brand orientation behavior and staff emotional brand attachment. This sense of relatedness,
competence, and autonomy, according to social determination theory, will trigger the
internalization process through which the staff can transform externally driven behavior into self-determined behavior (Deci & Ryan, 2004), that is, the potential intrinsic
motivation of becoming the representatives of the organization’s brand.
Finally, the dependent variable in our framework is organizational performance.
Generally speaking, organizational performance refers to the outputs of the organization (Dess & Robinson, 1984). NPO researchers frequently use two major frameworks
to assess organizational performance: the goal and system resource approach. By definition, the goal approach refers to the degree to which the organization achieves specific objectives, while the systems resource approach refers to the degree to which the
organization obtains the necessary resources to survive and work effectively (Dess &
Robinson, 1984). In the NPO context, the primary goal of the organization is to deliver
social services to the public (Coombes, Morris, Allen, & Webb, 2011; Mulyanegara,
2011). As Grønbjerg (1993) puts it, an NPO is a collection of individuals whose primary objective is to accomplish its social mission by delivering social services that
aim toward a particular cause. To survive in the marketplace and work effectively in
delivering social services, the NPO needs to generate sufficient funds and recruit
enough volunteers (Macedo & Pinho, 2006). In this research, we adopt both the goal
and system resource approaches to assess NPOs’ organizational performance related
to their ability to deliver social services and obtain resources (i.e., donations and volunteers). When staff become the representatives of the organization’s brand, they
transform the organization’s brand value into a reality (Punjaisri & Wilson, 2011;
Thomson et al., 1999). In other words, the staff will deliver the services provided

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

326

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

under the organization’s brand to the standard set by the organization’s brand. In doing
so, these acts will lead to superior performance in achieving the social mission and
generating resources.
In the context of NPOs, we suggest that the earlier arguments all hold true. In recent
decades, the demographic and social changes have continued to expand the need for
services, leading to an increase in the number of new entrants, which has intensified the
competition for funding and other resources among NPOs (Froelich, 1999). With the
promotion of the U.K. government and increasing social demand, an average of 7,000
new charities have been registered each year with the Charity Commission since the
mid-1990s (Chew & Osborne, 2008). This movement implies that both private individuals and the government may have insufficient funds to support NPOs to a level that
will enable them to deliver social services. In response, NPOs are increasingly adopting
marketing strategies to help them to obtain sufficient resources and deliver quality
social services (Macedo & Pinho, 2006; Sargeant et al., 2008), among which the practice of brand orientation behavior appears to be one of the key drivers of organizational
performance. Previous research suggests that NPOs’ brand orientation behavior can
improve their brand communication, help their staff to develop a better understanding
of the value of the brand, and develop a sense of feeling and responsibility for the
brand. For example, Hankinson (2004) advises NPO managers to use brand orientation
behavior and an internal branding strategy to motive staff and guide them to provide a
social service that is consistent with the NPO’s brand values. NPO staff who are more
emotionally attached to their organization’s brand are more likely to perform better in
delivering services and fundraising (Hankinson, 2002; Thomson et al., 1999). Thus, in
this research, we predict that a link exists between brand orientation behavior, staff
emotional brand attachment, staff service involvement, and organizational performance. On the basis of these considerations, we posit the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Staff emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement mediate the relationship between an organization’s brand orientation behavior
and performance.

Moderating Effects
According to leadership theory, leaders can influence the behavior of their followers
to achieve certain goals (e.g., Hiller et al., 2011; Walter & Bruch, 2009). Given that
there are different kinds of leadership traits, characteristics, and styles, experts have
produced different types of leadership theory to explain the role of leaders and the
contextual nature of leadership in different situations (Hiller et al., 2011). In this study,
we focus particularly on charismatic leadership. A charismatic leader refers to an individual who possesses a degree of high sensitivity with regard to assessing the unfulfilled needs and opportunities in their environment, articulating and communicating
their belief in their vision, engendering trust among their followers, and inspiring them
to secure their commitment rather than using any form of external power or authority
(Conger & Kanungo, 1998; Shamir et al., 1993).

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

327

Liu et al.

Drawing on leadership theory, we first propose that charismatic leadership moderates the relationship between an organization’s brand orientation behavior and the staff
emotional brand attachment. Previously, we argued that an organization’s brand orientation behavior can be considered as externally regulated behavior for creating an
organizational environment that allows the staff to feel that the organization’s brand is
part of themselves (i.e., emotional brand attachment). Shamir et al. (1993) suggest that
charismatic leadership can help to motivate staff to accept the organizational goals as
their own because followers are more likely to be attracted to and comply with the
vision and mission articulated by charismatic leaders. Drawing on this perspective, we
argue that charismatic leadership can improve staff’s motivation to accept the organizational goals of engaging internal branding through the organization’s brand orientation behavior and feel that they are personally connected with the organization’s brand.
This is because charismatic leaders can help to make the actions toward the accomplishment of the organizational goals, such as “being a representatives of the organization’s brand,” more consistent with the staff’s self-concept (Shamir et al., 1993; Walter
& Bruch, 2009). In doing so, charismatic leaders make the organizational goal more
meaningful for the staff and therefore more likely to be incorporated into action.
Second, we argue that charismatic leadership also moderates the relationship
between staff emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement. In addition to
making the organizational goal more meaningful, Shamir et al. (1993) argue that charismatic leaders can also (a) increase their followers’ participation in the effort to
express a collective identity, (b) enhance their followers’ perceived self-efficacy, and
(c) increase their followers’ commitment to the organizational goal. More specifically,
first of all, as Shamir et al. (1993) further advised, charismatic leaders find it easier to
persuade their followers that their collective identity is unique or superior (i.e., the
organization’s brand is great) or create a desirable social category for the followers
(i.e., “our brand represents our efforts toward delivering a high-quality social service”). Thus, we argue that charismatic leadership can make the followers more closely
related to the organization’s brand. Moreover, charismatic leaders find it easier to persuade followers to believe that they have the competence to perform certain activities,
as self-efficacy is defined as the judgment of one’s capability to accomplish a certain
level of performance (Shamir et al., 1993). In the context of this research, we argue
that the specific activities in which the staff are competent to perform under charismatic leadership can be relevant to internal branding, such as influencing the organization’s brand value or performing activities that are in alignment with the organization’s
brand standard. And, charismatic leaders find it easier to persuade their staff to develop
a commitment toward the organizational goal because they can make their followers
feel that they (the charismatic leaders and followers) share a common mission (Shamir
et al., 1993; Walter & Bruch, 2009). Because of this, we argue that charismatic leadership may enable the staff to feel drawn toward performing tasks (i.e., internal branding–related activities) independently, rather than being told by the leaders to do so.
Thus, we argue that charismatic leadership will create a sense of autonomy about
performing activities that is consistent with the organization’s brand standard that is
personally relevant. As outlined in our earlier discussion, the staff’s emotional brand

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

328

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

attachment will enhance their level of service involvement because they feel that the
organization’s brand is highly relevant to them (relatedness), and they can freely associate (autonomy) with and influence the value of organization’s brand and are capable
of performing the organizational activities that are consistent with the organization’s
brand standard (competence). Thus, when an organization has charismatic leaders, it
is more likely to create an environment that satisfies its staff’s needs for relatedness,
competence, and autonomy to feel that the services provided under the organization’s
brand are personally relevant to them.
In the context of NPOs, the previous empirical research suggests that charismatic
leadership can have a great influence on the staff’s attitudes and behavior (e.g., Rowold
& Rohmann, 2009). In other words, we suspect that having a charismatic leader
enhances the effects of brand orientation, and NPO staff members are more likely to
make an emotional connection with the brand. Once the staff members have established an emotional connection with an organization’s brand, having a charismatic
leader can also ensure that they are more involved in delivering a service that is consistent with the organization’s communicated brand values. The reason for this is that
a charismatic leader can consistently influence the staff’s attitudes and behavior by
motivating them to engage in delivering a “service,” reflecting the organization’s
brand promise. Therefore, it is hypothesized that
Hypothesis 2a (H2a): Charismatic leadership positively moderates the relationship between an organization’s brand orientation behavior and staff emotional
brand attachment.
Hypothesis 2b (H2b): Charismatic leadership positively moderates the relationship between staff emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement.

Research Method
Research Context
To test our hypotheses empirically, we adopt a cross-sectional research design to collect data from NPOs in the United Kingdom. We adopted and modified the variable
measurement from the existing literature and further refined it on the basis of the comments obtained from a pilot test to enhance the validity. Primary data were collected
via an e-mail survey of organizations registered with the Charity Commission UK
(2012). We randomly selected 2,000 organizations and sent out three waves of e-mails
to increase the response rate. We obtained 301 usable questionnaires from representative UK NPOs (see Table 1). The overall response rate was 15%. Despite the low
overall response rate, which is typical for organization-based survey research, the
results of this survey can provide valuable insights because they capture characteristics in proportion to their existence in the full sample of 2,000 (Baruch & Holtom,
2008; Rogelberg & Stanton, 2007). Furthermore, we also test for nonresponse bias.
We found that there were no significant differences between the early and late respondents. Therefore, the probability of nonresponse bias is minimal.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

329

Liu et al.
Table 1. Profiles.
Sector

Sample

Response

Response rate (%)

Education
Health/recreation
Disability/general care
Housing
Art/culture
Animal
Religious
Environment
Othersa
Overall

192
321
294
165
173
113
121
117
504
2,000

32
40
48
21
25
13
17
15
90
301

17
13
16
13
15
12
14
13
18
15

Note. We used a Likert scale because this format can overcome the respondents’ unwillingness to
disclose financial information and, even when they do, the accuracy of their figures cannot be assumed
(Zahra, Neubaum, & El-Hagrassey, 2003). Size: below £50,000 = 42; £50,001 to £100,000 = 57; £100,001
to £500,000 = 78; £500,001 to £1,000,000 = 63; above £1,000,001 = 61.
aThis sector includes general charitable purpose, community development, law advocacy, and so on.

Measurement
We assessed NPOs’ brand orientation behavior using the scale of Ewing and Napoli
(2005) and Napoli (2006). Orchestration, consisting of four items, measures the NPOs’
ability to assess the degree to which the brand portfolio and related marketing activities are suitably structured and effectively communicated to the stakeholders (Ewing
& Napoli, 2005). Interaction measures the NPOs’ ability to assess the extent to which
an organization establishes a dialogue with its key stakeholders, consisting of three
items (Napoli, 2006). In terms of affect, two items were used to measure the degree to
which an organization understands its stakeholders’ likes and dislikes about the brand
(Ewing & Napoli, 2005).
To measure staff emotional brand attachment, a four-item scale was adopted using
four facets of emotional brand attachment to measure the extent to which the staff’s
feeling toward an NPO’s brand are affectionate, connected, passionate, and committed
(Malär et al., 2011; Thomson, MacInnis, & Park, 2005). We measured staff service
involvement using four items adopted from Malär et al.’s (2011) measurement of product involvement, and modified them to reflect the personal importance based on values
and attitudes toward the organization’s brand, and to what extent these personal feelings
will influence the way in which the staff provide service to the stakeholders. We measured charismatic leadership using five items based on the assessments that are widely
accepted in the behavioral model of the charismatic leader, modified for the NPO context (Conger & Kanungo, 1998; Homburg, Wieseke, Lukas, & Mikolon, 2011).
In terms of organizational performance, we attempted to assess this using five items
modified from works of Coombes et al. (2011) and Napoli (2006). As in many empirical studies, subjective ratings are used to measure financial performance in this study,

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

330

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics, Correlations, and Reliabilities.

X1 Brand orientation behavior
X2 Staff service involvement
X3 Staff emotion brand
attachment
X4 Charismatic leadership
X5 Performance

M

SD

X1

X2

X3

3.93
3.87
4.06

.58
.65
.66

.74
.60
.51

.75
.50

.79

4.12
3.38

.58
.60

.52
.40

.31
.43

.27
.22

X4

X5

.77
.42

.78

Note. N = 301. Correlations are significant at p < .05. Cronbach’s alpha values are shown in bold on the
correlation matrix diagonal.

because published financial data about small operations are difficult to obtain and/or
the respondents are often unwilling to share sensitive “hard” data (e.g., Narver &
Slater, 1990). Moreover, many scholars have suggested that managerial decisions and
actions are primarily driven by the perceptions of the organizational performance
(Morgan, Kaleka, & Katsikeas, 2004). Therefore, we employed perceptual measures
of performance to assess NPOs’ ability to delivery social service and obtain resources.

Measurement Validation and Reliability
Initially, we assessed the potential common method bias using Harman’s single-factor
test (P. M. Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & N. P. Podsakoff, 2003). The result indicated
that a single method factor does not explain the majority of the variance (the highest
single variance extracted from the data is 26.95%) and, therefore, that common method
bias is not a problem in this study. During the data collection period, we also took
several actions to control for common method bias by following P. M. Podsakoff et al.
(2003), such as guaranteeing the anonymity and confidentiality of the responses,
emphasizing that there are no right or wrong answers, and covering items related to the
independent variables before the dependent variables.
Second, we assessed the measurement properties of our scales using a series of
confirmatory factory analyses (CFAs) and followed the acceptable model fit guidelines from Byrne (2010). According to these indicators, our measurement model fits
well with the data, as indicated by the CFA results, suggesting an acceptable fit for
brand orientation constructs (χ2 = 20.16, p < .00, comparative fit index [CFI] = .99,
root mean square error of approximation [RMSEA] = .03), staff emotion brand attachment, staff service involvement (the CFA results indicate a perfect fit, CFI = 1.00;
RMSEA = .00), charismatic leadership (χ2 = 8.80, p < .00, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .06),
and organizational performance (χ2 = 4.09, p < .00, CFI = 0.99, RMSEA = .06).
Finally, we assessed the correlations of the framework variables and reliability (see
Table 2).
The correlations show that all variables have a significantly positive correlation
with each other. This means that they are moving relative to each another. A reliability

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

331

Liu et al.

analysis produced Cronbach’s alpha coefficients exceeding the threshold value of .70;
thus, construct reliability is suggested.

Analyses and Results
With the properties of our measures established, we followed the recommendation of
Schumacker (2002) to use aggregate measures as the latent variable scores in the
model by creating composite variables from latent factors taking into account the
weights of each of the measurement items on the latent factor. We first tested the NPO
classification and size effect that may potentially influence our outcome and found
that there are no significant differences between the different types of NPO in terms of
classification and the size of all the variables. We then used AMOS 17.0 to perform
structural equation modeling to test the path relationships posited by our conceptual
framework.
H1 predicts that staff emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement
mediate the relationship between an organization’s brand orientation behavior and performance. Given the complexity of our model, we follow the suggestion by Murray,
Gao, and Kotabe (2011) to analyze mediating effects by estimating a series of structural equation models (see Table 3).
According to the Baron and Kenny’s (1986) proposed steps for mediation test, we
first estimated the direct paths among the relevant variables in Models 1 (brand orientation behavior → staff service involvement, β = .86), 4 (staff emotional brand attachment → performance, β = .39), and 7 (brand orientation behavior → performance, β =
.56), and found a positively significant relationship among the relevant variables in all
models. We then estimated the indirect paths among the relevant variables in Models
2, 5, and 8 (see Table 3), and found that all of the relationships among the relevant
variables were positive and significant. Finally, we estimated the model that includes
all the relevant variables in Models 3, 6, and 9, and found that the positively significant
standard coefficient estimate in Models 1 (brand orientation behavior → staff service
involvement, β = .74), 4 (staff emotional brand attachment → performance, β = −.02),
and 7 (brand orientation behavior → performance, β = .38) turned out to be weakened
or insignificant. According to Baron and Kenny (1986), the partial mediational model
is correctly specified. Moreover, we also conducted additional analysis, as suggested
by Holmbeck (1997), to calculate the change in the chi-square value between the
mediation models where the direct path relationship is constrained and where it is
unconstrained. We found that the changes in the chi-square value are not significant in
all situations when the mediators are taken into account. This means that there is significant mediation (Holmbeck, 1997). Taken together, our results indicate that staff
emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement partially mediate the relationship between an organization’s brand orientation behavior and performance. Thus,
H1 is partially supported.
Our hypotheses also predict that charismatic leadership moderates the relationship
between an organization’s brand orientation behavior and staff emotional brand attachment (H2a), and the relationship between staff emotional brand attachment and staff

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

332

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Model 7

Model 8

Model 9

Note. N/A = not available; CFI = comparative fit index; RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation. Standardized coefficients are reported with t values in parentheses. Italic
values indicate mediating effects on weakening direct effects.
*p < .10. **p < .05. ***p < .01.

Brand orientation behavior → staff emotional
.72 (12.90)*** .75 (19.36)***
.75 (19.35)*** .75 (19.36)***
brand attachment
Brand orientation behavior → staff service
.86 (29.68)***
.74 (17.30)***
.74 (17.30)***
involvement
Brand orientation behavior → performance
.56 (11.67)***
.38 (3.85)***
Staff emotional brand attachment → staff
.65 (11.12)*** .17 (4.09)***
.71 (18.00)*** .72 (18.01)***
.72 (18.01)*** .17 (4.09)***
service involvement
Staff emotional brand attachment →
.39 (7.25)***
−.02 (−.25)
−.12 (−1.59)
performance
Staff service involvement → performance
.54 (11.31)*** .56 (8.14)***
.55 (11.45)*** .30 (3.17)**
CFI
.99
.99
.99
.96
.99
.99
.99
.99
.99
p value
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
.00
RMSEA
.01
.01
.01
.05
.01
.03
.03
.02
.02
Δχ2—constrained vs. unconstrained model
N/A
N/A
.01
N/A
N/A
.07
N/A
N/A
.04

Table 3. Mediation Test.

333

Liu et al.
Table 4. Moderation Analysis.

Brand orientation behavior
→ staff emotional brand
attachment
Staff emotional brand
attachment → staff service
involvement

Low charismatic
leadership situation

High charismatic
leadership situation

Δ χ2
(constrained path)

.71 (12.91)***

.76 (14.18)*** (S)

3.82**

.67 (11.12)***

.73 (13.24)*** (S)

2.71*

Note. Standardized coefficients are reported with t values in parentheses. Multigroup analysis Δχ2 = 5.28,
p < .05. S is the significant difference found between the two groups when standardized coefficients were
compared.
*p < .10. **p < .05. ***p < .01.

service involvement (H2b). To test this, we adopt the method suggested by Dabholkar
and Bagozzi (2002) for a median split (high and low charismatic leadership, respectively) and compare both groups using structural equation modeling (see Table 4).
We first compare the overall chi-square value (model estimated: brand orientation
behavior → staff emotional brand attachment → staff service involvement) between
the high and low charismatic leadership groups and found that the change in the chisquare value is significant (Δχ2 = 5.28**, p < .05). Second, we compare the chi-square
value between models where our hypothesized paths are constrained and unconstrained. The estimation results show that, in both situations, the changes in the chisquare value are significant: brand orientation behavior → staff emotional brand
attachment (Δχ2 = 3.82**, p < .05) and staff emotional brand attachment → staff service involvement (Δχ2 = 2.71**, p < .05). Finally, we compare the change in the standard coefficients between the high and low charismatic leadership groups. According
to Dabholkar and Bagozzi (2002), when the change is more than .05, this means that
the difference is at a significant level. Our results suggest that the changes in the standard coefficients are also significant. By combining all the above, our results indicate
that charismatic leadership moderates the relationship between an organization’s
brand orientation behavior and staff emotional brand attachment, as well as that
between staff emotional brand attachment and staff service involvement. Thus, H2a
and H2b are supported.

Concluding Discussion
Our findings have several important implications for both academic research and managerial practice. First, using data obtained from 301 U.K. nonprofit organizations, our
research affirms the theoretical logic and extends the academic insights into the integration of self-determination theory and leadership theory. The integration of these
two theories can provide a possible explanation for the process of internal branding,
and the critical roles that leadership plays in moderating this process. More

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

334

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

specifically, drawing from self-determinate theory (Deci & Ryan, 2004; Ryan & Deci,
2000), the present study was premised on the ideal that staff need to first embrace an
organization’s brand value from organizational environment that managers create to
persuade them to have a greater understanding of the value of the organizational brand
until it has been fully assimilated to the self before they can transform it into reality by
providing high-quality services to the customers that reflects the organization’s brand
standard. Drawing on leadership theory (Hiller et al., 2011; Walter & Bruch, 2009),
our study presupposed that leaders play a critical role in influencing staff’s decision to
embrace an organization’s brand value. Our results support both ideas, highlighting
the important role of mangers to create a favorable organizational environment for the
process of internal branding to take place.
The second important contribution is to provide knowledge regarding the specific
process by which brand orientation behavior influences organizational performance.
Previous researchers have identified the direct relationship between brand orientation
behavior and organizational performance (e.g., Hankinson, 2000; Napoli, 2006). We
propose and test the causal chain relationship in which an organization’s brand orientation behavior will enhance the staff emotional brand attachment, and then trigger the
development of staff service involvement, ultimately leading to superior organizational
performance. Our findings support our proposed causal chain relationship, as illustrated
in Table 2. This is an important finding because it furthers our understanding of brand
orientation behavior–organizational performance relationship. More specifically, our
results indicate that there are different stages of behavior. It starts with organizationally
imposed demand (i.e., brand orientation behavior) to persuade staff to develop a greater
understanding of the value of organization’s brand (i.e., staff emotional brand attachment) and a higher degree of interest in delivering services that are consistent with the
organization’s brand standard (i.e., staff service involvement). Ultimately, these behaviors will lead to the improvement of organizational performance. In other words, there
was a developmental process for staff to transform externally encouraged behavior
regarding how to act accordingly in reflecting organization’s brand values into truly
self-determined behavior. Besides the double mediation (Models 1-3 and Models 4-6),
results from our data analysis before arriving at final results (Models 7-9) reinforce the
idea that each stage of behavior is important for staff to reach the next stage. This suggests that managers should not count on the immediate effects when implementing
brand orientation behavior. Instead, managers should allow time for staff to transform
externally encouraged behavior (i.e., acting as the representative of organization’s
brand) into self-determinate behavior and monitor each stage of the behavior to ensure
that the staff members are in the process of reaching it. According to our findings, this
process will ultimately lead to superior organizational performance.
Third, previous studies have suggested that leadership, mainly transactional and
transformational leadership, plays a critical role during the brand building process
(Morhart et al., 2009; Wieseke et al., 2009). Our research adds to existing knowledge
on the effects of charismatic leadership on internal branding. We believe this is the
first study to explore the effect of charismatic leadership on internal branding. We
found that by having a charismatic leader involved in the organization’s efforts to

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

335

Liu et al.

promote the brands inside an organization, the staff find it easier to form an attachment
to the organization’s brand and perceive the services provided under the organization’s
brand to be personally relevant to them. This is an important finding because, in addition to transactional and transformational leadership, we have identified another type
of leadership, charismatic leadership, which also plays an important role in facilitating
the process of internal branding. In comparison with other type of leadership that
emphasizes leaders’ governance style (i.e., transactional leadership), charismatic leadership focuses more on the quality of the leaders’ personality traits and accomplishments (Conger & Kanungo, 1998; Shamir et al., 1993). Therefore, our findings indicate
that to identity and recruit individuals with abilities to inspire followers is just as
important as to acquire individuals with appropriate governance style, for managerial
roles in charge of internal branding. However, it also means that it might be difficult
for organizations to “train” their existing managers who do not possess the personality
traits and accomplishments of a charismatic leader to become good managers at handling internal branding in a short period of time.
Finally, this research has implications for wider NPO research. Prior research has
recognized the importance of the effects of internal branding on the service staff who
deliver the services under the organization’s brand to the stakeholders (e.g., Morhart et
al., 2009; Punjaisri et al., 2009). As discussed earlier, one of NPOs’ main objectives is
to deliver social services to the public (Coombes et al., 2011; Grønbjerg, 1993). Even
through NPO staff are often drawn to work for this type of organization due to their
personal commitment to the NPOs’ social mission, experts in the field still suggest that,
by communicating the organization’s brand value clearly to their staff, NPOs can further encourage their staff’s brand commitment and contribution toward transforming
the brand promise into reality (e.g., Hankinson, 2002, 2004). Based on data from U.K.
NPOs, we broaden and deepen our understanding about the approach of internal branding in NPO context. As experts suggest, a brand can be considered as the most important asset for NPOs, because it helps them to attract supports from private and business
donors and volunteers (Hankinson, 2004; Napoli, 2006). Our study highlights the
importance for NPO managers to implement brand orientation behavior to encourage
the staff to engage emotionally with the organization’s brand and feel personally connected with the social service provided under the organization’s brand, to become the
representative of the NPO’s brand. Furthermore, in comparison with brand building
through external activities (i.e., advertising), internal branding not only provides less
costly options for NPOs that suffer decreasing public funding and private donations
(Hankinson, 2002) to build NPOs’ brand, but also capitalizes on NPOs’ significant fulltime and voluntary staff to reflect the NPOs’ brand value when serving customers.

Limitations and Future Research
This study suffers from certain limitations that suggest caution in interpreting its empirical findings as well as suggest directions for future research. First, we adopt and modify
measurements that have been used to analyze phenomena in the for-profit setting. Future
research could explore undiscovered types of marketing capability that are related

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

336

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

specifically to social enterprise performance. Second, in this research, we focus on
examining the effects of organization’s brand orientation behavior rather than brand orientation culture. However, this does not mean that the latter is unimportant. As Gotsi,
Andriopoulos, and Wilson (2008) suggest, for staff to buy-in to an organization’s brand
value, managers need to find ways to align the organizational subculture with it.
Moreover, the relevant literature suggests that emotional brand attachment can also be
developed through establishing a brand-oriented organizational culture, organizing
brand-supporting activities within the organization, and ensuring that the staff understand the value of the brand (Hatch & Schultz, 2001). Future research might consider
exploring the effects of an organization’s brand orientation culture and building an integrated internal branding model for NPOs. Third, the cross-sectional design of our study
does not allow for definite conclusions to be drawn about the causal processes that might
occur in the proposed relationships. Although the vast majority of the structural equation
model studies used cross-sectional data, researchers still need to verify whether the relationships among the variables take place simultaneously, or are causal in nature (Holbert
& Stephenson, 2002). In this research, we have established the links between the variables using cross-sectional data, and future researchers may use a longitudinal research
design to suggest the causality empirically and assess the performance over time.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank editor Lucas Meijs and anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this article.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

Reference
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Baruch, Y., & Holtom, B. C. (2008). Survey response rate levels and trends in organizational
research. Human Relations, 61, 1139-1160.
Baumgarth, C. (2009). Brand orientation of museums: Model and empirical results. International
Journal of Arts Management, 11(3), 30-45.
Baumgarth, C. (2010). “Living the brand”: Brand orientation in the business-to-business sector.
European Journal of Marketing, 44, 653-671.
Byrne, B. M. (2010). Structural equation modeling with AMOS: Basic concepts, applications,
and programming. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Celsi, R. L., & Olson, J. C. (1988). The role of involvement in attention and comprehension
processes. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 210-224.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

337

Liu et al.

Charity Commision UK. (2012). Search for charities by their registered details. Retrieved from
http://www.charity-commission.gov.uk/ShowCharity/RegisterOfCharities/AdvancedSearch.
aspx
Chew, C., & Osborne, S. P. (2008). Strategic positioning in UK charities that provide public services: Implications of a new integrating model. Public Money & Management, 28, 283-290.
Conger, J. A., & Kanungo, R. N. (1998). Charismatic leadership in organizations. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Coombes, S. M. T., Morris, M. H., Allen, J. A., & Webb, J. W. (2011). Behavioural orientations
of non-profit boards as a factor in entrepreneurial performance: Does governance matter?
Journal of Management Studies, 48, 829-856.
Dabholkar, P. A., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2002). An attitudinal model of technology-based self-service: Moderating effects of consumer traits and situational factors. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 30, 184-201.
de Chernatony, L., & Segal-Horn, S. (2003). The criteria for successful services brands.
European Journal of Marketing, 37, 1095-1118.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2004). Handbook of self-determination research. Rochester, NY:
University of Rochester Press.
Dess, G. G., & Robinson, R. B. Jr. (1984). Measuring organizational performance in the absence
of objective measures: The case of the privately-held firm and conglomerate business unit.
Strategic Management Journal, 5, 265-273.
Ewing, M. T., & Napoli, J. (2005). Developing and validating a multidimensional nonprofit
brand orientation scale. Journal of Business Research, 58, 841-853.
Froelich, K. A. (1999). Diversification of revenue strategies: Evolving resource dependence in
nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 28, 246-268.
Ganesh, J., Arnold, M. J., & Reynolds, K. E. (2000). Understanding the customer base of service providers: An examination of the differences between switchers and stayers. Journal
of Marketing, 64(3), 65-87.
Gotsi, M., Andriopoulos, C., & Wilson, A. (2008). Corporate re-branding: Is cultural alignment
the weakest link? Management Decision, 46, 46-57.
Grønbjerg, K. A. (1993). Understanding nonprofit funding. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hankinson, P. (2000). Brand orientation in charity organisations: Qualitative research into
key charity sectors. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing,
5, 207-219.
Hankinson, P. (2001). Brand orientation in the charity sector: A framework for discussion and
research. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 6, 231-242.
Hankinson, P. (2002). The impact of brand orientation on managerial practice: A quantitative
study of the UK’s top 500 fundraising managers. International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, 7, 30-44.
Hankinson, P. (2004). The internal brand in leading UK charities. Journal of Product & Brand
Management, 13, 84-93.
Hatch, M. J., & Schultz, M. (2001). Are the strategic stars aligned for your corporate brand?
Harvard Business Review, 79, 128-134.
Hiller, N. J., DeChurch, L. A., Murase, T., & Doty, D. (2011). Searching for outcomes of leadership: A 25-year review. Journal of Management, 37, 1137-1177.
Holbert, R. L., & Stephenson, M. T. (2002). Structural equation modeling in the communication
sciences, 1995-2000. Human Communication Research, 28, 531-551.
Holmbeck, G. N. (1997). Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the study
of mediators and moderators: Examples from the child-clinical and pediatric psychology
literatures. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 599-610.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

338

Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 44(2)

Homburg, C., Wieseke, J., Lukas, B. A., & Mikolon, S. (2011). When salespeople develop
negative headquarters stereotypes: Performance effects and managerial remedies. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39, 664-682.
Macedo, I. M., & Pinho, J. C. (2006). The relationship between resource dependence and market
orientation: The specific case of non-profit organisations. European Journal of Marketing,
40, 533-553.
Madhavaram, S., Badrinarayanan, V., & McDonald, R. E. (2005). Integrated marketing
communication (IMC) and brand identity as critical components of brand equity strategy: A conceptual framework and research propositions. Journal of Advertising, 34(4),
69-80.
Malär, L., Krohmer, H., Hoyer, W. D., & Nyffenegger, B. (2011). Emotional brand attachment
and brand personality: The relative importance of the actual and the ideal self. Journal of
Marketing, 75(4), 35-52.
Miles, S. J., & Mangold, G. (2004). A conceptualization of the employee branding process.
Journal of Relationship Marketing, 3(2-3), 65-87.
Morgan, N. A., Kaleka, A., & Katsikeas, C. S. (2004). Antecedents of export venture performance: A theoretical model and empirical assessment. Journal of Marketing, 68(1),
90-108.
Morhart, F. M., Herzog, W., & Tomczak, T. (2009). Brand-specific leadership: Turning employees into brand champions. Journal of Marketing, 73(5), 122-142.
Mulyanegara, R. C. (2011). The role of brand orientation in church participation: An empirical
examination. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing, 23, 226-247.
Murray, J. Y., Gao, G. Y., & Kotabe, M. (2011). Market orientation and performance of export
ventures: The process through marketing capabilities and competitive advantages. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39, 252-269.
Napoli, J. (2006). The impact of nonprofit brand orientation on organisational performance.
Journal of Marketing Management, 22, 673-694.
Narver, J. C., & Slater, S. F. (1990). The effect of a market orientation on business profitability.
Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 20-35.
Park, C. W., MacInnis, D. J., Priester, J. R., Eisingerich, A. B., & Iacobucci, D. (2010). Brand
attachment and brand attitude strength: Conceptual and empirical differentiation of two
critical brand equity drivers. Journal of Marketing, 74(6), 1-17.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 879-903.
Punjaisri, K., & Wilson, A. (2011). Internal branding process: Key mechanisms, outcomes and
moderating factors. European Journal of Marketing, 45, 1521-1537.
Punjaisri, K., Wilson, A., & Evanschitzky, H. (2009). Internal branding to influence employees’
brand promise delivery: A case study in Thailand. Journal of Service Management, 20,
561-579.
Rogelberg, S. G., & Stanton, J. M. (2007). Introduction understanding and dealing with organizational survey nonresponse. Organizational Research Methods, 10, 195-209.
Rowold, J., & Rohmann, A. (2009). Relationships between leadership styles and followers’
emotional experience and effectiveness in the voluntary sector. Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly, 38, 270-286.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and
new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 54-67.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

339

Liu et al.

Sargeant, A., Ford, J. B., & Hudson, J. (2008). Charity brand personality: The relationship with
giving behavior. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 37, 468-491.
Schumacker, R. E. (2002). Latent variable interaction modeling. Structural Equation Modeling,
9, 40-54.
Shamir, B., House, R. J., & Arthur, M. B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic leadership: A self-concept based theory. Organization Science, 4, 577-594.
Thomson, K., de Chernatony, L., Arganbright, L., & Khan, S. (1999). The buy-in benchmark:
How staff understanding and commitment impact brand and business performance. Journal
of Marketing Management, 15, 819-835.
Thomson, M., MacInnis, D. J., & Park, C. W. (2005). The ties that bind: Measuring the strength
of consumers’ emotional attachments to brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15, 77-91.
Urde, M., Baumgarth, C., & Merrilees, B. (2013). Brand orientation and market orientation—
From alternatives to synergy. Journal of Business Research, 66, 13-20.
Vallaster, C., & de Chernatony, L. (2006). Internal brand building and structuration: The role of
leadership. European Journal of Marketing, 40, 761-784.
Voeth, M., & Herbst, U. (2008). The concept of brand personality as an instrument for
advanced non-profit branding: An empirical analysis. Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector
Marketing, 19(1), 71-97.
Walter, F., & Bruch, H. (2009). An affective events model of charismatic leadership behavior: A review, theoretical integration, and research agenda. Journal of Management, 35,
1428-1452.
Wieseke, J., Ahearne, M., Lam, S. K., & van Dick, R. (2009). The role of leaders in internal
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 73(2), 123-145.
Zahra, S. A., Neubaum, D. O., & El-Hagrassey, G. M. (2003). Competitive analysis and new
venture performance: Understanding the impact of strategic uncertainty and venture origin.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 1-28.

Author Biographies
Gordon Liu is a senior lecturer in strategic marketing at the School of Management at the
University of Bath. He received his PhD from the Royal Holloway, University of London. His
current research interests include cause-related marketing, knowledge and capability, strategic
marketing and entrepreneurship, and strategic alliance.
Chris Chapleo is a senior lecturer in marketing at Bournemouth University. He is a former marketing practitioner, and since joining academia over 12 years ago has published widely in international journals on marketing, branding, and stakeholder management, particularly in education
and social enterprises. He has also presented papers at many academic and practitioner conferences, and has combined this with consultancy and enterprise work for leading organizations.
Wai Wai Ko is a lecturer in strategic entrepreneurship at Brunel University. Her main research
interests include knowledge formation/transfer, capability development, social network, social
capital, and strategic management in small- and medium-sized enterprises and social enterprises.
Isaac K. Ngugi is a lecturer in marketing at Bournemouth University, UK. He has a PhD in
marketing from Bournemouth University. His research interests include branding, sustainability
in customer–supplier relationships, internet marketing, and consumer behavior.

Downloaded from nvs.sagepub.com at GEORGIAN COURT UNIV on March 27, 2015

