ARTICLE
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

OPEN

University digital media co-occurrence networks
reveal structure and dynamics of brand visibility in
the attention economy
1234567890():,;

Alexander Michael Petersen

1✉

As universities compete for visibility to attract student enrollment and build scientiﬁc
reputation, the management of institution of higher education (IHE) brand has emerged as an
important strategic endeavor. Yet our understanding of the factors that condition the
structure and dynamics of brand stratiﬁcation within regional IHE ecosystems is limited.
Instead, our best approximation for brand equity derives from widespread IHE rankings,
which lack contextual and relational features for understanding the patterns of engagement in
the fast-moving attention economy, and in particular how institutional partnerships can
generate brand equity by leveraging ecosystem network effects. To this end, here we develop
a framework for measuring two dimensions of brand equity, namely visibility, and association,
according to the frequency of digital media articles featuring a university’s ofﬁcial name. We
demonstrate this approach for 29 universities in California and Texas based upon 2 million
media articles published between 2000 and 2020 and validate our approach by correlating
university digital media visibility with ARWU Shanghai rankings and freshman enrollment
growth. As roughly 10% of the article sample features >1 university, longitudinal analysis of
institutional co-occurrence reveals the extent to which brand association stratiﬁes according
to regional proximity, institutional specialization, and prestige. Interestingly, despite the
shared value generated from media co-visibility, the frequency of multi-university media
articles has declined over time, which we attribute to paradigm shifts in media content
production following the 2007–08 ﬁnancial crisis and the COVID-19 infodemic, in addition to
increased competitiveness of the attention economy. Topic classiﬁcation of media article
titles shows how specialized institutions may strategically manage their brand equity by
aligning content production with dominant media topics to reinforce brand visibility with
broader social, technological, and environmental narratives.

1 Department of Management of Complex Systems, Ernest and Julio Gallo Management Program, School of Engineering, University of California, Merced, CA,

USA. ✉email: petersen.xander@gmail.com

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

1

ARTICLE

T

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

Introduction
he modern research university is situated at the intersection of education, research, public service and public
investment (Kenney and Mowery, 2014; Kirp, 2003; OwenSmith, 2018; Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025; Rouse, 2016),
which requires the brand management of institutions of higher
education (IHE) to extend across multiple sectors (e.g., research,
athletics, real estate). Consequently, IHE brand management
generates commensurate operational costs associated with student, faculty, and donor recruitment, along with the management
of accumulated human, intellectual, and infrastructure capital,
which together manifest as premiums in faculty salary and student enrollment costs, among others (Altbach, 2012; Rouse, 2016;
Rouse et al., 2018; Stephan, 2012).
In this way, institutional brand is an increasingly fundamental
pillar of the academic enterprise (Kirp, 2003), placing increased
focus on brand visibility and co-visibility (Aaker, 1991; Newmeyer et al., 2018; Ramadan, 2019) within the broader attention
economy (Brossard, 2013; Brynjolfsson and Oh, 2012; Ciampaglia
et al., 2015; Drèze and Zufryden, 2004; Goldhaber, 1997; Simon
et al., 1971; Smithson et al., 2011). As such, in addition to
securing students, star faculty, scientiﬁc achievement, public and
private funding, real estate development, sports achievement, and
alumni support (Marginson, 2006, 2013; Rouse, 2016; Rouse
et al., 2018), the competitiveness of IHE increasingly depends on
producing digital web-based content and tracking the attention it
receives across the vast media ecosystem.
The importance of brand visibility has proliferated in the
attention economy emerging across both the internet and social
media platforms, which are invaluable resources for identifying
IHE mission and values, for showcasing student achievements
and research outcomes, and for highlighting the differentiating
factors vis-a-vis competitors (Ballantyne et al., 2006; Smithson
et al., 2011). Yet there is scant literature analyzing the brand
equity derived from the total print visibility of an institution’s
ofﬁcial name. While there is substantial research activity in the
ﬁeld of webometrics (Barnett et al., 2017; Park and Park, 2024;
Thelwall, 2009) utilizing the network of hyperlinks between
ofﬁcial institutional websites to explore the emergence of regional
and global university networks (Park and Thelwall, 2006;
Thelwall, 2002), we are aware of just a single study where the
number of university name mentions constitutes the measure of
institutional visibility (Lee and Park, 2012). Instead, an alternative
proxy for IHE brand equity employed in webometrics, scientometrics, and organizational studies literature streams are global
university rankings, in particular those produced by the ARWU
“Shanghai”, Times Higher Education, and US News & World
Report (Barnett et al., 2014; Lee and Park, 2012; Marginson, 2006;
Rouse, 2016).
However, there are a number of documented limitations to
IHE rankings. By and large, rankings generate a ﬂattened oversimpliﬁcation of the complex ecosystem of entities and their
interrelationships. Another limitation of the ranking approach is
the compression of multiple attribute variables into a single
composite rank, which discards substantial latent information. As
such, rankings sacriﬁce precision for clarity, as two entities with
successive rank may differ greatly, or incrementally, in their
underlying score. In the present case, IHE rankings also lack
consistency and transparency, as they each tend to focus on
different dimensions of the IHE mission (e.g., education, research,
or combinations thereof) and employ different model inputs with
different weights that are not typically speciﬁed (Hazelkorn,
2009, 2015; Rouse, 2016). Several IHE rankings incorporate survey instruments that are susceptible to traditional experimental
biases, including reputation bias manifesting as a reinforcement
effect derived from other rankings and prestige mechanisms that
2

inform IHE rankings (Safón, 2019; Safón and Docampo, 2020).
Moreover, in the absence of comprehensive historical data on
every attribute of every institution, then these approaches are
susceptible to omitted variable bias and thus may miss miss critical “X” factors that explain nuanced aspects of brand equity
(Safón, 2013).
To address these issues, it is essential to develop brand equity
metrics that are comprehensive across institutions, and retain
contextual and relational features that are useful for identifying
ecosystem network effects. A candidate metric employed in the
webometrics literature is the centrality of an IHE within the
global network of hyperlinks that comprise the internet (Barnett
et al., 2014; Lee and Park, 2012; Ortega and Aguillo, 2009).
However, two large-scale studies analyzing hyperlinking between
IHE across Europe conclude that the degree of hyperlinking to
and from a university largely reﬂects institutional size, and fails to
capture more nuanced aspects of reputation signaling and subjective perspective (Lepori et al., 2014; Seeber et al., 2012), which
are nevertheless relevant dimensions for brand equity analytics.
Moreover, the methodology to quantify the number of hyperlinks
from institutional website A to institutional website B does not
permit cross-temporal studies, as hyperlinks do not generally
have time-stamps, and so hyperlink counts capture timeaggregated tallies thru the sampling date.
An alternative data source that does permit inter-temporal
(dynamical) analysis of brand equity and association are the vast
quantities of digital footprints in web-based communication and
other new media sources (Ding et al., 2020; Nuortimo and
Harkonen, 2019; Oh et al., 2020), which are also endowed with
readily identiﬁable time-stamps and other contextual information
(e.g., media source and background/narrative topics). To this end,
we develop a framework for IHE altmetrics, analogue to those
developed for research and researchers (Cronin and Sugimoto,
2014; Sugimoto et al., 2017), by analyzing the frequency and cooccurrence of IHE featured by name in digital media articles –
Fig. 1a shows an example.
We apply this framework across a corpus of roughly 2 million
articles published between 2000 and 2020 collected from the
Media Cloud (MC) database (MC-Consortium 2024)—see the
Supplementary Information (SI) Figs. S1 and S2. Our methodology leverages the comprehensive breadth and depth of MC data
that have advanced our understanding of ‘new media’ content
production paradigm (Roberts et al., 2021; Waisbord, 2018), the
diversity of media sources and messages relating to speciﬁc topics
and events (Chuang et al., 2014; Faris et al., 2017), and the
structure and dynamics of media ecosystems comprised of distinct identiﬁable entities (Arroyave et al., 2024; Petersen et al.,
2025, 2019; Wells et al., 2020). As in the latter approach, we
employ exact string matching to identify individual media articles
featuring ofﬁcial university names. This method generates a
consistent measure of brand visibility, over time and across
institutions. Moreover, the roughly 1 in 10 media articles that
mention two or more IHE simultaneously provide novel inroads
to analyzing the structure and dynamics of brand association
generated within and across the two regional IHE ecosystems in
California (CA) and Texas (TX) that we focus upon.
The structure and dynamics of media co-visibility networks
are eluded by other metrics used to proxy IHE brand equity. As
such, the framework developed in what follows can enhance our
understanding of institutional hierarchies and stratiﬁcation in
the digital media attention economy. In particular, IHE cooccurrences in digital media supports the combination of network analytics (Barabasi, 2016) and topic-classiﬁcation methods
for quantifying the relational and contextual basis of brand
association and alliances at high resolution. To this end, we

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

ARTICLE

Fig. 1 Framework for institutional media visibility analytics: schematic of the data collection process and validity assessment. a Media articles obtained
from Media Cloud (MC-Consortium, 2024) are identiﬁed by full-text string matches of ofﬁcial university name and also common abbreviations (e.g.,
UCLA). Shown is an example article highlighting UCM that also features UCLA and UCSC. b Geographic distribution University of California System: 10
universities, northern (southern) colored blue (light blue); University of Texas System: 8 research universities (brown) and 5 afﬁliated medical centers
(yellow); regional counterparts: 6 private Carnegie R1/R2 research universities: green (Texas-TX), red (California-CA). c Media visibility Mi provides a
consistent and granular proxy for brand equity, and is moderately correlated with extant brand equity metrics, such as the international Academic Ranking
of World Universities (ARWU). d Marginal effects of media visibility growth on freshman enrollment growth, by multi-campus university system, as
estimated using a 1-year lagged regression model implemented with institutional ﬁxed effects speciﬁed in Eq. (2). On the aggregate, a 1% increase in media
visibility correlates with a βGM = 0.034% increase in freshman enrollment.

orient our framework analysis around the following 3 research
questions (RQs):
(RQ1) Digital media altmetrics (institutional level): How do
they correlate with traditional institutional metrics –
namely, ARWU rankings and student enrollment trends
– and what advantages do they entail?
(RQ2) Media co-visibility network structure (systems level): To
what degree do brand association networks reﬂect
assortative factors (prestige, geographic proximity and
topical narrative)?
(RQ3) Topical dynamics (event-history level): How robust are
brand association networks over time, and to what
degree are they augmented by exogenous systemic shocks
to the attention economy?
Results provide inroads for the institutional assessment of
media visibility, and can inform marketing strategies for student
enrollment and retention from the perspectives of brand trust and
loyalty (Rasoolimanesh et al., 2024; Vander Schee, 2010). Cooccurrence analysis further advances our understanding of brand

equity that is co-produced by association when two or more
institutions are co-mentioned (Newmeyer et al., 2018; Ramadan,
2019), which is relevant to measuring the value of ‘brand alliances’ within the context of multi-campus university systems
(MUS) (Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025).
Background and motivation
The IHE attention economy – what’s in a name? As the cost of
media content production and distribution decreased with the
advent of the web, institutions have become steeped in competition for the attention of the masses (Goldhaber, 1997; Simon
et al., 1971). However, the associated attention and brand equity
deriving from institutional signatures have traditionally been
challenging to quantify.
Prior work in the ﬁeld of webometrics has elucidated the
structure of institutional afﬁliations by analyzing hyperlink
networks (Lee and Park, 2012; Ortega et al., 2008; Ortega and
Aguillo, 2009; Park and Thelwall, 2006; Thelwall, 2002; Thelwall
and Zuccala, 2008), associated variants such as URL and web
citations (Barnett et al., 2014; Kretschmer et al., 2007), and

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

3

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

individual IHE name mentions occurring in web text (Lee and
Park, 2012) (which is the most similar to the methodology
employed here). Together, these complementary methodologies
have supported the application of network science methods
(Barabasi, 2016) to elucidate the structure of international
networks of IHE, as well as identify the relative strengh of
geographic, institutional, academic, and other social factors that
contribute to the overall connectivity between webpages hosted
by ofﬁcial IHE web domains (Kretschmer et al., 2007; Lepori
et al., 2014; Seeber et al., 2012).
Yet advances in Web 2.0 (Brynjolfsson and Oh, 2012) and text
analysis methods in marketing research (Berger et al., 2022;
Büschken and Allenby, 2016; ElKattan et al., 2023; Mathew, 2024)
have fostered new opportunities for mapping both the demand
and supply side of the attention economy emerging around the
deluge of web-based new media (Ciampaglia et al., 2015; Drèze
and Zufryden, 2004; Lazer et al., 2009; Smithson et al., 2011). In
this regard, we leverage the precise publication timestamps, the
diversity of independent media sources, and the broad range of
narrative topics inferred from digital media article titles. These
data features facilitate analyzing the evolution of the IHE
ecosystem, and correlating the dynamical structure of brand covisibility with the dynamic undercurrent of media narratives. As
such, our framework supports simultaneously analyzing two
distinct dimensions of brand equity that are promoted in media
communications – namely, institutional visibility and association.
A related paradigm is how institutions increasingly seek datadriven opportunities for holistic self-assessment to guide strategic
decision making. The development of consistent and highly
generalizable measures of brand equity may offer new ways for
IHE (here encompassing traditional universities, as well institutions
more focused on education or research) to compete for valuable
resources that are auxiliary to the core education and research
missions, thereby conferring dynamic capabilities for maneuvering
in turbulent environments (Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Teece,
2007). For this reason, IHE invest substantial resources into external
relations departments (e.g., https://www.ucop.edu/external-relationscommunications/index.html) to manage the ecosystem of interacting
yet distinct enterprises (education, research, public service and
public/private investment, health care provision, government
relations, and legislative lobbying) that constitute the broad scope
of the modern IHE (Kirp, 2003; Rouse, 2016).
Widespread university ranking systems – such as the ARWU
“Shanghai”, Times Higher Education, and US News & World
Report—represent distinct arenas where IHE brand, values, and
achievements are distilled into a summary score and rank
associated with the ofﬁcial institutional name. Such rankings
reinforce perceptions of relative brand equity because individuals
naturally associate institutions of similar rank. Consequently, IHE
rankings promote university names, along with derivative and
abbreviated forms, as distinct brand entities. By way of example,
consider the University of California Los Angeles, which
speciﬁcally encourages their abbreviation UCLA to promote their
trademarked brand name (UCLA Brand website); and the
University of Texas MD Anderson Center, which employs a
strikethrough in ofﬁcial brand logos to emphasize its core
mission.
In this way, universities along with medical centers and
other specialized research institutes represent an institutional
sector that features high levels of brand recognition associated
with their ofﬁcial name. For this reason, journalistic standards
support using the ofﬁcial institutional name in reporting,
either because the IHE is the article’s focal context, or as a
reputation signal conferred upon the expert afﬁliate being
interviewed. This brand name visibility framework readily
generalizes to other organizational systems where the use of
4

ofﬁcial names are normalized and can be readily disambiguated, such as US National Parks (Arroyave et al., 2024;
Petersen et al., 2025).
As such, the ofﬁcial name of a given institution is the focal
entity identiﬁed by our media visibility framework. Take for
example the New York Times article titled “A Magnet for Latino
College Students” (Medina, 2018) featured in Fig. 1a, which
mentions three particular University of California campuses
associated with the overarching context of student demographics.
While the article title connotes institutional mission and values
associated with a principal customer base (students), the media
source connotes cultural and topical signiﬁcance. Moreover, the
co-mention of three universities establishes the basis for signaling
similarity and differentiation that are essential inputs to student
information-gathering and decision-making, while also connoting
institutional membership in an overarching university system,
which connotes a brand alliance in and of itself (Newmeyer et al.,
2018; Ramadan, 2019).
Theoretical motivation. This work contributes to literature
streams developing an organizational theory of the modern
research university (Kirp, 2003; Rouse, 2016), as well as the
marketing and strategy literature regarding institutional brand,
identity and reputation (Aaker, 1991; Ballantyne et al., 2006).
Considering the common service objectives of universities
(knowledge transfer, workforce training and auxiliary experience
delivery) and related destination-amenity industries, research
from tourism & hospitality management on digital branding and
marketing provide translatable insights (Pike and Page, 2014).
The ﬁrst theoretical construct that we seek to measure is brand
visibility. Prior research on small and medium-sized tourism
accommodation enterprises found that online visibility correlates
positively with overall competitiveness (Smithson et al., 2011). In
the present context, their results suggests that democratization of
new media content production has enhanced the competitiveness
of smaller IHE, while extending the geographic basin of attraction
for student enrollment across the entire IHE ecosystem,
independent of institutional size.
Our second theoretical construct focuses on brand association,
a relational concept that relies on consistently identifying
instances of brand co-visibility. Explicit brand connections offer
a clear strategy for promoting brand alliances that enhance and
reinforce perceptions of common reputation and quality. Likewise, such alliances foster distinct opportunities for product
differentiation. From the consumer perspective, brand association
has the added advantage of narrowing the range of choices,
thereby reducing the cognitive effort required to compare and
sort competing brands when detailed information, such as
product quality or pricing, is unavailable. In the present setting,
these considerations predict relatively stronger brand associations
within MUS, as these multi-institutions inherently connote
shared educational standards, institutional mission, and values.
Considering the extent to which IHE brand loyalty is promoted
by college sports, legacy enrollment preferences, and alumni
networks, brand association among MUS campuses fosters
differentiation between campuses, while at the same time
reinforces shared identity across the university system (Kato,
2021; Mills et al., 2022).
Methods
Digital media dataset construction. We developed large-scale
sample of media articles produced in the news media ecosystem
mentioning a speciﬁc set of universities using methods of computational social science (Ahonen, 2015; Ding et al., 2020; Lazer
et al., 2009; Oh et al., 2020) applied to the science of science

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

(Fortunato et al., 2018). Primary source data were collected from
the Media Cloud (MC) project (MC-Consortium, 2024) open
application programming interface (API), which provides access
to a database of digital media articles accessible via the web
(representing news articles, blog posts and other web content).
Since its inception in 2008, this valuable open resource has
supported over 88 published studies—see https://www.mediacloud.
org/research.
The breadth of the MC project is vast, web-crawling at a rate of
roughly 1 million stories per day and reaching a size of > 1.7
billion searchable items as of 2021 (Roberts et al., 2021). As such,
MC provides a comprehensive supply-side representation of the
digital media attention economy. Notably, due to copyright
restrictions, MC does not supply full article text, but instead
provides granular article-level metadata. As such, we collected
university-speciﬁc records by querying the MC API using each
institution’s ofﬁcial name, e.g., “University of California Los
Angeles”; moreover, for the most prominent institutions, we also
merged records obtained using their ofﬁcial abbreviations (e.g.,
UCLA, Cal Berkeley, MD Anderson Cancer Center). Our ﬁnal
data sample is comprised of roughly 2 million articles published
by roughly 58 thousand media source providers (e.g., New York
Times, LA Times, etc.)—see Fig. 2.
Figure 1b shows the geographic distribution of universities in
our sample, which focuses upon two speciﬁc regional innovation
systems (RIS) in California and Texas. These IHE were selected
based upon their geographic proximity, institutional similarity
and the alignment of research and education missions; see
(Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025) for further details
regarding IHE sample selection. The 29 IHE belong to three
subgroups (including two MUS): the University of California
(UC; comprised of 10 public campuses); the University of Texas
(UT; comprised of 13 public campuses and afﬁliated health
science centers); and 6 prestigious private universities (3 in CA
and 3 in TX). Notably, the UT is comprised of a 8-campus multidisciplinary university system alongside a 5-campus system of
specialized biomedical and health science centers.
Metrics for brand visibility & brand association. The total
number of media articles from year y that feature IHE i provides a
consistent and granular measure of brand visibility, which we
denote by Mi,y. In what follows, we leverage four types of primary
source metadata available for each MC article (denoted by the
index a):
1. the article title, Ta;
2. the publication date (deﬁning the year ya and month ma);
3. the media source sa publishing the article (e.g., New York
Times, Washington Post);
4. article-level tags (ea) useful for identifying granular
article entities ("Obama”, “Supreme Court”) and themes
(e.g., “medicine and health”, “research”); note that these
tags are not uniformly provided (only 18% of articles in
our sample have tags).
To exhibit the variation in media source audience and
orientation, we manually separated the set of s into three nonoverlapping subsets corresponding to: (a) large regional and
national mainstream media (MM30); (b) local mainstream media
associated with speciﬁc cities and metropolitan areas; (c) and
other, corresponding to new media sources associated with
websites, blogs and content aggregators. Notably, sources
belonging to the MM30 and other sources are the most
prominent content producers, characteristic of the modern
web-based news media ecosystem designed for scale via the
democratization of content production and the reduction of

ARTICLE

editorial oversight (Petersen et al., 2019). Figure 2c indicates
of an institution’s
relatively small variation in the fraction f MM
i
total media visibility that is featured in the MM30, and for this
reason we aggregate all media sources in what follows.
Each instance of an identiﬁable brand name represents a salient
pointer that information consumers can instantaneously follow or
bookmark for follow-up (Drèze and Zufryden, 2004; Smithson
et al., 2011). On the aggregate, these instances represent the total
number of pointers to the brand. Compared to alternative webpresence metrics such as hyperlink counts, IHE name visibility
shares certain features. In particular, both approaches rely on
unique non-ambiguous identiﬁers that can be readily tabulated by
web search algorithms and web-crawlers (Ortega and Aguillo,
2009; Thelwall, 2002; Thelwall and Zuccala, 2008). However, by
construction, the actual hyperlink is often obscured by the HTML
anchor text, such that the IHE afﬁliated with the hyperlink is not
obvious to a human reader. Moreover, even if the human reader
inspects the speciﬁc domain name associated with the hyperlink,
the particular IHE may not be inferable. For example, the domain
www.mdanderson.org does not speciﬁcally connote the parent
UT afﬁliation, whereas https://uthscsa.edu/ does.
Thus, explicit instances of the IHE name in legible digital media
are more relevant to brand marketing analytics, as they offer
granular instances of how the brand is situated, perceived, and
associated. Because ofﬁcial brand names are promoted and
reinforced by the parent institution, they can be automatically
identiﬁed, and are thus countable. As such, similar to hyperlink
metrics, they reinforce web-search algorithms that sort and
recommend results according to perceived relevance and salience
of the brand entity. Compared to the information codiﬁed by
hyperlinks between institutional websites, brand associations
formed through digital media co-visibility differ in two additional
aspects. First, digital media are likely to span a broader contextual
background, as their production is not limited by institutional
guidelines on content relevance, sentiment, or timeliness; and also,
digital media are generated by diverse sources, whereas hyperlinks
embedded in institutional websites are generated by select
institutional representatives. Second, digital media articles include
a publication timestamp, often at the daily time resolution, whereas
hyperlinks lack this precision. This difference emerges because web
page metadata tends to record when the page was ﬁrst created or
last updated, making it challenging to determine precisely when a
hyperlink was added. In light of these distinctions, we analyze the
total number of media articles from year y that feature the ofﬁcial
name of IHE i, which provides a consistent and granular measure
of a brand’s media visibility, denoted by Mi,y.
Similarly, it follows that brand association can be proxied by
the co-visibility of two brand names, such that one brand entity
reinforces the pointer to a coincident brand entity. We explored
the feasibility of this deﬁnition by analyzing the frequency of
media articles featuring Nu universities. Results indicate that the
probability distribution P(Nu) follows an extremely right-skewed
Zipf distribution: 89% of articles feature just one university; 8.5%
feature 2 universities; and 2.1% featuring 3 or more universities.
Interestingly, while the nominal rate of multi-university articles
featuring Nu ≥ 2 has grown exponentially over the sample period,
the percentage of articles that are multi-university has fallen
roughly in half from 20% in 2000 to 10% in 2020—see Fig. S3.
Given that the majority of articles with Nu ≥ 2 feature Nu = 2
institutions, we employ a pairwise (dyadic) measure of brand
association. Speciﬁcally, we use the Jaccard similarity index
given by
J ij;y ¼

C ij;y
2 ½0; 1:
M i;y þ M j;y  Cij;y

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

ð1Þ
5

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

Fig. 2 Institutional and contextual distribution of IHE media visibility. Descriptive statistics including media source, Media Cloud entity tags, and total
IHE media visibility. a The top-100 media sources ranked according to article count, Ms. Colors indicate media source group: 30 select regional/national
mainstream media sources (MM30, orange); local mainstream media (blue); other (gray). b Media Cloud annotates articles by entity tags identifying
distinct entities and topic categories. Shown are the top-100 entities ranked according to the article count, Me. c Institutions ranked according to the total
number of media articles Mi featuring each institution i over 2000–2020. Each data point is shaded according to the fraction f MM30
of the Mi articles that
i
were published by mainstream MM30 sources indicated in (a).

6

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

where Cij,y is the number of media articles where institutions i
and j are co-visible in a given time period y. Importantly, Jij is
bounded and intensive, as it accounts for both secular growth in
news media content production over time, as well as the wide
variation in Mi across IHE – see Figs. S1 and S2, respectively.
The standardization of the metric serves as a critical
methodological safeguard, particularly in intertemporal studies
spanning signiﬁcant time periods (Petersen et al., 2018); see
(Montaño Ramirez and Petersen, 2025; Petersen et al., 2025;
Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025) for similar systems
integration analyses implementing the Jaccard index to address
co-production inﬂation. We further validate this choice of
pairwise metric by way of unsupervised network clustering
algorithm that reproduces the expected institutional stratiﬁcation within and across regions. For example, the maximum Cij,y
observed between two institutions over our entire sample
period is between Stanford University and UC Berkeley,
featured together in Cij,2000−2020 = 25, 747 media articles
corresponding to 100 × Jij,2000−2020 = 3.5% of their combined
media visibility – see Fig. S2.
Validity assessment: enrollment growth and media visibility
regression model. To demonstrate the validity of Mi,y as a
measure of brand equity in relevant use case setting, we analyzed
its relation to freshman enrollment, Ei,y, at each of the 17
undergraduate-serving campuses in the UC and UT systems
using publicly-available enrollment data provided by each system
over the period 2013–2021. To avoid confounding effects of
secular growth, we estimate the relationship between media visibility growth GM,i,y = 100(Mi,y − Mi,y−1)/Mi,y−1 and undergraduate enrollment growth, GE,i,y = 100(Ei,y − Ei,y−1)/Ei,y−1,
while also accounting for other university and system-level covariates by way of a hierarchical model speciﬁcation implemented
with institutional ﬁxed effects. Our model speciﬁcation is as follows,
GE;i;y ¼ βi þ βGM GM;i;y1 þ βE ln Ei;y1 þ γy þ ϵi

ð2Þ

which employs a 1-year lag between dependent and independent
variables.
Topic classiﬁcation of media article titles. To identify a consistent set of narrative contexts that correlate with brand covisibility, we applied a pre-trained machine learning text classiﬁer
to each article title, Ta. The topic classiﬁer is available in Mathematica software, and was trained on a corpus of Facebook posts,
which are of similar length and contextual density as article titles
and other abbreviated text sources used in marketing, such as
customer reviews (Berger et al., 2022; Büschken and Allenby,
2016). By applying this classiﬁer to each Ta, we consistently
identify broad topic categories associated with each article.
See the SI Appendix Extended Methods and Fig. S4 for more
details regarding: the data collection process using the Media
Cloud API; Media article disambiguation, in effect to merge
articles with the same title from the same media source that have
multiple instances with distinct web addresses; the topic
classiﬁcation of article titles.
Results
Validity of media visibility as a proxy for brand equity. It is
reasonable to expect that different measures of brand equity, such
as visibility and institutional rankings reﬂect common sortings
(Drèze and Zufryden, 2004; Rouse, 2016; Smithson et al., 2011).
Hence, as a ﬁrst consistency check, Fig. 1c correlates the media
visibility in 2019 with university rankings from the same year.

ARTICLE

Results show that media visibility explains 48% of the variation in
the research-oriented ARWU ranking of international universities.
To further demonstrate the informational value of Mi,y across a
longer time horizon, we estimated the impact of a 1% increase in
media visibility in a given year on the enrollment growth in the
following academic year. This analysis is based upon a panel of
the seventeen UC and UT campuses that focus on undergraduate
education over the period 2013–2021. Results indicate a
statistically signiﬁcant and positive relationship on the aggregate,
βGM = 0.034, (p = 0.026; 95% CI = [0.005,0.063]). Disaggregating the effect size by university system reveals a
substantially larger coefﬁcient for campuses belonging to the
UT system—see Fig. 1d and Table S1 for the full table of
regression model parameter estimates.
To summarize, for a university increasing its media visibility by
the average value of GM =40.8% (which is nearly the same for
each MUS), we estimate corresponding enrollment growth of
3.5% for UC campuses and 5% for UT campuses. These effect
sizes highlight the signiﬁcant impact that shifts in brand visibility
can have on attracting visibility, student applications, and
ultimately, student enrollment.
Digital media co-visibility networks reveal institutional stratiﬁcation. Building on the granularity and consistency of Jij as a
measure of brand association, the ensemble of Jij values enables a
systematic analysis of the structure and stability of brand associations over time. The prominence and stability of institutional linkages are signatures of brand alliance (Newmeyer et al., 2018;
Ramadan, 2019). As such, we posit that if a measure of brand
association is appropriately calibrated, then system-level communities emerging from the structure of Jij will reﬂect ground-truth
associations (institutional and regional). Hence, we expect that
MUS membership—a form of institutional homophily reﬂecting
shared mission, values, resources and other characteristics – to
emerge naturally from our network community analysis.
This expectation is grounded in prior literature based upon
analysis of networks formed by hyper-links between webpages
hosted by the IHE domain (Park and Thelwall, 2006; Thelwall,
2002; Thelwall and Zuccala, 2008). Within this context, several
studies have identiﬁed geographic proximity and language as
important factors explaining institutional centrality within IHE
hyperlink networks (Lee and Park, 2012; Ortega et al., 2008; Ortega
and Aguillo, 2009). Yet a dominant factor explaining IHE hyperlink
connectivity is institutional size, which is positively moderated by
institutional prestige (Barnett et al., 2014; Lepori et al., 2014; Seeber
et al., 2012). Instead, our chosen relational measure, Jij, mitigates
biases associated with the large size variations (encountered in our
sample as well as the IHE ecosystem at large) according to its very
deﬁnition as an intensive quantity (a size-normalized fraction).
Accordingly, this co-visibility measure is well suited to elucidate the
roles of geographic proximity, institutional homophily and prestige
as they manifest within and across the CA and TX regional IHE
ecosystems over time.
Figure 3a exhibits the structure of the Jij,2010−2020 matrix
calculated for the 11-year period 2010–2020. The structure as
well as the extreme values are highly correlated with regional
proximity, as there is signiﬁcant within-state co-visibility, but
relatively little across-state co-visibility. This is in contradistinction to analogous research co-publication frequencies
tabulated for the same set of universities, which features
signiﬁcant integration across the CA and TX regional innovation systems (Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025). The
differing rates and aggregate structure indicate that institutional
competitiveness in the attention economy is largely intraregional. This insight is further supported by our results

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

7

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

Fig. 3 Media co-visibility provides a granular proxy for brand association. The Jaccard similarity index, denoted by Jij,y, is a quantity that measures the
fraction of media articles featuring institutions i and j—see Eq. (1). a Shown is the full ensemble of Jij,y values, calculated over the period 2010–2020 and
represented as a sorted matrix. Institutions are grouped according to communities identiﬁed using the Louvain modularity maximizing algorithm (Blondel
et al., 2008), as indicated by the gray-scale border segments along the upper border; within each community, institutions are ordered according to their
total media visibility, Mi. Community members are largely correlated according to regional proximity, institutional specialization and prestige. See the SI
Appendix GIF for a dynamic visualization of Jaccard co-occurrence matrices at the 1-year resolution from 2000 to 2020. b Institution-topic matrix
identifying the top-5 media article topic categories; circles on left margin indicate the community. c Rank-ordered topic categories for each community;
each topic is sized proportional to the log frequency across all media articles associated with that university community.

showing that national and local media sources tend to feature
smaller numbers of IHE in the same article—see Fig. S3.
The structure of Jij,2010−2020 also exhibits stratiﬁcation
according to institutional prestige. By way of example, consider
the relatively large Jij,2010−2020 values that do extend across state
lines. Those extreme values are exclusively between Rice
University (and UT Austin) and other premier universities in
CA. Prestige stratiﬁcation is further reﬂected by the emergent
community-level structure, which we identiﬁed by analyzing the
entire ensemble of pairs in the Jij,y matrix. To be speciﬁc, we
identiﬁed IHE communities by applying an unsupervised
network clustering algorithm that identiﬁes groups of nodes
featuring statistically higher strengths of within-community
links versus those that extend beyond the community (Blondel
et al., 2008). The ordering of rows (columns) for Jij,2010−2020
thereby encodes the community structure, as denoted by the
gray-scale bar across the top of Fig. 3a. Also note that
institutions are sorted within community according to decreasing media visibility Mi.
As such, it is notable that the strongest Jij,2010−2020 values
tend to occur in the upper-left corner of each community. This
pattern is indicative of prestige sorting between the most
prominent institutions, i.e., those featuring the largest media
visibility, Mi. Taken together, the reproduction of geographic
and institutional hierarchies captured by the Jij,y community
structure provides a consistency check that media co-visibility is
a valid measure of brand association. Results indicate that
prestige and geographic proximity are important factors in
California, as there is a rough split between northern and
southern IHE. Similarly, role of institutional specialization
appears to be dominant factors in Texas, with the UT Medical
institutions forming their own community.
8

Institutional specialization mediates brand association. To
what degree does Jij,y capture the alignment of specialized institutions? To address this question, we applied NLP text classiﬁcation to identify the media topics associated with brand visibility
and co-visibility. Figure 3b shows the 5 most common topics
associated with media articles featuring each IHE. By and large,
the topics are concentrated upon the Politics, Health&Food and
Education&Professional categories. The Health&Food category is
consistently top-ranked among the medical and health science
oriented institutions.
There is also considerable variation in top-ranked categories
across IHE, and even notable variation among members of the
same co-visibility community. Interestingly, the ﬁrst community
(including UCLA) is the only community featuring a mixture of
principal topics, whereas the remaining communities are highly
aligned according to their principal topics. This correlation
indicates that specialized institutions (i.e., IHE that are biomedical and health science oriented, including UCSF and the UT
health science centers) are primed for brand co-visibility.
Co-visibility dynamics indicate paradigm shifts in media production. The volume and diversity of content produced in the
attention economy has grown by over two orders of magnitude
over our 21-year sample period, both at the aggregate and for
individual universities. Yet at the same time, the co-production of
brand equity has decreased on a per-article basis, as indicated by
the average value of the co-visibility matrix, denoted by J y . Plotted
in Fig. 4a, the characteristic pairwise frequency of any two universities being featured in the same media article has decreased
from 2.6% in the period 2000–2008 to 0.9% from 2009 to 2020.
Similarly, the variation in co-visibility calculated as the standard

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

ARTICLE

Fig. 4 Dynamics of brand co-visibility exhibit sensitivity of attention economy to exogenous shocks. Characteristic values for the Jij,y matrix calculated at
the annual level: a the average Jy and standard deviation, σJ,y; b the coefﬁcient of variation, CVy, which is a measure of inequality; c the assortativity, AJ,y,
which quantiﬁes sorting of IHE in Jij,y, with negative values indicating disassortativity; d the number of communities, CJ,y. Dashed lines indicate the mean
value calculated over 2000–2020. See the SI Appendix GIF for a dynamic visualization of Jij,y at the 1-year resolution from 2000 to 2020. Geography and
prestige condition the e long-term and f short-term stratiﬁcation of media co-visibility networks. g Extreme fragmentation of IHE communities during the
ﬁrst year of the COVID-19 pandemic.

deviation of the matrix values, denoted by σJ,y, also features a
steady decline.
These trends indicate that media articles increasingly tend to
focus on a single university, with roughly 90% of articles in 2020
being mono-university (Nu = 1)—see S3e. Hence, brand equity
production has become more singular over time – which is
opposite of trends observed for multi-university research coproduction (Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025). As the
frequency distribution P(Nu) shifts towards smaller Nu values
over time, we ﬁnd this pattern to be stronger among the national
and regional mainstream media sources—see Fig. S3c. This result
aligns with the dynamics of an increasingly competitive attention
economy, where the advantages of exclusive attention outweigh
the beneﬁts of extending reach by sharing co-visibility.
The inequality across the matrix component values also
exhibits the sensitivity of the attention economy to exogenous
shock. To identify variability across the IHE ecosystem, we
measure structural inequality by way of the coefﬁcient of
variation CV J;y  σ J;y =J y . Interestingly, we observe heightened
levels of co-visibility inequality immediately following the onset
of the 2007–2008 global ﬁnancial crisis—see Fig. 4b. The recovery
from this broad crisis extended into the long term as institutions
implemented cost-savings measures well into the early 2010s. As
a rapid cost-savings measure, institutions reduce marketing
expenditures during signiﬁcant market downturns. Consequently,
many university communications departments, and legacy news
reporting at large, underwent signiﬁcant staff reductions (Deuze
et al., 2010). In addition to workforce decline, other negative
impacts include the loss of professional and institutional memory,
and a diminished capacity to sustain brand value over the long
term (Quelch and Jocz, 2009). Alongside this industry transformation came a surge of new media sources within the digital news

ecosystem (Mitchell and Holcomb, 2016; Picard, 2014). A
relatively long recovery period followed, as indicated by the
CVJ,y time series taking until 2012 to return to the full 21-year
average value.
To what degree did this pervasive shock to the news media
industry affect the micro-level structure of brand associations
among IHE? To address this question, we calculate the
assortativity of Jij,y, denoted by AJ,y – see Fig. 4c. This metric
was designed to measure homophily among neighbors in social
networks (Newman, 2002). If IHE with relatively high (low)
average co-visibility tend to pair with other IHE featuring
relatively high (low) co-visibility, then the Jij,y conﬁguration
would be characterized as assortative (corresponding to AJ,y > 0).
Conversely, if IHE with relatively high (low) average co-visibility
tend to pair with other IHE featuring relatively low (high) covisibility, then the Jij,y conﬁguration would be characterized as
dis-assortative (AJ,y < 0).
By and large we observe robust dis-assortative sorting (AJ,y < 0),
which is consistent with a separate analysis of research coproduction among the same IHE (Petersen and Montaño
Ramirez, 2025). In this way, IHE share micro-level structural
similarities with other biological and technological systems
featuring featuring A < 0, which are attributed to resource
constraints and zero-sum interactions (Newman, 2002). Accordingly, the negative shift in assortativity after the 2007–08 crisis
suggests that IHE adjusted to short-term ﬁnancial constraints by
prioritizing co-visibility with regional institutions.
Just as a system’s structural response to exogenous shocks can
be revealing, so too is the long-term structure that emerges
according to more stable sorting factors. To illustrate this, Fig. 4e
shows the long-term community structure that emerged during
the ﬁnancial crisis recovery period (2010–2018). The composition

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

9

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

and relative stability of macro-level communities in the Jij,y matrix
highlight the dominant inﬂuence of more time-independent
factors—namely, geographic proximity, institutional homophily,
and prestige. In particular, two of the three long-term communities are composed of IHE from a single region. Institutions
within these communities are almost exclusively part of the
region’s MUS, with Caltech being the exception. The single mixed
community features several of the most prestigious universities
from each region, along with nearly all of the private universities.
This sorting appears to be reinforced by institutional homophily,
which generally reﬂects how shared backgrounds, attributes,
values, and experiences promotes the formation of lasting ingroup propensities (McPherson et al., 2001). In the present
context, UC and UT multi-institutions promote institutional
homophily via several channels, including employment opportunities, student admissions, and research collaboration (Petersen
and Montaño Ramirez, 2025).
Yet the 3-community structure identiﬁed for Jij,2010−2018 is not
entirely representative of the inter-temporal structure, which is
more fragmented. Instead, the number of communities identiﬁed
per year varies around the 21-year mean (std. dev.) of 5.5 (±2.0)
communities—see Fig. 4d. At this annual time resolution, we
observe relatively higher levels of mixing across geographic
proximity and prestige groups. Interestingly, the peak in CVJ,y
during the 2007–2008 crisis coincides with a local maxima in CJ,y,
which suggests that the fragmentation of the community structure
is an indicator of systemic stress. Consistent with this observation,
we also observe notable fragmentation during the ﬁrst year of the
COVID-19 pandemic – see Fig. 4g. Unlike the 2007–2009 crisis
characterized by fast reductions in ﬁnancial resources available for
university media communications, it is possible that fragmentation during 2020 followed altogether different mechanisms
deriving from the ‘infodemic’ of pandemic-related content
production (Gallotti et al., 2020; Gruzd et al., 2021).
Topical shifts and brand alignment during systemic crisis.
Results from the previous section point to a relevant question – to
what degree did the COVID-19 infodemic affect brand co-visibility?
To address this question, we focus on a group of 9 IHE in CA with
the largest media prominence. Figure 5 illustrates the 20 strongest
links (i.e., the highest Jij values, corresponding to those above the
75th percentile) as well as the topical proﬁle for each link among
this group. We show the topical proﬁle of media articles represented
by each link with a pie chart comprised of 11 article title topic
categories, denoting the frequency of category c in period y by Pij,y,c.
Comparing the non-overlapping periods 2010–2015,
2016–2019 and 2020, we note consistency in terms of the
identiﬁcation of the strongest 20 links, which facilitates
comparative deduction. For example, visual inspection of the
topical proﬁles between the 2010–2015 and 2016–2019 periods
indicates a remarkable level of stability, with most Pij,y,c
dominated by the Politics, Health&Food and Education&Professional categories, consistent with Fig. 3b, c.
The co-visibility network for 2020, however, contains systematic shifts in the topical frequencies aligning with dominant health
crisis themes. To illustrate the changes, Fig. 5d conveys the
percent change between the co-visibility data aggregated over the
period 2016–2019 and 2020. By coloring each link according to
the sign of the change, roughly half of the links feature a relative
reduction in co-visibility (red), reﬂecting the system-level
fragmentation discussed in the previous section. The topic
categories responsible for this reduction were Weather, Sports&Recreation and most notably, Education&Professional, which
experienced a −23% reduction. Contrariwise, the topics that
increased their share the most were Politics (increasing by 20%),
10

Health&Food, Vacation&Travel and Personal. Shifts in topic
categories are sensitive to particularly notable research outcomes
receiving widespread press. Hence, crises tend to promote
institutional synergies that were primed to align with the
dominant narratives of the information deluge.
Discussion
We developed a framework for representing the production-side
of the attention economy, enabling the consistent and granular
measurement of brand equity associated with an institution’s
name. Our approach leverages the distinct nature of ofﬁcial
institutional names as readily identiﬁable text entities to operationalize an analysis of two aspects of brand equity – namely,
visibility and association. While this work is based upon a case
study of 29 universities from two select US states, our methodology readily generalizes to other IHE, regions and brand sectors. To be speciﬁc, the application of this approach relies upon:
(a) unique name identiﬁers to avoid identiﬁcation ambiguities
while also supporting consistent and granular identiﬁcation; and
(b) data availability, consisting of a comprehensive representation
of the system where the entities are mentioned, which further
facilitates the robust identiﬁcation of brand co-occurrences.
A principal advantage of this framework is how it can be
applied to IHE independent of their prominence, thereby
including both small and large universities. Accordingly, this
comprehensive approach may temper a brand equity advantage
for elite universities, which receive a vast majority of attention
according to their status, thereby supporting self-reinforcing
‘Matthew effect’ competitive dynamics (Petersen et al., 2011). A
more holistic approach that distinguishes educational visibility
from research visibility may provide a more representative
appreciation for the net impact of public universities (Oreskes,
2023), especially when considering multi-campus university systems at large (Petersen and Montaño Ramirez, 2025).
The breadth and depth of the media data also facilitates
adopting a systems science perspective for understanding and
comparing institutional brand equity, and thereby provides institutions a data-driven resource for evaluating and strategizing brand
management (Ahonen, 2015; Amaral and Uzzi, 2007; Axelrod and
Cohen, 2008; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Madhavan et al. 2020;
Teece 2007). Moreover, this approach opens avenues for better
understanding how universities are contextualized and perceived
by the public, which complements research-oriented altmetrics
(Cronin and Sugimoto 2014; Sugimoto et al., 2017), hyperlinkoriented webometrics approaches (Kretschmer et al., 2007; Lee and
Park, 2012; Lepori et al., 2014; Ortega et al., 2008; Ortega and
Aguillo, 2009; Park and Thelwall, 2006; Seeber et al., 2012;
Thelwall, 2002; Thelwall and Zuccala, 2008), and science communication studies (Brossard, 2013; Brossard and Scheufele, 2013).
This framework is subject to certain limitations. First, ofﬁcial
institutional names can nevertheless be ambiguous (e.g., University of Miami in Florida and Miami University in Ohio), and
the sampling method must be extended in notable cases to
include articles using formal abbreviations (e.g., UCLA, Cal
Berkeley, USC). Another limitation of the Media Cloud project is
the concentration on English-based content. Nevertheless,
because we are analyzing U.S. institutes of higher education, this
language bias should not signiﬁcantly affect our sample and
analysis, but does limit extending this framework to the measurement of international brand equity. A ﬁnal limitation regards
the contextualization of the media articles, which is limited to
inferences based upon the article title since MC does not host the
full article text due to legal copyright restrictions.
In summary, our analysis provides several insights on the
structure and dynamics of university brand equity (co-)

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

ARTICLE

Fig. 5 Topical contextualization of media co-visibility. Each network shows a core set of 9 highly co-visible universities in CA, connected by links with
thickness proportional to Jij,y. Each link contains a pie-chart showing the article title topic category distribution Pij,y,c calculated for the Cij,y co-occurring
articles that feature both university i and j. Shown are networks representing three sequential periods: a y ≔ 2010–2015; b 2016–2019; c 2020.
d Visualizing the structural shifts between the co-occurrence networks shown in (b, c). Each link has thickness proportional to the percent change %
Δ = 100(Jij,2020 − Jij,2016−2019)/Jij,2016−2019, and shaded green (red) if the change is positive (negative). Each link also contains a pie-chart showing the
same proportions as in (c), but with variable radii encoding the relative changes P2020,c/P2016−2019,c. The large pie-chart at the bottom shows the average
across the entire sample, indicating a 20% increase in Politics media articles and a−23% decrease in Education& Professional articles during the ﬁrst year of
the COVID-19 pandemic; the purple background indicates the baseline radius for visual comparison. The most notable increased frequencies are for c
associated with the pandemic -- Politics, Vacation& Travel and Health& Food -- and universities with prominent biomedical and health research focus and
medical schools -- Stanford, UCLA, UCSF.

production, and identiﬁes various avenues for future development
to foster dynamic marketing capabilities tailored to individual
institutions (Ding et al., 2020; Soykoth et al., 2024; Teece, 2007).
As a start, results from our analysis of undergraduate enrollment
across 17 different UC and UT campuses from 2013 to
2021 suggests that moderate investments in campus

communications that stimulate media visibility growth could
translate into consequential increases in competitiveness for
freshman enrollment growth.
According to a regional systems approach, our analysis provides valuable historical perspective on the integration and stratiﬁcation of universities in the attention economy. An increasing

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

11

ARTICLE

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

frequency of digital media featuring just a single institution
reﬂects the increasing competitiveness within the attention
economy. At the same time, the co-occurrence of multiple
institutions in digital media is largely correlated with regional
proximity, both in regard to both the universities themselves, as
well as the media sources that promote them.
Our results also point to the strategic alignment of institutional
content production with dominant media topics as they arise, which
reinforces brand visibility and association according to broader
social, technological and environmental narratives. To this end, we
applied machine learning methods to classify article titles according
to a consistent topic space, which affords analyzing narrative alignment between entities. The juxtaposition of media co-visibility with
narrative topic co-variability facilitates analyzing the sensitivity of the
attention economy to exogenous shocks such as the 2007–08 global
ﬁnancial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, which are representative of paradigm shifts affecting digital media production and
consumption. In order to navigate periodic socio-economic ‘storms’,
institutions can capitalize on the strengths of regional systems by
investing in strategic synergies for brand visibility co-production.
This approach enhances brand equity associations and boosts the
visibility of the entire university system—key aspects of advancing
the multifaceted mission of modern higher education institutions.
Data availability
All primary source data are openly available from Media Cloud (MCConsortium 2024). Parsed data and code for reproducing ﬁgures and
regression model parameter estimates are available on the Dryad open
data publishing platform (10.5061/dryad.2rbnzs7zc).
Received: 8 September 2024; Accepted: 17 January 2025;

References
Aaker DA (1911) Managing brand equity: Capitalizing on the Value of a Brand
Name. The Free Press, New York
Ahonen P (2015) Institutionalizing Big Data methods in social and political
research. Big Data Soc 2:2053951715591224
Altbach PG (2012) Paying the professoriate: a global comparison of compensation
and contracts. Routledge, New York
Amaral LAN, Uzzi B (2007) Complex systems - A new paradigm for the integrative
study of management, physical, and technological systems. Manag Sci
53:1033–1035
Arroyave F, Jenkins J, Petersen AM (2024) Network embedding for understanding
the National Park System through the lenses of news media, scientiﬁc
communication and biogeography. Ann Am Assoc Geogr 114:1795–1804
Axelrod R, Cohen MD (2008) Harnessing complexity. Basic books
Ballantyne R, Warren A, Nobbs K (2006) The evolution of brand choice. J Brand
Manag 13:339–352
Barabasi A (2016) Network Science. Cambridge University Press
Barnett GA, Park HW, Jiang K (2014) A multi-level network analysis of webcitations among the world’s universities. Scientometrics 99:5–26
Barnett GA, Ruiz JB, Xu WW (2017) The world is not ﬂat: evaluating the inequality
in global information gatekeeping through website co-mentions. Technol
Forecast Soc Change 117:38–45
Berger J, Packard G, Boghrati R (2022) Marketing insights from text analysis. Mark
Lett 33:365–377
Blondel VD, Guillaume JL, Lambiotte R (2008) Fast unfolding of communities in
large networks. J Stat Mech Ther Exp 2008:P10008
Brossard D (2013) New media landscapes and the science information consumer.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:14096–14101
Brossard D, Scheufele DA (2013) Science, new media, and the public. Science
339:40–41
Brynjolfsson E, Oh J (2012) The attention economy: measuring the value of free
digital services on the internet. In: ICIS 2012 Proceedings. 0902941, 33rd
International Conference on Information Systems, Association for Information Systems (AIS), p 1–19
Büschken J, Allenby GM (2016) Sentence-based text analysis for customer reviews.
Mark Sci 35:953–975

12

Chuang J, Fish S, Larochelle D et al. (2014) Large-scale topical analysis of multiple
online news sources with media cloud. NewsKDD: Data Science for News
Publishing, at KDD
Ciampaglia GL, Flammini A, Menczer F (2015) The production of information in
the attention economy. Sci Rep 5:9452
Cronin B, Sugimoto CR (2014) Beyond bibliometrics: harnessing multidimensional
indicators of scholarly impact. MIT press
Deuze M, Elefante P, Steward B (2010) Media work and the recession. Popular
Commun 8:226–231
Ding Y, DeSarbo WS, Hanssens DM (2020) The past, present, and future of
measurement and methods in marketing analysis. Mark Lett 31:175–186
Drèze X, Zufryden F (2004) Measurement of online visibility and its impact on
Internet trafﬁc. J Interact Mark 18:20–37
Eisenhardt KM, Martin JA (2000) Dynamic capabilities: what are they? Strat
Manag J 21:1105–1121
ElKattan AG, Gavilan D, Elsharnouby MH et al. (2023) Mapping sharing economy
themes: science mapping, topic modeling, and research agenda. J Mark Anal 12:1–22
Faris R, Roberts H, Etling B et al. (2017) Partisanship, propaganda, and disinformation: Online media and the 2016 US presidential election. Berkman
Klein Center Research Publication 6
Fortunato S, Bergsrom CT, Borner K (2018) Science of science. Science
359:eaao0185
Gallotti R, Valle F, Castaldo N (2020) Assessing the risks of ‘infodemics’ in
response to COVID-19 epidemics. Nat Human Behav 4:1285–1293
Goldhaber MH (1997) Attention Shoppers! https://www.wired.com/1997/12/es-attention/
Gruzd A, De Domenico M, Sacco PL (2021) Studying the COVID-19 infodemic at
scale. Big Data Soc 8:20539517211021115
Hazelkorn E (2009) Impact of global rankings on higher education research and
the production of knowledge. Unesco Forum on Higher Education, Research
and Knowledge: No. 18. https://doi.org/10.21427/D7BG9J
Hazelkorn E (2015) Rankings and the reshaping of higher education: The battle for
world-class excellence. Springer
Kato T (2021) Brand loyalty explained by concept recall: recognizing the signiﬁcance of the brand concept compared to features. J Mark Analytics 9:185
Kenney M, Mowery DC (2014) Public universities and regional growth: insights
from the University of California. Stanford University Press
Kirp DL (2003) Shakespeare, Einstein, and the bottom line: the marketing of higher
education. Harvard University Press
Kretschmer H, Kretschmer U, Kretschmer T (2007) Reﬂection of co-authorship
networks in the Web: Web hyperlinks versus Web visibility rates. Scientometrics 70:519–540
Lazer D, Pentland A, Adamic L (2009) Computational social science. Science
323:721–723
Lee M, Park HW (2012) Exploring the web visibility of world-class universities.
Scientometrics 90:201–218
Lepori B, Aguillo IF, Seeber M (2014) Size of web domains and interlinking behavior of
higher education institutions in Europe. Scientometrics 100:497–518
Madhavan G, Poste G, Rouse W (eds.) (2020) NAE: the Bridge on Complex
Uniﬁable Systems. National Academies Press
Marginson S (2006) Dynamics of national and global competition in higher education. Higher Educ 52:1–39
Marginson S (2013) Global ﬁeld and global imagining: Bourdieu and worldwide
higher education. In: The sociology of higher education. Routledge, pp 6–18
Mathew SG (2024) Making sense of data using automated content analysis: an
illustration using archival data from newspaper articles. J Mark Anal 1–20
MC-Consortium Media Cloud project (2024). http://mediacloud.org
McPherson M, Smith-Lovin L, Cook JM (2001) Birds of a feather: homophily in
social networks. Annu Rev Sociol 27:415–444
Medina JA (2018) Magnet for Latino College Students. New York Times https://
www.nytimes.com/2018/07/21/us/a-magnet-for-latino-college-students.html
Mills M, Oghazi P, Hultman M (2022) The impact of brand communities on public and
private brand loyalty: a ﬁeld study in professional sports. J Bus Res 144:1077–1086
Mitchell A, Holcomb J (2016) State of the news media 2016. Pew Research Center 1–118
Montaño Ramirez A, Peterse, AM (2025) Transformation of Global Science coreperiphery structure towards a multi-polar horizon: the Rise of China and the
Global South from 1980–2020. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5112439
Newman ME (2002) Assortative mixing in networks. Phys Rev Lett 89:208701
Newmeyer CE, Venkatesh R, Ruth JA (2018) A typology of brand alliances and
consumer awareness of brand alliance integration. Mark Lett 29:275–289
Nuortimo K, Harkonen J (2019) Establishing an automated brand index based on
opinion mining: analysis of printed and social media. J Mark Anal 7:141–151
Oh TT, Keller KL, Neslin SA (2020) The past, present, and future of brand
research. Mark Lett 31:151–162
Oreskes N (2023) The Ivy League gets attention, but public universities are far
more important. Sci Am 329:86
Ortega JL, Aguillo I, Cothey V (2008) Maps of the academic web in the European
Higher Education Area - an exploration of visual web indicators. Scientometrics 74:295–308

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

Ortega JL, Aguillo IF (2009) Mapping world-class universities on the web. Inform
Process Manag 45:272–279
Owen-Smith, J (2018) Research universities and the public good: Discovery for an
uncertain future. Stanford University Press
Park HW, Thelwall M (2006) Web-science communication in the age of globalization. New Media Soc 8:629–650
Park JH, Park HW (2024) A new methodological quest to evaluate South Korean digital
diplomacy in US government web domains. Human Soc Sci Commun 11:1–11
Petersen AM, Arroyave FJ, Shackelton S et al. (2025) Increasing digital media
visibility and tourism messaging promote US National Park system integration. https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.fttdz091w
Petersen AM, Jung WS, Yang JS (2011) Quantitative and empirical demonstration
of the Matthew effect in a study of career longevity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
108:18–23
Petersen AM, Montaño Ramirez A (2025) Research university assortativity conditions the integration of regional innovation systems. https://doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.5112413
Petersen AM, Pan RK, Pammolli F (2018) Methods to account for citation inﬂation
in research evaluation. Res Policy 48:1855–1865
Petersen AM, Vincent EM, Westerling A (2019) Discrepancy in scientiﬁc authority and
media visibility of climate change scientists and contrarians. Nat Commun 10:3502
Picard RG (2014) Twilight or new dawn of journalism? Evidence from the changing news ecosystem. Journal Pract 8:488–498
Pike S, Page SJ (2014) Destination marketing organizations and destination marketing: a narrative analysis of the literature. Tour Manag 41:202–227
Quelch JA, Jocz KE (2009) How to market in a downturn. Harvard Bus Rev 87:52–62
Ramadan ZB (2019) Brand–brand relational moments. J Brand Manag 26:705–716
Rasoolimanesh SM, Tan PL, Nejati M (2024) Corporate social responsibility and
brand loyalty in private higher education: mediation assessment of brand
reputation and trust. J Mark Higher Educ 34:156–177
Riccaboni M, Pammolli F, Buldyrev SV (2008) The size variance relationship of
business ﬁrm growth rates. Proc Natl Acad Sci 105:19595–19600
Roberts H, Bhargava R, Valiukas L et al. (2021) Media cloud: massive open source
collection of global news on the open web. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. Association for the
Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 1034–1045
Rouse WB (2016) Universities as complex enterprises: how academia works, why it
works these ways, and where the university enterprise is headed. John Wiley
& Sons
Rouse WB, Lombardi JV, Craig DD (2018) Modeling research universities: predicting probable futures of public vs. private and large vs. small research
universities. Procp Natpl Acad Sci USA 115:12582–12589
Safón V (2013) What do global university rankings really measure? The search for
the X factor and the X entity. Scientometrics 97:223–244
Safón V (2019) Inter-ranking reputational effects: an analysis of the Academic Ranking
of World Universities (ARWU) and the Times Higher Education World University Rankings (THE) reputational relationship. Scientometrics 121:897–915
Safón V, Docampo D (2020) Analyzing the impact of reputational bias on global
university rankings based on objective research performance data: the case of
the Shanghai Ranking (ARWU). Scientometrics 125:2199–2227
Seeber M, Lepori B, Lomi A (2012) Factors affecting web links between European
higher education institutions. J Informetr 6:435–447
Simon HA (1971) Designing organizations for an information-rich world. Comput
Commun Public Interest 72:37
Smithson S, Devece CA, Lapiedra R (2011) Online visibility as a source of competitive advantage for small-and medium-sized tourism accommodation
enterprises. Serv Indus J 31:1573–1587
Soykoth MW, Sim W, Frederick S (2024) Research trends in market intelligence: a
review through a data-driven quantitative approach. J Mark Anal 1–27
Stephan PE (2012) How economics shapes science. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA, USA
Sugimoto CR, Work S, Larivière V (2017) Scholarly use of social media and altmetrics: a review of the literature. J Assoc Inform Sci Technol 68:2037–2062
Teece DJ (2007) Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations
of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strat Manag J 28:1319–1350

ARTICLE

Thelwall M (2002) Evidence for the existence of geographic trends in university
web site interlinking. J Documentation 58:563–574
Thelwall M (2009) Introduction to webometrics: quantitative web research for the
social sciences. Morgan & Claypool Publishers
Thelwall M, Zuccala A (2008) A university-centred European Union link analysis.
Scientometrics 75:407–420
Vander Schee BA (2010) Students as consumers: programming for brand loyalty.
Serv Mark Q 32:32–43
Waisbord S (2018) Truth is what happens to news: on journalism, fake news, and
post-truth. Journal Stud 19:1866–1878
Wells C, Shah D, Lukito J (2020) Trump, Twitter, and news media responsiveness:
a media systems approach. New Media Soc 22:659–682

Acknowledgements
AMP acknowledges ﬁnancial support from a Hellman Fellowship and a 2024 UC Merced
Senate Faculty award. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
these institutions. We also thank Dr. Dong Yang for critical research assistance.

Author contributions
AMP performed the research, wrote the manuscript, collected, analysed, and visualized
the data.

Competing interests
The author declares no competing interests.

Ethical approval
Ethical approval was not required as the study did not involve collecting data from
human participants.

Informed consent
Informed consent was not applicable as the study did not involve collecting data from
human participants.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Alexander Michael Petersen.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025

HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | (2025)12:117 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04419-5

13

