THE

QUARTERLY JOURNAL
OF ECONOMICS
Vol. 127

February 2012

Issue 1

STEFANO DELLAVIGNA
JOHN A. LIST
ULRIKE MALMENDIER
Every year, 90% of Americans give money to charities. Is such generosity
necessarily welfare enhancing for the giver? We present a theoretical framework
that distinguishes two types of motivation: individuals like to give, for example,
due to altruism or warm glow, and individuals would rather not give but dislike
saying no, for example, due tosocial pressure. We design a door-to-door fund-raiser
in which some households are informed about the exact time of solicitation with a
flyer on their doorknobs. Thus, they can seek or avoid the fund-raiser. We find
that the flyer reduces the share of households opening the door by 9% to 25%
and, if the flyer allows checking a Do Not Disturb box, reduces giving by 28%
to 42%. The latter decrease is concentrated among donations smaller than $10.
These findings suggest that social pressure is an important determinant of doorto-door giving. Combining data from this and a complementary field experiment,
we structurally estimate the model. The estimated social pressure cost of saying
no to a solicitor is $3.80 for an in-state charity and $1.40 for an out-of-state charity.
Our welfare calculations suggest that our door-to-door fund-raising campaigns on
average lower the utility of the potential donors. JEL Codes: C93, D03, H41.
∗ We thank the editor, four referees, Saurabh Bhargava, David Card, Gary
Charness, Constanca Esteves-Sorenson, Bryan Graham, Zachary Grossman,
Lawrence Katz, Patrick Kline, Stephan Meier, Klaus Schmidt, Bruce Shearer,
Joel Sobel, Daniel Sturm and the audiences at the Chicago Booth School of Business, Columbia University, Harvard University, HBS, University of Amsterdam,
University of Arizona, Tucson, UC Berkeley, USC (Marshall School), UT Dallas,
University of Rotterdam, University of Zurich, Washington University (St. Louis),
Yale University, the NBER Summer Institute (Labor Studies), the San Francisco
2009 Applied Micro Conference, the 2009 Berkeley Conference in Behavioral
Economics, the 2010 UCSB Conference on Experimental Economics, the Munich
Workshop on Natural Experiments and Controlled Field Studies, and the ASSA
2009 Meetings for helpful comments. We also thank Daniel Acland, Diane Alexander, Jim Cai, MatthewLevy, Vera te Velde, Xiaoyu Xia, andespecially Gautam Rao
for excellent research assistance.

c The Author(s) 2012. Published by Oxford University Press, on behalf of President and
Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.
permissions@oup.com.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2012) 127, 1–56. doi:10.1093/qje/qjr050.
Advance Access publication on January 18, 2012.

1

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE IN
CHARITABLE GIVING∗

2

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

I. INTRODUCTION

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

In the UnitedStates, approximately 90% ofindividuals donate
money each year. There is at least one capital campaign to raise
$25 million or more under way in virtually every major population
center in North America. Smaller capital campaigns are even
more numerous, with phoneathons, door-to-door drives, and mail
solicitations increasing in popularity. Despite the ubiquity of
fund-raising, we still have an imperfect understanding of the
motivations for giving and the welfare implications for the giver
(see, e.g., Andreoni 2006).
In this article, we consider two broad classes of motivations. First, individuals may enjoy giving. For example, they care
about a specific worthy cause or like the warm glow of giving.
Second, individuals may give, despite not liking to give to the
charity, because the solicitor effectively placed them under social
pressure to give. Such givers would rather avoid the personal
interaction with the solicitor. The two motivations have very
different welfare implications. The altruism (or warm glow) model
(Becker 1974; Andreoni 1989, 1990) posits that giving is mostly
supply-driven, and that it is utility-maximizing for the giver to
give. Under this model, donations unambiguously enhance the
giver’s utility as well as societal welfare. The social pressure
model (Akerlof and Kranton 2000) posits that giving is mostly
demand-driven, and that giving may be utility-reducing for the
giver.
We test for these two types of motivations in the context of
in-person, unsolicited donation requests. Building on a theoretical
model, we design a field experiment that allows us to test whether
giving is welfare-enhancing or welfare-reducing for the giver.
We complement the reduced-form experimental evidence with
structural estimates of the model parameters. The structural estimation allows us to decompose the share of giving that is due to
altruism versus social pressure and to quantitatively evaluate the
welfare effects for the giver. In this way, the empirics and theory
are intertwined in a manner that is rare in this literature. To
our knowledge, this article is the first in the behavioral literature
to provide structural estimates of welfare implications of a field
experiment. Moreover, while the fund-raising set-up is specific,
it showcases a general methodology and provides a first step
toward better understanding the underpinnings for giving more
generally.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

3

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Our field experiment revolves around a door-to-door fundraising drive for two charities, a local children’s hospital, which
has a reputation as a premier hospital for children, and an outof-state charity, unfamiliar to most solicitees. Between April and
October 2008, we approached 7,668 households in the towns surrounding Chicago. The crucial aspect of the experimental design
is to allow individuals to sort, that is, to either seek or avoid the
solicitor. In our first treatment, a flyer on the doorknob notifies
households one day in advance about the one-hour time interval
in which a solicitor will arrive at their homes the next day. In
the second treatment, opt-out, the flyer also includes a box to
be checked if the household does not want to be disturbed. We
compare these two conditions to a baseline treatment, wherein
solicitors approach households in the usual manner without a
flyer. We estimate the treatment effects on both the share of
households that open the door and the share that give.
This design allows for a simple test of (pure or impure) altruism versus social pressure in door-to-door giving. If altruism is the
main driver of giving, the flyer should increase both the presence
at home and giving. Because giving is utility-enhancing, givers
should sort into staying at home, provided that alternative ways
of donating to these charities require more effort. In addition,
givers who would like to give in response to the flyer but who find
it too costly to be at home should give to the charity via other
means, such as mailing a check. Conversely, if social pressure is
the main driver of giving, the flyer shouldlower both the frequency
of opening the door and the frequency of giving. Since being asked
to give is welfare-diminishing, potential givers should sort out of
opening the door and should not give via Internet or check because
these forms of donation are not subject to social pressure.
We report four main results, which are similar across the two
charities. First, the flyer lowers the frequency of opening the door.
Relative to a baseline rate of 41 percentage points, the share
of households opening the door is 9% lower after receiving the
flyer and 23% lower after receiving the flyer with an opt-out box
(including the households that check the opt-out box). Second, the
simple flyer does not reduce giving. However, the flyer with an
opt-out checkbox decreases giving significantly, by 28% relative
to a baseline of 7% for the local charity and 40% relative to a 5%
baseline giving for the out-of-state charity. Third, the decrease
in giving in the opt-out treatment is driven by small donations
up to $10; donations above $10, instead, increase slightly (not

4

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

significantly). Fourth, there is no effect on donations via mail or
Internet. In contrast to the substantial donation rates in person,
only one household out of 7,668 gave through these other means.
Overall, the reduced-form estimates indicate that both altruism and social pressure are important determinants of giving in
this setting, with stronger evidence for the role of social pressure.
The lower frequency of households opening the door after receiving a flyer indicates that households are, on average, trying to
avoid solicitors, consistent with social pressure. The lack of an
effect of the baseline flyer on giving is consistent with opposing
effects of altruism and social pressure approximately canceling
each other out. The decrease in giving after a flyer with optout box supports the role of social pressure. When the cost of
avoiding the solicitor is lowered (a simple check on a box suffices),
giving due to social pressure decreases. This interpretation is
consistent with the reduction occurring almost exclusively among
small donations, which are more likely due to social pressure
than large donations. The social pressure interpretation is also
consistent with the lack of donations via mail or Internet.
We consider several alternative interpretations. First, flyers
could be taken as a signal of lower quality of the charity. This
interpretation can explain the reduction in answering the door
and in giving with a flyer, but does not immediately explain
why only small donations decrease, not large donations. Second,
individuals might donate to send (costly) signals to themselves or
to others that they are generous (Bodner and Prelec 2003; Benabou and Tirole 2006; Grossman 2010). This interpretation can
explain our findings to the extent that avoiding a solicitor does not
send the same negative signal as saying no to the solicitor. This
explanation, however, is less consistent with the fact that 12% of
households in the opt-out treatment check the opt-out box, which
is a signal to the solicitor, as well as possibly to the neighbors.
Third, people may dislike spending time with the solicitor, for
example, because of the time involved, despite wanting to donate
in principle. These potential donors, however, when alerted of a
campaign by a flyer, should seek alternative ways to give that
do not involve personal interaction; instead, we observe no such
substitution.
To assess the welfare effects of giving, we structurally estimate the model parameters. We combine data from the treatments with complementary field experiments on the value of time,
run in the same geographical areas in 2008 and 2009. These

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

5

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

experiments are designedtoestimate a key parameter in the fundraising treatments, the sensitivity of home presence to incentives,
which is otherwise identified only parametrically. We ask 11, 900
households to complete a survey and vary the payment ($0, $5, or
$10), the duration (5 or 10 minutes), and whether the surveys are
announced (with a flyer, with or without opt-out option). Higher
payments and shorter duration increase the presence at home up
to 16% and increase survey completion by 17–82%.
We use a minimum-distance estimator on the combined data
from the charity and the survey experiments. The estimator
minimizes the distance between the moments predicted by the
model and the observed moments. The moments are the probabilities of opening the door, giving different amounts, completing a
survey, and opting out. Key parameters are the share of altruists,
the curvature of the altruism function, and the social pressure
cost of saying no in person to a solicitor. We estimate that 75%
of solicitees have no altruism toward the charities, but there is
substantial heterogeneity. Among the altruists, the utility from
giving due toaltruism is steeply concave in the amount given, with
almost no predicted donation above $50, consistent with warmglow rather than pure altruism. The estimated social pressure
cost of giving zero is $3.75 (and significantly different from $0) for
the in-state charity and $1.44 (marginally significant) for the outof-state charity. As a result of social pressure, a majority of donors
give more than they would have liked to. Half of donors derive
negative utility from the fund-raising interaction and would have
preferred to sort out.
Given the large social pressure costs, our door-to-door campaigns lower the utility of the solicited households on average. In
the benchmark specification, a visit is estimated to lower welfare
by $1.10 per household contacted for the in-state charity and
by $0.44 for the out-of-state charity. The more negative welfare
impact for the in-state charity is counterintuitive because more
people are willing to donate to this better-liked charity. At the
same time, however, the social pressure cost of saying no is also
significantly higher for the local charity, and the second force
dominates.
If we take our fund-raising campaigns to be representative
of door-to-door solicitations, unsolicited campaigns lead to utility
losses for the givers in the order of hundreds of millions of dollars.
The campaigns may still increase overall welfare, though only if
the charities spend the money very effectively; in our campaign,

6

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

we raised net donations of only $0.24 per household contacted
for the in-state charity, and no net donation for the out-of-state
charity.
An important qualification is that our design identifies reasons for marginal, as opposed to infra-marginal, giving. Households that do not give to our fund-raiser, or give only due to
social pressure, likely contributed to other charities. The motives
for giving identified in this article may not generalize to inframarginal giving, which is more likely motivated by altruism
and desire for status. By the same token, however, it would be
a mistake to ignore the high-pressure giving requests studied
herein, or to assume that the motives for infra-marginal giving
studied in the literature apply. Small capital campaigns, like the
one studied in this article, are common and reveal a different facet
of the motivations for giving.
Our findings can be used as an argument to introduce a donot-solicit or do-not-call list for charities. However, they also suggest an alternative: providing households with the opportunity to
sort or, even better, opt out. Introducing sorting opportunities in
fund-raising limits or eliminates altogether, the welfare losses for
the solicitees. Interestingly, introducing sorting can also increase
charitable fund-raising, and be a win-win solution: even a limited
amount of sorting in of altruistic givers, who give larger amounts,
is likely to counterbalance the sorting out of givers motivated by
social pressure, who give smaller amounts.
A methodological contribution of this article is the close tie
between the behavioral model and the field experiment, allowing
for structural estimation of the underlying parameters, which
is surprisingly rare. Of all field experiments published in top
five journals from 1985 to 2010, only two have this feature
(Card, DellaVigna, and Malmendier 2011). A small literature in
structural behavioral economics estimates behavioral models on
observational data, including Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman
(2007) and Conlin, O’Donoghue, and Vogelsang (2007).
Our article adds to several other strands of literature. It
provides field evidence about social preferences to complement
the laboratory evidence (Fehr and Gächter 2000; Charness and
Rabin 2002; and especially Dana, Cain, and Dawes 2006; Lazear,
Malmendier, and Weber forthcoming). The study also relates to
the empirical and theoretical literature on optimal fund-raising
(e.g., List and Lucking-Reiley 2002; Andreoni 2006; Landry et al.
2006; Ariely, Bracha, and Meier 2009; Croson and Shang 2009;

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

7

II. MODEL
We model the behavior of an individual whose home is visited
by a fund-raiser. We distinguish between the standard case of an
unanticipated visit and that of an anticipated visit. In the latter
case, a flyer announces the visit and the individual can alter the
probability of being at home and opening the door. We discuss
here the setting and predictions. The technical details, including
Lemmas are in the Appendix, and the proofs are in the Online
Appendix.
II.A. Setup
We consider a two-stage game between a potential giver and
a solicitor. For convenience, we denote the potential giver, or
solicitee, simply as giver. In the first stage, the giver may receive
a flyer of the upcoming visit and, if so, notices the flyer with
probability r ∈ (0, 1]. In the second stage, the solicitor visits the
home. The giver opens the door with probability h. If she did not
notice the flyer (or did not receive one), h is equal to a baseline
probability h0 ∈ (0, 1). If she noticed the flyer, she can adjust the
probability to h ∈ [0, 1] at a cost c (h), with c(h0 ) = 0, c0 (h0 ) = 0, and
c00 (∙) > 0. That is, the marginal cost of small adjustments is small,
but larger adjustments have an increasingly large cost. We do not
require symmetry around h0 and we allow for corner solutions at
h = 0 or h = 1.
If the giver is present, she donates an amount g ≥ 0. If she
is absent, there is no in-person donation (g = 0). The giver can
donate through other channels, such as via mail or online, after
learning about the charity from the solicitor or the flyer. The giver
has utility
(1)

U (g, gm ) = u (W − g − gm ) + av (g + θgm , G−i ) − s (g) .

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Fong and Luttmer 2009). Finally, it adds tothe literature on social
pressure (Asch 1951; Milgram 1963; Garicano, Palacios-Huerta,
andPrendergast 2005; Gerber, Green, andLarimer 2008; Mas and
Moretti 2009).
The rest of the article proceeds as follows. In Section II
we present a simple model of giving with altruism and social
pressure. We introduce the experimental design in Section III and
discuss the reduced-form results in Section IV. In Section V, we
structurally estimate the parameters. In Section VI, we discuss
alternative interpretations. Section VII concludes.

8

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

1. The key results generalize to a fixed cost of giving by mail, but the algebra
is more complex.
2. We allow for giving to exceed current wealth, that is, the case g + gm > W.
In practice, this case is unlikely to matter.
3. The parameter a can also capture the belief of the donor about the quality
of the charity.
4. Under the warm-glow model, an alternative interpretation of θ is that the
charity receives the full amount gm (i.e., there are no costs of giving via mail), but
the impersonal mean lowers warm glow by a factor θ.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

The utility of private consumption, u, is derivedfrom the pregiving
wealth W minus the donations given to the solicitor (g) and
through other channels such as mail (gm ). Giving through other
channels gm involves additional costs, such as finding an envelope
andstamp, equal to(1−θ)gm , with 0 ≤ θ < 1. The charity therefore
receives θgm .1 The private utility satisfies standard properties:
u0 ( ∙ ) > 0 and u00 ( ∙ ) ≤ 0. Notice that the utility of private
consumption can include the utility from infra-marginal giving to
other charities.2
The utility of giving to the charity, v, allows for pure and
impure altruism (warm glow), or prestige (Harbaugh 1998). Since
the experiment is not designed to separate pure altruism, impure altruism, or prestige but altruism from social pressure, we
use a specification that is general enough to encompass both. We
also allow for negative social preferences, or spite (Levine 1998),
towards the charity.
In the case of pure altruism, the agent cares about the total
contributions to the charity, G−i + g + θgm , where G−i is the
giving of others. In this case, we can think of v (G−i + g + θgm )
as the production function of the charity, which is increasing in
the donation g but has decreasing returns: v0g (∙, ∙) > 0, v00g,g (∙, ∙)
< 0, and limg→∞ v0 (g, ∙) = 0. The parameter a ≥ 0 denotes the
level of altruism,3 and the overall utility from giving is
av (G−i + g + θgm ).
In the case of impure altruism, the agent cares about the
warm glow from giving g. Hence, v (∙) does not necessarily depend
on the giving of others, G−i , and a ≥ 0 captures the intensity of
the warm glow. We make the same assumptions v0g > 0, v00g,g < 0,
and limg→∞ v0 (g, ∙) = 0.4
Finally, in the case of spite towards the charity, the agent
dislikes giving tothe charity. The utility is av (G−i + g + θgm ), with
a < 0 capturing the intensity of spite. It is natural to assume that
the disutility of giving increases with the donation in a convex

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

9

Giving in Person. We solve the model working backward. In
the second stage, conditional on being at home and answering the
door, the giver chooses g to maximize (1). Notice that conditional
on answering the door, the giver always prefers to donate in
person because mail donations involve an additional cost (1 − θ)
and do not eliminate the social pressure cost.
We characterize optimal giving g∗ as a function of the parameters a and S in Lemma 1A in the Appendix. (The thresholds
ˉ are also defined in the Appendix.) Figure I
a(S), a(S), and a
illustrates the case of linear private utility u and v+0 (0) = v−0 (0),
which are the assumptions used for the structural estimation.
Giving g∗ increases in altruism. When altruism is sufficiently
low (a ≤ a (S)), the individual does not give. For a higher level
of altruism (a (S) < a < a (S)), the individual gives a positive
ˉ ),
amount, but less than gs . For even higher altruism (a (S) ≤ a ≤ a
there is bunching at g∗ = gs , which is the lowest level of giving
associated with zero social pressure cost. Finally, for large enough
ˉ ), the donor gives more than gs . Any giving above gs is
a (a > a
ˉ > 0 does not depend on
due to altruism (hence the threshold a
the social pressure cost S), while donations smaller than gs may
be due to altruism or social pressure. Giving can occur also with

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

manner: v0g > 0 and v00g,g > 0. Here, we are abusing notation since
the function v differs for a ≥ 0 (altruism) and a < 0 (spite);
it is concave in the first case and convex in the second. When
the distinction is important, we use v+ to denote the function for
a ≥ 0, v− to denote the function for a < 0, and v to denote the
function that equals v+ for a ≥ 0 and v− for a < 0. Notice that
it is important to consider the case of spite because, unlike in a
standard model of giving, even spiteful individuals may give to
the charity if social pressure is high enough.
The third element in the utility function is social pressure.
The giver pays a utility cost s(g) = S ∙ (gs − g) ∙ 1g<gs ≥ 0 for
not giving or only a giving small amount g while the solicitor is
present. The cost is highest for the case of no donation (s(0)= Sgs ),
then decreases linearly in g, and is 0 for donations of gs or higher.
The giver does not incur a social pressure cost if she is away
from home during the visit. The special case of S = 0 (no social
pressure) and a = 0 (no altruism or warm glow) represents the
standard model. We further assume that the giver is aware of her
own preferences and rationally anticipates her response to social
pressure.

10

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Figure indicates the different regions for giving, no giving [g = 0], small giving
[0 < g < gs ], giving equal to gs , and large giving [g > gs ], and the different regions
for the probability of being at home, avoiding the solicitor [h < h0 ], and seeking
the solicitor [h > h0 ]. The regions are a function of the altruism parameter a and
of the social pressure parameter S.

spiteful agents (a < 0) if the social pressure cost S is large enough
(S > u0 (W) and hence a < 0).
Giving via Mail. Conditional on not being at home, a giver
who was informed about the fund-raising via a flyer decides
whether to give via mail gm . Note that the only reason to give
via mail is altruism. Giving via mail is increasing in altruism,
provided θ > 0. For given altruism a, the level of giving via
mail received by the charity (θg∗m (a)) is always smaller than the
level of giving in person conditional on being at home (g∗ (a, S))
(Lemma 1B).
Presence at Home. In the first stage, the giver opens the
door with probability h0 if the visit is unanticipated (no flyer or,
with probability 1 − r, despite a flyer). If the visit is anticipated
(flyer), she optimizes h given her utility from being at home,
u (W − g∗ ) + av (g∗ , G−i ) − s (g∗ ), and her utility from not being
at home, u (W − g∗m ) + av (θg∗m , G−i ):

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE I
Regions of Giving g and Probability of Home Presence h

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

11

max h [u (W − g∗ ) + av (g∗ , G−i ) − s (g∗ )] + (1 − h) [u (W − g∗m )

h∈[0,1]

+av (θg∗m , G−i )] − c (h) .

Opt-out. So far we have assumed that it is costly to reduce the
probability of being at home. We now allow agents to costlessly
reduce the probability of being at home to 0, for example, via a
Do-Not-Disturb check box on the flyer. Formally, c (0) = 0 and c (h)
as above for h > 0.5
Opting out does not affect giving g∗ (a) (conditional on being
at home) or g∗m (a) (conditional on not being at home) but only the
probability of being at home h∗ (a). As characterized in Lemma 3,
h∗ (a) remains the same as without the opt-out option if there is no
social pressure and, hence, no reason to opt out. In the presence of
social pressure, however, the agent opts out for low altruism, a <
a0 (S), since the interaction with the fund-raiser lowers utility.
For higher altruism levels, instead, the agent derives positive
5. This formalization allows a costless reduction of h to 0 but not to other
levels. This is not a restriction because agents who prefer to lower h below h0 (at
a positive cost) will strictly prefer to lower h to 0 at no cost.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

We characterize the optimal probability of being at home, h∗ (a, S),
in Lemma 2 (see Appendix). It is (weakly) increasing in altruism: the more the giver cares about the charity (or the warm
glow), the more likely she is to be at home. The exact pattern
depends on the degree of social pressure (Figure I). In the case
of no social pressure (S = 0), sufficiently altruistic agents, a >
a (0), give if at home and actively seek to be at home (h∗ >
h0 ). The probability of being at home is increasing in the altruism up to the corner solution h = 1. Less altruistic agents,
a ≤ a (0), instead, do not plan to give. They are indifferent as
to being at home or not, and hence do not alter the baseline
probability h0 .
In the case of social pressure (S > 0), agents with low
altruism a ≤ a (S) do not give and avoid the fund-raiser in order
not to pay the social pressure cost. More altruistic agents with
a (S) < a ≤ a0 (S) give a small amount but prefer to avoid the
fund-raiser. Their giving is either entirely or partly due to social
pressure. Agents with sufficiently high altruism, a > a0 (S), care
enough about the charity that they seek the interaction with the
fund-raiser, despite the fact that social pressure may distort their
giving upward.

12

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

utility from giving. Hence, she does not opt out and the solution
is the same as in Lemma 2.
Opting out also allows us to distinguish social pressure from
self- or other-signaling. In our model, checking the opt-out box
has no cost to the agent. Under self- and other-signalling, instead,
opting out is costly since it signals avoidance of giving. If the cost
is high, the agent will never opt out, and the opt-out treatment
reduces to the simple flyer treatment.

PROPOSITION 1. With Altruism and No Social Pressure, the
probability P (H) is higher with flyer than without: P (H)F =
P(H)OO > P (H)NF . With Social Pressure and Limited Altruism, P (H) is lower with flyer and lowest with opt-out:
P (H)NF > P (H)F ≥ P (H)OO .

In the case of Altruism and No Social Pressure, the flyer
increases home presence relative to the control group since some
agents seek to meet the solicitor. The opt-out option has no
differential effect since no one avoids the solicitor. Under Social
Pressure and Limited Altruism, the opposite is true: the flyer
lowers home presence as agents seek to avoid the solicitor. In this
case, the costless opt-out possibility lowers the presence at home
further.7 In general, the probability of being at home is higher for
the flyer group if the altruism force dominates the social pressure
force, but the opt-out option always weakly lowers the presence at
home.

6. In case (ii), we also require F(a0 (S) ) − F(a (S) ) > 0 to eliminate a trivial
case.
7. A sufficient (not necessary) condition for the inequality P (H)F ≥ P (H)OO
to be strict is a positive mass of households with a in the left neighbourhood of a0 .

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Testable Predictions. To complete the model, we assume that
the population of agents is heterogeneous in a with c.d.f. F. We
emphasize two special cases: (i) Altruism and No Social Pressure,
that is, the standard assumption S = 0, but a positive probability
of altruistic individuals with a > a (0); (ii) Social Pressure and
Limited Altruism, that is, allowing for social pressure S > 0, but
requiring 0 probability of altruistic individuals with a > a0 (S).6
The following propositions outline testable predictions regarding the key outcomes, home presence and giving. Our first
prediction compares the probabilities of being at home in the
treatments without flyer, P (H)NF , with flyer, P (H)F , and with
opt-out flyer P(H)OO .

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

13

The next proposition illustrates the impact of the different
treatments on the unconditional probability of in-person giving,
P (G).

Under Altruism and No Social Pressure, the flyer and opt-out
treatments lead to the same probability of giving, since there is no
reason to opt out in the absence of social pressure. The probability
of giving in these two flyer treatments is higher than without flyer
because some agents seek to stay at home. Under Social Pressure
and Limited Altruism, instead, the probability of giving is lower
with flyer and lowest with an opt-out flyer. In general, the net
effect of a flyer depends on whether the giving is more due to real
altruism (which works to increase giving) or to social pressure
(which has the opposite effect).
The third prediction regards the probability of giving conditional on being at home, P (G|H).
PROPOSITION 3. The probability of giving conditional on being
at home is higher with flyer than without: min (P(G|H)F ,
P(G|H)OO ) ≥ P (G|H)NF .

Altruism and social pressure both lead to increases in the
conditional giving probability with flyer: altruistic people are
more likely to be at home, and nongivers sort away from home.
Hence, conditionally on reaching an agent at home, giving is
higher with than without flyer.
The next proposition focuses on gift size. We distinguish
between large donations, defined as g > gs , and small donations,
g ≤ gs .

PROPOSITION 4. (i) The unconditional probability of a large donation, P(GHI ), is higher with flyer than without: P(GHI )F =
a) < 1 ). (ii)
P(GHI )OO ≥ P(GHI )NF (with strict inequality if F(ˉ
The unconditional probability of a small donation, P(GLO ) , is
identical under the simple flyer treatment and the flyer with
opt out (P(GLO )F = P(GLO )OO ) if S = 0 , but higher under the
simple flyer (P(GLO )F > P(GLO )OO ) if S > 0 (and F(a0 (S) ) −
F(a (S) ) > 0).

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

PROPOSITION 2. With Altruism and No Social Pressure, the
probability P (G) is higher with flyer than without: P (G)F =
P (G)OO > P (G)NF . With Social Pressure and Limited Altruism, P (G) is lower with flyer and lowest with opt-out:
P (G)NF > P (G)F ≥ P (G)OO .

14

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

PROPOSITION 5. The unconditional probability of a donation while
not at home P(Gm ) satisfies 0 = P(Gm )NF ≤ P(Gm )F ≤
P(Gm )OO .
Without a flyer, giving via mail is zero because the giver is
only informed about the fund-raiser if she is at home. A flyer
informs the giver about the fund-raiser and, hence, she may give
even if not at home, so long as she is sufficiently altruistic. Giving
via mail is at least as high if the flyer offers opting out as with the
simple flyer because some of the individuals who opt out because
they would have given more than they wish in person give a
smaller amount via mail.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Charities. The two charities in the fund-raising treatments
are La Rabida Children’s Hospital and the East Carolina Hazard
Center (ECU). Although both charities are well-respectedregional
charities, we chose them so that most households in our sample
would prefer one (La Rabida) to the other (ECU). To document
these preferences, in our 2008 survey treatments we asked respondents to rank five charities from 1 (least liked) to 5 (most
liked). The charity with the highest average rank is the La Rabida
Children’s Hospital (average rank 3.95) followed by Donate Life
(rank 3.79), and the Seattle Children’s Hospital (rank 3.47). At
the bottom of the rank, below the Chicago Historical Society (rank
2.96), is the East Carolina Hazard Center (rank 2.54).8 La Rabida
appears to be highly liked both because it is an in-state charity
well known to residents in the area around Chicago, and also
8. We obtain similar results when we ask the respondents to allocate $1 that
an anonymous sponsor has pledged to give to one of the five charities. (We followed
up and delivered the donations.) Out of 255 respondents, 147 pledge the donation
to the La Rabida charity, and only 7 choose the ECU charity.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

A flyer (with or without opt-out option) increases large
donations given that altruistic donors increase their probability
of being at home. The impact of a flyer on small donations is less
obvious since small donations can reflect moderate altruism or
social pressure. A flyer with opt-out unambiguously lowers the
probability of small donations relative to a simple flyer, given that
it simplifies the sorting out of donors motivated by social pressure.
The last proposition characterizes the probability of giving
via mail.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

15

because it provides health benefits to children; neither condition
applies to ECU.

Logistics. We employed 92 solicitors and surveyors, mostly
undergraduate students at the University of Chicago, who were
paid $9.50 per hour. All solicitors elicited contributions within
at least two treatments, and most over multiple weekends, and
similarly for surveyors. Each solicitor and surveyor’s participation in the study typically followed four steps: (1) an invitation to work as a paid volunteer for the research center, (2)

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Door-to-Door Fund-Raising. Our experiment uses a door-todoor campaign because it offers the easiest implementation of the
design. While door-to-door campaigns are common and previously
studied in economics (Landry et al. 2006), it is hard to quantify
how much money they raise. To provide some evidence, our
survey asked respondents to recall how many times in the past
12 months people have come to your door to raise money for a
charity. We asked similarly phrased questions about giving via
phone, via mail, and through other channels, such as employer or
friends. Of 144 respondents who answered all of these questions,
76% stated that they had received at least one such visit, and 48%
of respondents reported at least three such visits. This frequency
is smaller than but comparable in magnitude to other solicitation
forms: phone (86% received at least one call), mail (95% with at
least one mailing), andother forms (83% with at least one contact).
We also asked how much the respondents gave to these
solicitors in total over the last 12 months. Of the respondents,
40% reported donating to a door-to-door campaign, compared
to 28% in response to phone solicitations, 53% in response to
mail solicitations, and 76% in response to other solicitations.
The average reported total door-to-door donation in the past
12 months (including nondonors) is $26, compared to $101 by
phone, $1, 012 by mail, and $2, 063 by other means. However,
this estimate is very sensitive to a small number of individuals
reporting large sums given (in two cases $50, 000 and $60, 000)
which could be due to measurement error or self-aggrandizing
claims. If we cap the donations at $1, 000, the numbers are $26
by door-to-door, $66 by phone, $115 by mail, and $295 by other
means. Hence, door-to-door solicitations are quite common, at
least in the area where the survey took place, and they raise a
smaller, but not negligible, amounts.

16

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Treatments. In the treatments without flyer, solicitors knock
on the door or ring the bell and, if they reach a person, proceed
through the script (see Online Appendix C). They inform the
household about the charity (La Rabida or ECU), ask if they are
willing to make a donation, and if they receive a gift leave a receipt. In the survey treatment, the solicitor inquires whether the
household member is willing to respond to survey questions about
charitable giving. The solicitor informs the household member
about the duration of the survey (5 or 10 minutes) and about the
payment for completing the survey, if any ($10, $5, or none).
In the flyer treatments, the solicitor’s script is identical, but
in addition a different solicitor leaves a flyer on the doorknob on
the day before the solicitation. The professionally prepared flyer
indicates the time of the upcoming fund-raising (or survey) visit
within a one-hour time interval. Figure II provides examples of
two flyers used for the fund-raising treatment and two flyers used
for the 2008 survey treatments.10 In the opt-out treatments, the
9. Burr Ridge, Countryside, Flossmoor, Kenilworth, Lemont, Libertyville,
Oak Brook, Oak Forest, Oak Park, Orland Park, Park Ridge, Rolling Meadows,
Roselle, Schaumburg, Skoke-Evanston, and Willowbrook.
10. For a small number of observations, the flyer does not indicate the exact
time of the visit, only that there will be a visit in the next two weeks. Results for
this subgroup are qualitatively similar tothe results for the flyer with the one-hour

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

an in-person interview, (3) a training session, and (4) participation as a solicitor and/or surveyor in the door-to-door campaign. Details about the recruitment process are in Online
Appendix B.
The field experiment took place on Saturdays and Sundays
between April 2008 and October 2008 (both charity and survey
treatments) and then again between April 2009 and November
2009 (survey treatments only). The locations are wealthy towns
around Chicago.9 Each solicitor is assigned a list of typically 25
households per hour on a street, for a daily workload of either
4 hours (10 am–noon and 1–3 pm) or 6 hours (10 am–noon and
1–5 pm). Every hour, the solicitor moves to a different street in
the neighborhood and typically enters a different treatment. Solicitors do not know whether a treatment involves a flyer, though
they can presumably learn that information from observing flyers
on doors. Solicitors are trained to either do charity treatments
or survey treatments (with a small number trained to do both).
A solicitor assigned to La Rabida on a given day will only do
treatments for La Rabida, and similarly for ECU or survey.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

17

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE II
Flyer Samples
Twoexamples of flyers for the 2008 fund-raising treatments (toprow) andflyers
for the 2008 survey treatments (bottom row). The top-left flyer is for the opt-out
treatment, while the top-right flyer is for a flyer treatment. The bottom-row flyers
are both for a 10-minute survey with flyer, the left one without payment, the right
one for a $10 payment.

18

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Summary of the treatments run in the door-to-door field experiments in 2008
(charity and survey) and run in 2009. La Rabida and ECU are the names of the
two charities for which the funds were raised.

flyer has a box “Check this box if you do not want to be disturbed.”
If the solicitors find the box checked, they do not knock on the
door. The charity treatments are summarized in the top part of
Figure III.
The survey treatments are aimed at estimating the elasticity
of the presence at home and of the response rate to incentives. In
Section V, we use these elasticities to estimate the social pressure
interval of visit. We therefore present the results combining these treatments.
Excluding the observations with the two-week window does not change any of the
results.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE III
Experimental Treatments (Top) 2008, (Bottom) 2009

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

19

and altruism parameters. The survey questions are mostly about
patterns of charitable giving in 2008 and about voter participation
in 2009.11 Figure III summarizes the survey treatments run in
2008 (top) and 2009 (bottom).

IV. REDUCED-FORM ESTIMATES
We report the differences across the treatments in the share
of households answering the door, the empirical counterpart of
11. In the 2009 survey treatments, about half of the flyers specify that the
survey will be about voter participation. The results are similar for the two types
of flyers and hence we pool them in the analysis.
12. These five solicitors indicate the presence of flyers on the door or on the
floor also for households in the no-flyer treatment.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Sample and Randomization. We reached a total of 8,906
households in the charity treatments, 2,018 households in the
2008 survey treatments, and 10,594 households in the 2009
survey treatments. From this initial sample, we exclude 1,391
observations in which the households displayed a no-solicitor
sign (in which case the solicitor did not contact the household)
or the solicitor was not able to contact the household for other
reasons (including, for example, a lack of access to the front door
or a dog blocking the entrance). We also exclude 559 solicitorday observations for 5 solicitors with substantial inconsistencies
in the recorded data.12 The final sample includes 7,668 households in the charity treatments, 1,865 households in the 2008
survey treatments, and 10,035 households in the 2009 survey
treatments.
The charity field experiment took place in 2008 in three
waves. In the first wave (April 27 to June 1), we solicited for
both charities (with equal weights) and all three treatments
(approximate weights of 40% for no-flyer, 35% flyer, 25% optout). In the second wave (July 13 to August 23), we solicited only
for La Rabida and ran only no-flyer and flyer treatments (with
equal weights). In the third wave (September 6 to October 18) we
solicited for both charities (the ECU charity is over-sampled with
weight 75%) and all treatments (approximate weights of 25% for
no-flyer, 50% flyer, 25% opt-out). The script of the randomization
and the flyer design is the same throughout. Within each of these
waves, the randomization of the treatments takes place for each
solicitor-hour and is at the street level within a town.

20

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

13. On almost all days, we visited only one town, so that the day-town fixed
effects are essentially equivalent to day fixed effects.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

P (H), and the share of households giving to the charity in person, corresponding to P (G). We also present results on giving
conditional on being at home, corresponding to P (G|H), on the
frequency of small and large donations, P(GLO ) and P(GHI ), and
on giving via mail and Internet, P (Gm ).
Table I presents the summary statistics on the key treatment
outcomes. The rate at which the respondents open the door varies
between 41% and 42% in the baseline treatments for La Rabida,
ECU, and in the 2008 survey treatment. Since households did not
know the task at hand, these averages ought, indeed, to be close.
The share answering the door is smaller for the flyer treatment
and smaller yet for the opt-out treatment. The share of givers is
substantially smaller for the ECU charity than for the La Rabida
charity, consistent with our survey evidence that the La Rabida
charity is more liked than the ECU charity. For ECU, the share
of givers is substantially lower in the opt-out treatment than in
the other treatments. For La Rabida, instead, giving is somewhat
higher in the opt-out treatment. In the survey treatments, the
share opening the door and the share completing the survey are
generally larger for the treatments with higher pay and shorter
duration both in 2008 and 2009.
While the summary statistics provide suggestive evidence on
the impact of the treatments, the raw statistics are potentially
confounded with randomization fixed effects. As discussed in
Section III, treatments were randomized within a date-solicitor
time block, but not all treatments were run in all time periods.
Hence, estimates that do not control for the randomization fixed
effects may be confounded, for example, by time effects—we ran
more ECU treatments later in the sample when donation rates
also happened to be lower. It turns out that all directional effects
indicated in the summary statistics, except for the higher giving
to La Rabida under opt-out, are confirmed once we add the
randomization fixed effects.
The benchmark empirical specifications (Table II) control
for solicitor i and day-town t fixed effects.13 The identification
comes from within-solicitor, within-day variation in treatment.
The vector of control variables Xi,t,h includes dummies for the
hourly time blocks h (10 am, 11 am, 1 pm, 2 pm, 3 pm, and 4 pm),
and dummies for a subjective rating by the solicitor of the quality

N

Flyer with opt-out treatment

Flyer treatment

0.4090
(N = 3166)
0.3753
(N = 3432)
0.3355
(N = 1070)
N = 7668

0.4228
(N = 946)
0.3993
(N = 1172)
0.3503
(N = 588)
N = 2706

0.4032
(N = 2220)
0.3628
(N = 2260)
0.3174
(N = 482)
N = 4962
0.0289
N = 2706

N = 7668

0.0460

0.0507

ECU
(5)

0.0514

0.0585

0.0629

Pooled
(4)

N = 4962

0.0788

0.0650

0.0680

La Rabida
(6)

Share of households giving In
person

La Rabida
(8)
One ($25)
donation across
all treatments

N = 4962

ECU
(7)
Zero donations
across all
treatments

N = 2706

Number of households giving via
mail or internet

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Baseline (no-flyer) treatment

La Rabida
(3)

Pooled
(1)

Sample:

ECU
(2)

Share of households answering
the door

Variable:

Panel A: Fund-raising treatments

TABLE I
SUMMARY STATISTICS

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

21

0.0972
0.1186
0.1714
0.1719
N = 1865

(2)

(1)

0.4135 (N = 607)
0.3681 (N = 489)
0.392 (N = 449)
0.4156 (N = 320)
N = 1865

Share of
households
completing the
survey

Share of
households
answering the
door

Baseline ($0/5min)
Baseline ($5/5min)
Flyer ($0/10min)
Flyer ($0/5min)
Flyer ($5/5min)
Flyer ($10/5min)
Opt-out ($0/5min)
Opt-out ($5/5min)
N

2009 survey
treatments

Share of hhs.
completing the
survey
(4)
0.1472
0.1231
0.1430
0.1679
0.2085
0.2600
0.1434
0.1797
N = 10035

Share of hhs.
answering the
door
(3)
0.3915 (N = 1420)
0.3956 (N = 910)
0.3771 (N = 769)
0.3852 (N = 1703)
0.4057 (N = 1856)
0.4428 (N = 673)
0.3420 (N = 1374)
0.3639 (N = 1330)
N = 10035

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Notes. Summary statistics for the variables of the experiment. ”ECU” and ”La Rabida” indicate the two charities in the experiment, ”ECU” is an out-of-state research center on
hurricanes, ”La Rabida” is an in-state children’s hospital.

Baseline ($0/10min) treatment
Flyer ($0/10min) treatment
Flyer ($0/5min) treatment
Flyer ($10/10min) treatment
N

2008 survey treatments

Variable:

Panel B: Survey treatments

TABLE I
(CONTINUED)

22
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

−0.0967

Flyer with opt-out
treatment
Indicator ECU
charity
Flyer treatment
* ECU charity
Flyer with opt-out
* ECU charity
Flyer treatment
* La Rabida charity
Flyer with opt-out
* La Rabida charity
Omitted treatment
Mean of dep. var. for
omitted treatment
Fixed effects for
solicitor, datelocation, hour,
and area rating
N

(2)
(0.0062)

−0.0195

−0.0011

(3)

(4)

Indicator for
giving

(0.0052)

−0.0193

−0.0033

(5)

N = 7668

N = 7668

X

N = 7668

0.0717

N = 7668

X

N = 7668

0.0414
X

(8)

N = 7668

0.0414
X

N = 7668

0.0215
X

(9)

1.161
X

N = 7668

0.0215
X

N = 7668

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

(10)

N = 7668

1.161
X

Notes. Estimates for a linear probability model, with standard errors clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The omitted treatment is the baseline no-flyer fund-raising
treatment for the La Rabida charity. The regressions include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination, for the hour of day, and for a subjective rating of home values
in the block. ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%.

X

0.413

X

(7)

Amount given
(including $0)

0.0022
−0.1459
(0.0035)
(0.1357)
−0.0002
−0.3041
(0.0051)
(0.1653)∗
−0.0107
−0.0123
−0.0155
−0.7611
−0.9767
(0.0085)
(0.0032)∗∗∗ (0.0052)∗∗∗ (0.1368)∗∗∗ (0.2014)∗∗∗
0.0051
0.1154
−0.0045
(0.0076)
(0.0045)
(0.1240)
−0.0222
−0.0907
0.0039
(0.0098)∗∗
(0.0058)
(0.1268)
0.0009
−0.0028
−0.2545
(0.0066)
(0.0046)
(0.1841)
−0.0161
−0.0042
−0.4573
(0.0128)
(0.0087)
(0.2885)
No-flyer, La Rabida
No-flyer, La Rabida

(6)

Indicator for giving
Small amount (≤ $10)
Large amount (> $10)

OLS regressions

(0.0084)∗∗
(0.0081)∗∗
−0.0249
−0.0263
−0.0127
0.0041
(0.0234)
(0.0049)∗∗∗ (0.0085)∗∗∗ (0.0053)∗∗
0.0006
−0.0365
(0.0313)
(0.0094)
−0.089
−0.0183
(0.0271)∗∗∗
(0.0100)∗
−0.0396
−0.0019
(0.0144)∗∗∗
(0.0078)
−0.106
−0.0202
(0.0132)
(0.0319)∗∗∗
No-flyer, La Rabida
No-flyer, La Rabida

(0.0194)∗∗∗
0.01
(0.0143)

(0.0137)∗∗∗

−0.0387

(1)

Indicator for
answering the door

Flyer treatment

Dep. var.:

Specification:

TABLE II
RESULTS FOR FUND-RAISING TREATMENTS
TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

23

24

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

of the houses visited in that hour block on a 0–10 scale. The latter
controls provide a rough measure of the wealth level of a street
within a town. We run the OLS regression
(2)

yi,j,t,h = α + Γ Ti,t,h + βECU dECU + ηi + λt + BXi,t,h + εi,j,t,h ,

(3)

yi,j,t,h = α + ΓLaR Ti,t,h dLaR + βECU dECU + ΓECU Ti,t,h dECU
+ ηi + λt + BXi,t,h + εi,j,t,h ,

where dch is an indicator variable for charity ch ∈ {LaR, ECU}.
The omitted treatment is the no-flyer treatment for La Rabida.
In Figures IVA and IVB, we plot the estimated coefficients from
this specification. The estimated impact for the baseline no-flyer
treatment for La Rabida is α̂, from specification (3) with no
fixed effects and controls. The estimated impact for the other
k
k
treatments k are α̂ + γ̂LaR
for La Rabida and α̂ + β̂ + γ̂ECU
for ECU.
Answering the Door. For both charities, a flyer announcing
the visit reduces the share of households opening the door by
about 4 percentage points relative to the baseline treatment with
no flyer (Figure IVA). As Table II shows, the difference is statistically significant at conventional levels. The share of households
opening the door is further lowered, by an additional 5 to 6
14. The specification assumes that the impact of the fixed effects on the relevant outcomes is additive. We obtain essentially identical results using solicitortime-date fixed effects, reported in the Online Appendix. These fixed effects,
however, do not allow us to identify the difference in outcomes between La Rabida
and ECU, because on any given date each solicitor raised money for only one
charity.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

where the dependent variable yi,j,t,h is, alternatively, an indicator
for whether individual j opened the door (yH ), gave a positive
amount to the charity (yG ), gave a small amount (yGLO ), or gave
a large amount (yGHI ). The vector Ti,t,h contains indicators for
the various fund-raising treatments, with the baseline no-flyer
treatment for La Rabida as the omitted group. As such, the point
estimates for Γ are to be interpreted as the effect of a treatment
compared to the baseline.14 We cluster the standard errors at the
solicitor × date level.
We also estimate the impact of the fund-raising treatment
separately for the two types of charities (ECU and La Rabida),
using the following OLS regression model:

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

25

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE IV
Frequency of (A) Answering the Door, (B) (Unconditional) Giving, and (C) Giving
Conditional on Answering the Door
Panel A presents the percent of households that answer the door under
different treatment. The third set of bars (opt-out treatment) also shows the
percent opting out (shaded colors on top). Panel B displays the percent that give
to the charity out of all the households in the treatment group (including those
not answering the door). Panel C shows giving conditioned on answering the door,
which equals the ratioof the estimated shares of unconditional giving (Figure IVB)
and of households answering the door (Figure IVA). All estimates are obtained
from regressions that control for randomization fixed effects.

26

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Opting Out. Figure IVA alsopresents evidence on the share of
subjects in the opt-out treatment that check the opt-out box: 12%
of all households for the La Rabida charity and 9.9% for the ECU
charity. Households that, in the flyer treatment, are explicitly
avoiding the solicitor by not answering the door, instead use the
opt-out option when available. This result is consistent with the
assumption that checking the opt-out box is a cheaper way to
avoid a solicitor.
Unconditional Giving. Figure IVB presents the results on the
unconditional giving probability, including households that do
not answer the door. Not surprisingly, giving is higher for the
preferred charity, La Rabida, than for ECU in each treatment.
The pattern of effects across treatments is similar for the two
charities. The baseline and the flyer treatments have essentially
the same share of giving. The lack of a difference between these
treatments is estimated quite precisely because we overweighted
the baseline and flyer treatments. The opt-out treatment, instead,
lowers giving by 2 percentage points for both charities. This
difference is statistically and economically significant (see Table
II): the effect amounts to a reduction in giving of about a third
relative to the other treatments.
The first result—that the flyer per se does not affect giving—
is consistent with both social pressure and altruism affecting
charitable giving. The advance notice increases the presence at
home of the altruistic givers and lowers the presence of those who
give due to social pressure. To the extent that these two forces
are of about the same size, we expect no overall impact. Note that

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

percentage points, by the presence of an opt-out condition (Check
this box if you do not want to be disturbed) on the flyer. Hence, the
flyer and the opt-out conditions lower the probability of opening
the door by, respectively, 10% and 25%, an economically large
effect that is similar for both charities. We interpret this evidence
as suggestive of social pressure: when informed of a visit by a
solicitor, households attempt to avoid the interaction, especially
when doing so has little cost, as in the opt-out treatment. Notice
that the reduction in the probability of opening the door in the
presence of a flyer can be due to two factors: a lower probability
of being at home, or a lower probability of opening the door
conditional on being at home. The variable we measure captures
the sum of these two effects.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

27

Conditional Giving. For both charities, the share of
households that give among those who answer the door15 is
higher in the treatments with flyer than in the baseline treatment
(Figure IVC). This increase is consistent with Proposition 3 since
the flyer allows sorting in by donors who want to give and
sorting out by those who do not want to give. In the opt-out
treatment, however, conditional giving is lower. This effect
is inconsistent with Proposition 3, though not statistically
significant at conventional significance levels.
Amount of Giving. In our model, individuals who give due to
social pressure give at most gS , whereas individuals who give due
to altruism may contribute higher amounts. Hence, relative to the
control treatment, the flyer treatment may both decrease smaller
donations (sorting out of social-pressure givers) and increase
larger donations (sorting in of altruists). The opt-out treatment,
which further facilitates sorting out but not sorting in, should
lower the share of small donations but not the share of larger
donations (Proposition 4).
To test these predictions, we split donations based on the
median amount given, $10, and label donations smaller than (or
equal to) $10 as small and donations larger than $10 as large.
Figure V presents the results. In the baseline treatment, 4% of
households give small donations, and 2% give large donations.
The percentage giving a small donation decreases slightly in the
flyer treatment and decreases by 2.1 percentage points in the optout treatment. Hence, the opt-out option more than halves the
15. The conditional giving for each treatment is the estimated unconditional
giving, Figure IVB, divided by the estimated share of households answering the
door, Figure IVA.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

this result does not contradict our previous finding that the flyer
significantly reduces the share of households opening the door. In
the presence of social pressure costs, nongivers also avoid being at
home when notified with a flyer. This avoidance does not impact
the probability of giving, but it lowers home presence.
The second result—that the opt-out option significantly lowers giving—points to the importance of social pressure: in the
opt-out treatment the cost of avoiding the fund-raiser is substantially lowered, and giving decreases proportionally. If giving was
primarily due to altruism, the opt-out option should not affect
giving rates or levels.

28

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Figure presents the results on (unconditional) giving of small (≤$10) and large
(>$10) donations across treatment. The estimates are obtained from regressions
that control for randomization fixed effects.

likelihood of a small donation, a significant difference as shown
in Table II. The pattern is very different for large donations.
The flyer somewhat increases the incidence of larger donations,
though not significantly, and the opt-out option has no effect. This
pattern is consistent with Proposition 4.
Figure VI presents additional information on the distribution
of the amount given across treatments. The opt-out treatment,
compared to the baseline treatment, induces a decrease in the
donations up to $10, but no change in larger donations. The
histogram also provides evidence of bunching at $5 and $10.
In the structural model, we use this information and consider
$10 as the amount that eliminates all social pressure from not
giving, gs .
Finally, in columns (9) and (10) of Table II we consider
the effect of the different treatments on the amount given.
There is no significant effect of the flyer treatment, and a
marginally significant reduction in giving with the opt-out
treatment.
Robustness. We examine the robustness of specification (2)
in Table II to: (i) omitting the dummy for the ECU charity; and
(ii) introducing fixed effects for solicitor-day-location fixed effects,

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE V
Frequency of Giving: Small versus Large (Pooled)

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

29

Figure displays the distribution of donation amounts across different treatment groups. Each bar indicates the percentage giving the specified amount out
of all households in the treatment. The figure does not display the share of
households donating $0. The estimates are obtained from regressions that control
for randomization fixed effects.

which allows for different solicitor fixed effects on different days
or towns. Online Appendix Table 1 shows that the estimates are
essentially identical.
In Online Appendix Table II, we estimate separately the
results for the three experimental waves in 2008: April to June
(wave 1), July and August (wave 2), September and October (wave
3). The results in the first and second waves for the flyer treatment
are consistent (in wave 2 we did not run an opt-out treatment): in
both waves the share answering the door significantly decreases
in response to a flyer, and there is no effect on the share giving. In
the third wave, we obtain similar effects as in the previous waves
for the share answering the door, but somewhat different effects
on giving. In this time period, which coincides with the peak
of the financial crisis, the level of giving is substantially lower.
Given this lower level, a flyer (marginally) increases giving,
mostly in the form of larger donations; a flyer with opt-out option
still lowers giving, though less so than in previous waves. These
results are consistent with the crisis reducing giving due to lower
social pressure cost of turning away a solicitor (“sorry, times are
tough”), but the sample size in this period is toosmall todrawfirm
conclusions.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE VI
Distribution of Amounts Donated

30

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Survey. For the survey treatments, we estimate a specification parallel to equation (2), separately for the 2008 and the
2009 field experiments. In the 2008 experiments (Figure VII (top)
and column (1) of Table III), a flyer announcing a $0 10-minute
survey reduces the share opening the door by 15% (though not
significantly), compared to the same survey without flyer. In
addition, flyers for more attractive surveys with either shorter
duration (5 minutes) or higher payment ($10) lead to a 10–15%
increase in the share of households opening the door, indicating
that households sort into shorter and better-paid surveys, though
the difference is again not significant.
The share completing the survey is comparable (about 10%)
for the $0 10-minute conditions with and without flyer (Figure VII
(top) and column (2) of Table III). Interestingly, the willingness to
complete an unpaid 10-minute survey is higher than the willingness to give money even to an in-state charity. Also, compared to
the $0 10-minute survey with flyer, surveys with shorter duration
or payment have a higher completion rate of 17–18%, a 70–80%
increase. The increase is very similar for the two groups, indicating a high value of time for survey completion, consonant with the
sample population characteristics.
Figure VII (bottom) and columns (3) and (4) of Table III
report the results for the 2009 survey. Within the treatments with
flyer, the share answering the door is increasing in the amount
paid (from $0 to $5 to $10). In addition, the share answering is

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Giving via Mail or Internet. We also obtained data on mail
and Internet donations from the households in our sample over
the time period of the fund-raising campaign. The results are
reported in columns (7) and (8) of Table I. There was not a single
donation to ECU, and only one donation to La Rabida—a striking
difference compared to the 3–7% of households donating in person
for the same charities. The near absence of donations provides
further evidence on the motivations of giving. If giving was due to
pure altruism, individuals whosee the flyer but cannot be at home
during the fund-raiser would donate via mail or Internet. The
cost of this form of giving (captured by θ in our model) attenuates
giving, but not likely to be zero. A model of warm glow can better
fit the data if we assume that the warm glow arises only from inperson donations (i.e., θ is close to 0). The lack of mail or Internet
donations is also consistent with social pressure: giving arises
only under high social pressure.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

31

Surveys: (Top) 2008 Experiment, (Bottom) 2009 Experiment
Figures present the percent of households answering the door and the percent
completing the survey (out of all households) in the survey treatment run in 2008
(top) and 2009 (bottom). The estimates are obtained from regressions that control
for randomization fixed effects.

significantly lower for the treatments with opt-out, especially the
treatment with no payment. These findings are consistent with
the findings for 2008 and confirm a sizable responsiveness of the
presence at home to the attractiveness of the task.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE VII

Flyer ($10/5min) treatment

Flyer ($5/5min) treatment

Flyer ($0/5min) treatment

Flyer ($0/10min) treatment

Baseline ($5/5min) treatment

Flyer ($10/10min) treatment

Flyer ($0/5min) treatment

Flyer ($0/10min) treatment

Dependent variable:

Sample:

−0.0563
(0.0377)
−0.0021
(0.0334)
−0.0105
(0.0448)

Indicator for
answering the door
(1)
0.0000
(0.0260)
0.0794
(0.0233)∗∗∗
0.0695
(0.0265)∗∗

Indicator for
completing survey
(2)

2008 Survey

−0.0096
(0.0217)
−0.0198
(0.0247)
−0.0193
(0.0189)
0.0028
(0.0205)
0.0368
(0.0243)

−0.0240
(0.0176)
−0.0008
(0.0180)
0.0243
(0.0132)∗
0.0549
(0.0164)∗∗∗
0.1072
(0.0187)∗∗∗

Indicator for
completing survey
(4)

2009 Survey
Indicator for
answering the door
(3)

OLS regressions

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Specification:

TABLE III
RESULTS FOR SURVEY TREATMENTS

32
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Indicator for
completing survey
(2)

X
N = 1865

X
N = 1865

Baseline ($0/10min)
0.4138
0.1025

Indicator for
answering the door
(1)

2008 Survey

X

0.1498

−0.0026
(0.0160)
0.0259
(0.0162)

N = 10035

Baseline ($0/5min)

N = 10035

X

0.3915

−0.0583
(0.0227)∗∗
−0.0373
(0.0192)∗

Indicator for
completing survey
(4)

2009 Survey
Indicator for
answering the door
(3)

OLS regressions

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Notes. Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The omitted treatment is the baseline no-flyer $0–10 minutes
survey for columns (1) and (2) and the baseline no-flyer $0–5 minutes survey for columns (3) and (4). The regressions include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination,
for the hour of day, and for a subjective rating of home values in the block. ∗ significant at 10%; ∗∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗∗ significant at 1%

Omitted treatment
Mean of dep. var. for
omitted treatment
Fixed effects for solicitor,
date-location, hour, and
area rating
N

Opt-out ($5/5min) treatment

Opt-out ($0/5min) treatment

Dependent variable:

Sample:

Specification:

TABLE III
(CONTINUED)

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

33

34

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

The 2009 treatments alsoindicate a strong response of survey
completion with respect to duration and payment. The survey
completion rate in treatments with flyer increases monotonically
from 14.8% for a $0 10-minute survey to 25.5% for a $10 5-minute
survey. The latter completion rate is remarkably high: over 50%
of the people opening the door took the survey. There is a similar
increase in survey completion with respect to payment in the
opt-out treatments, though not in the treatments without flyer.

The reduced-form estimates provide qualitative evidence on
the importance of both altruism and social pressure, but they
do not allow for a quantitative estimate of the underlying social preferences. We now estimate the model parameters structurally, combining the results of the fund-raising and the survey
experiments.
Set-up. We estimate the model of Section II, imposing seven
additional assumptions, several of which are relaxed below. First,
the private utility of consumption is linear, u(W − g) = W − g. This
assumption is not unduly restrictive since utility should be locally
linear in a standardexpectedutility framework. Second, the altruism parameter a comes from a normal distribution with mean μ
and variance σ 2 censored below at 0, with the remaining probability mass assigned to a = 0. Third, the altruism function is v(gi )=
log (Γ + gi ); the parameter Γ governs the concavity of the altruism
function for a > 0: a large Γ implies that the marginal utility of
a
giving, given by (Γ +g
, declines only slowly in the individual giving
i)
gi , consistent with pure altruism—the individual cares about the
overall donation and her individual giving is only a small part.
A small Γ instead indicates that the marginal utility diminishes
steeply with the individual giving, more consistent with warm
glow. Fourth, the social pressure cost S is homogeneous. Fifth,
the level of giving gS from which on there is no social pressure
cost is $10, the median donation. Sixth, the cost of leaving
home
2
0)
c(h) is symmetric around h0 and quadratic: c(h) = (h−h
Seventh,
.
2η
to capture the lack of giving by mail, we set θ = 0.
To model behavior in the survey treatments, we assume a
baseline utility s of completing a 10-minute survey for no monetary payment, with s ∼ F s , a normal distribution with parameters μs and σ s . Hence, we allow s to be negative for households

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

V. STRUCTURAL ESTIMATES

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

35

max h max (s + m − t, −Ss ) −

h∈[0,1]

2

(h − h0 )
.
2η

Taking into account corner solutions for h∗ , this leads to a solution for the probability of being at home: h∗ = max[min[h0 +
η max (s + m − t, −Ss ), 1], 0].
The vector of parameters ξ that we estimate are: (i) h02008
and h02009 —the probabilities of opening the door in the 2008
and 2009 no-flyer treatments; (ii) r—the probability of observing
(and remembering) the flyer; (iii) η—the responsiveness of the
probability of opening the door to the desirability of being at
home; (iv) μs and σ s —the mean and standard deviation of the
distribution F s of the utility of completing a 10-minute survey; (v)
vs —the value of one hour of time spent completing a survey; (vi)
Ss —the social pressure associated with saying no to the survey
request; (vii) μach and σach (where ch = LaR, Ecu)—the mean and
standard deviation of the censored normal distribution F from
which the altruism parameter a is drawn; (viii) Γ —the curvature
of the altruism function, which is assumed to be the same for the
two charities; (ix) Sch (ch = LaR, Ecu)—the social pressure cost
associated with a donation request; the tables display the social
pressure cost associated with giving zero, SgS = 10S.
To estimate the model, we use a minimum-distance estimator. Denote by m (ξ) the vector of moments predicted by the theory
as a function of the parameters ξ, and by m̂ the vector of observed

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

that dislike doing surveys without compensation. In addition,
individuals receive utility from a payment m for completing the
survey, and receive disutility from the time cost t of the survey,
both of which are deterministic. Given the assumption above of
(locally) linear utility, we add these terms to obtain the overall
utility from completing a survey: s + m − t. The time cost t
equals τ vs , where τ is the duration of the survey in fraction of
hours, and vs is the value of one hour of time (see below). We
denote by Ss the social pressure cost of saying no to a survey
request.
The agent undertakes the survey if s + m − t is larger than
−Ss . The threshold ˉsm,t = −Ss − (m − t) is the lowest level of s such
that individuals will agree to complete the survey if asked. An
increase in the social pressure Ss or in the pay m, or a decrease in
the cost of time t will lower the threshold and hence increase the
probability of survey completion. The decision problem of staying
at home conditional on receiving a notice is

36

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

ch

the opt-out treatment (P (OO)OO ); (iii) the unconditional probch
ability of giving in the various charity treatments (P (G)j );
(iv) the probability of giving an amount of money in differch
ch
ch
ent ranges (P (0 < G < 10)j , P (G = gs = 10)j , P (10 < G ≤ 20)j ,
ch

ch

P (20 < G ≤ 50)j , and P (G > 50)j ); (v) the probability of opening
the door in the various survey treatments k (with varying dollar
s
amounts, minutes, and flyer conditional), P (H)k , run in 2008
and in 2009; (vi) the unconditional probability of completing the
s
survey in the various survey treatments, P (SV)k , run in 2008 and
in 2009; and (vii) the probability of checking the opt-out box in the
s
survey opt-out treatments (P (OO)k ). The corresponding empirical
moments m̂ are estimated in a first-stage model using the same
controls as in the main regressions, andare listedin the Appendix.
To calculate the method of simulated moments estimate, we
employ a common sequential quadratic programming algorithm
(Powell 1983) implemented in Matlab as the fmincon routine. We
impose the following constraints: Sch , Ss ≥ 0 (social pressure nonnegative), σ ch , σ s > 0 (positive standard deviation of altruism),
h02008 , h2009
, r ∈ [0, 1] (probabilities between 0 and 1), and η ∈
0
[0, 9999] (finite elasticity of home presence). We begin each run of
the optimization routine by randomly choosing a starting point,
drawn from a uniform distribution over the permitted parameter
space. The algorithm determines successive search directions
by solving a quadratic programming subproblem based on an
16. Given the large number of moments, weighting the estimates by the inverse
of the full variance-covariance matrix is problematic computationally.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

moments. The minimum-distance estimator chooses the param0
eters ξˆ that minimize the distance (m (ξ) − m̂) W (m (ξ) − m̂) ,
where W is a weighting matrix. As a weighting matrix, we use the
diagonal of the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix. Hence,
the estimator minimizes the sum of squared distances, weighted
by the inverse variance of each moment.16 As a robustness check,
we also use the identity matrix as weight. To calculate the theoretical moments, we use a numerical integration algorithm based
on adaptive Simpson quadrature, implemented in Matlab as the
quad routine.
As moments m (ξ) we use the following probabilities
(where j = F, NF, OO and ch = LaR, Ecu): (i) the probability of opening the door in the various charity treatments
ch
(P (H)j ); (ii) the probability of checking the opt-out box in

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

37

Identification. Though the parameters are estimated jointly,
it is possible to address the main sources of identification of individual parameters. The baseline probabilities of answering the
door, h02008 and h2009
, are identified by the observed probabilities
0
of opening the door in treatments without flyer. The probability
of observing and remembering the flyer, r, is identified by two
moments in the opt-out treatment: the fraction of households
checking the opt-out box (10−12%), which equals rh0 F (a0 ), and
the fraction opening the door. The elasticity of opening the door η
with respect to incentives is identified by the fraction opening the
door in the survey treatments for different payments and survey
durations. In addition, η is identified by the amounts given in the
different charity treatments.
The survey parameters are identified using the survey moments. The survey completion rates for varying amounts of
compensation identify the heterogeneity in the willingness to
complete the survey, and hence σ s . For example, the completion
rate of a 10-minute survey increases by 7 percentage point with a
$10 increase in pay (Figure VII, top). This indicates that h70 = 17%
of the population assigns negative value to doing a survey for no
payment, but assigns positive value to completing a survey when
receiving $10. The survey completion rate also identifies the mean
willingness to complete a 10-minute survey, μs . The value of time
vs is identified from the comparison between pay increases for the
survey (from $0 to $5 to $10) and duration decreases (from 10 to 5
minutes). Finally, the social pressure Ss is identified by the share
of people answering the door in the survey treatments. To see
this, consider a respondent who dislikes answering a survey and
hence will say no and incur the social pressure cost Ss . In the flyer
17. For the results presented here, the best estimate is achieved in about 40%
of all runs.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

approximation of the Lagrangian of the optimization problem. To
avoidselecting local minima, we choose the run with the minimum
squared distance of 500 runs.17
Under standard conditions, the minimum-distance estimator using weighting matrix W achieves asymptotic nor0
−1
0
0
−1
mality, with estimated variance (Ĝ W Ĝ) (Ĝ WNΛ̂W Ĝ)(Ĝ W Ĝ) , where
P
N
ˆ and Λ̂ ≡ Var[m(ξ)]
ˆ (Wooldridge 2002). We
Ĝ ≡ N −1 i=1 ∇ξ mi (ξ)
ˆ numerically in Matlab using an adaptive finite
calculate ∇ξ m(ξ)
difference algorithm.

38

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Estimates. Column (1) in Table IV reports the benchmark
estimates of the parameters along with standard errors. The
probability of being at home h0 is precisely estimated to be 41.4%
in 2008 and in 2009. The share r of households that have read (and
remember) the flyer is precisely estimated at 34.1%. Although
this estimate may appear low, many households may have just
disregarded the flyer, or a household member may have seen it,
but not informed the person opening the door. The elasticity of
home presence η is estimated to be 0.040 (s.e. 0.011), implying
that the cost of increasing the probability of being at home and
2
answering the door by 10 percentage points is 0.1
2η = $0.13.
The average utility for survey completion is estimated to
equal −$26.89, implying that, on average, households dislike
completing 10-minute surveys for no pay. There is, however,
significant heterogeneity (σ̂ s = $29.59), implying that a sizable

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

treatment, she will choose to be at home with probability h0 −ηrSs
(barring corner solutions for h). Hence, knowing h0 , η, and r, it is
possible to identify Ss .
Turning to the charity parameters, the information on the
amounts given identify the standard deviation of altruism σach ,
mean altruism μach , and the curvature parameter Γ . This is clearest for donations of g > gS , where social pressure plays no role.
Without social pressure, an individual with altruism a will give
exactly g dollars if the marginal utility of giving, av0 (g) = (Γ a+g) ,
equals the private marginal utility of consumption, 1, and hence
a = Γ + g. Thus, in this example without social pressure, the
mass of households with altruism higher than Γ + g, that is,
1 − F(g + Γ ), has to equal the observed share of households that
give at least g. This pins down the empirical distribution of a for
a given Γ . Figure VIIIA illustrates the identification mechanism
for the estimated value of Γ̂ = 10.61 and giving levels g of $0 and
of $10. The identification of Γ depends on two sets of moments:
the sorting in of givers of larger amounts, and the giving of
smaller amount. The more concave the altruism function is (that
is, smaller Γ ), the more altruistic individuals sort in because of
higher infra-marginal utility of giving, and the more frequent
are small donations. Finally, the social pressure Sch is identified
from two main sources of variation: home presence in the flyer
treatment (which, to a first approximation, equals h0 − ηrS) and
the distribution of small giving (the higher the social pressure, the
more likely is small giving and in particular bunching at gS ).

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

39

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

FIGURE VIII
(A) Distribution of Altruism and Cut-offs for Giving; (B) Overall Utility of
Fund-Raiser as Function of Altrusim
Figure VIIIA plots the estimated distribution of the altruism parameter a > 0.
The figure displays the threshold for giving $0 and for giving $10 in the absence
of social pressure, given by a v’ (Γ + g.) -1  0 or α  Γ + g. Figure VIIIB
plots the implied utility in equilibrium of a standard door-to-door fund-raiser,
as a function of the altruism parameter a. The parameter values are from the
benchmark minimum distance estimates (Table IV).

40

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE IV
MINIMUM-DISTANCE ESTIMATES: BENCHMARK RESULTS

Common parameters

Elasticity of home
presence (eta)
Implied cost of altering
prob. home by 10 pp.
Survey parameters
Mean utility (in $) of doing
10-minute survey
Std. dev. of utility of
doing survey
Value of time of
one-hour survey
Social pressure cost if saying
no to survey
Charity parameters
Share with zero altruism a
Mean altruism a,
conditional on a>0
Std. dev. of altruism a,
conditional on a>0
Curvature of altruism
function
Social pressure cost of
giving 0 in person
SSE

No social pressure
(2)

0.414
(0.004)
0.414
(0.007)
0.341
(0.012)
0.040
(0.011)
0.126

0.383
(0.003)
0.392
(0.008)
0.426
(0.017)
0.008
(0.003)
0.656

−26.863
(4.204)
29.591
(5.129)
80.656
(22.762)
6.197
(1.492)

−17.203
(3.466)
28.347
(5.374)
83.039
(24.898)
0.000
(—)

La Rabida
ECU
0.753
0.763
(0.048)
(0.071)
12.786
9.659
(1.444)
(1.485)
10.545
7.994
(1.038)
(1.103)
10.606
(4.466)
3.751
1.438
(0.581)
(0.784)

La Rabida
ECU
0.723
0.747
(0.01)
(0.024)
14.167
10.272
(0.452)
(0.876)
11.569
8.455
(0.389)
(0.773)
10.606
(—)
0
0
(—)
(—)

86.618

366.620

Notes. Estimates from minimum-distance estimator with moments listed in the Appendix and weights
given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix. The estimation assumes a normal distribution
censored below at 0, with the censored mass assigned to zero altruism (a=0). Notice that the share with zero
altruism is not a separate parameter, but it is the share implied by the censoring of a at a=0. In column
(2) we estimate the model fixing the social pressure parameters to 0; in addition, since the curvature of the
altruism function is very poorly identifed, we fix it at the same value as in column (1). Standard errors are in
parentheses. SSE reports the weighted sum of squared errors.

share of respondents like doing surveys even for no pay. The
value of time for one hour of survey completion is estimated to
be $80.66, which corresponds approximately to the value of time

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Prob. of home presence
(h) year 2008
Prob. of home presence
(h) year 2009
Prob. of observing flyer (r)

Benchmark estimates
(1)

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

41

18. At an average income of about $100,000 per year, the implied hourly wage
is $50.
g
19. For a < 0, we assume v(a) = eGi .

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

for the households in the wealthy neighborhoods we reached. 18
Finally, the social pressure cost of turning down a survey request,
Ss , is estimated to be $6.20, a sizable magnitude.
Turning to the charity parameters, we estimate that about
75% of households have no altruism for either charity and that,
conditional on a positive altruism, the mean altruism is higher
for the La Rabida charity (12.79) than for the ECU charity
(9.66). Figure VIIIA plots the implied distribution of the altruism
parameter a for a > 0 for La Rabida and ECU. The estimated Γ̂
is small, implying a highly concave altruism function, consistent
with warm-glow rather than with pure altruism.
The social pressure parameters are quite precisely estimated,
and the data reject the null hypothesis of no social pressure cost.
Turning down a door-to-door giving request is associated with a
social pressure cost of $3.75 (s.e. $0.58) for La Rabida and $1.44
(s.e. $0.78) for ECU. That is, it is psychologically more costly to
say no to a well-liked local nonprofit than to a lesser-known outof-state charity. The sizable social pressure cost suggests that the
welfare implications of door-to-door campaigns can be large, as we
explore below.
While the model with social pressure does a nice job of fitting
the observed moments (Appendix), the same cannot be said of
a model with no social pressure. In column (2) of Table IV we
estimate the parameters forcing S = 0 (and setting Γ , which is
essentially unidentified, to the value in column (1)). The fit is
extremely poor, with the mean squared error 4.5 times larger.
Missing social pressure, the model cannot explain opting out
nor the decrease in the share answering the door in the flyer
treatment.
In Table V we explore the robustness of the estimates to
alternative model specifications with respect to the distribution
of altruism, the cost function, and the heterogeneity of social
pressure. We report the weighted sum of squared errors to allow
for comparisons among the models. Allowing for negative values
of altruism (spite) toward the charity with an untruncated normal distribution (column (2)) yields nearly identical estimates
to the benchmark ones (column (1)).19 Given that social pressure is estimated to be substantially lower than $10, any level

−26.924
(4.227)
29.662
(5.155)
6.205
(1.495)

Survey parameters
Mean utility (in $) of
−26.863
doing 10-minute survey
(4.204)
Std. dev. of utility of doing
29.591
10-minute survey
(5.129)
Social pressure cost
6.197
of saying no to survey
(1.492)

Elasticity of home
presence (eta)
Probability of type with
no social preferences (p)

0.342
(0.012)
0.040
(0.011)

−27.771
(4.332)
30.166
(5.296)
6.990
(1.416)

0.340
(0.012)
0.034
(0.008)

−26.163
(4.072)
29.361
(5.039)
5.344
(1.333)

0.345
(0.012)
0.047
(0.013)

Normal distr. of Exponential distr. Lognormal distr.
altruism, no
altruism, allows
of altruism,
mass at 0
of mass at 0
allows mass at 0
(2)
(3)
(4)

−23.049
(5.072)
27.103
(5.169)
7.836
(2.123)

0.412
(0.079)
0.033
(0.009)
0.142
(0.13)

0.340
(0.012)
0.340 down
0.055 up
(0.011)
(0.051)

−26.947
(4.152)
28.947
(4.927)
6.550
(1.725)

Benchmark
altr., allows for
no social pref.
(6)

Benchmark
asymmetric altruism,
sorting cost
(5)

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

0.341
(0.012)
0.040
(0.011)

Prob. observing flyer (r)

Common parameters

Benchmark
estimate
(1)

TABLE V
MINIMUM DISTANCE ESTIMATES: ROBUSTNESS

42
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

La
Rabida

La
Rabida

Lognormal distr.
of altruism,
allows mass at 0
(4)

Benchmark altruism,
asymmetric
sorting cost
(5)

Benchmark altr.,
allows for no
social pref.
(6)

86.623

−

86.618

−

ECU

12.931
9.789
(1.503)
(1.551)
10.647
8.080
(1.076)
(1.141)
11.066
(4.675)
3.704
1.413
(0.596)
(0.772)

ECU

0.753
0.763
(0.048)
(0.071)
12.786
9.659
(1.444)
(1.485)
10.545
7.994
(1.038)
(1.103)
10.606
(4.466)
3.751
1.438
(0.581)
(0.784)

La
Rabida

−0.708
(0.411)
0.528
(0.097)

90.715

0.807
0.846
(0.026)
(0.035)
9.838
7.103
(0.541)
(0.929)
9.838
7.103
0.541
0.929
4.033
(2.116)
4.996
2.358
(0.453)
(1.032)

ECU

ECU

−0.426
(0.3)
0.520
(0.098)

−0.874
(0.255)
0.507
(0.04)

86.233

ECU

86.520

La
Rabida

0.743
0.744
(0.052)
(0.08)
13.118
10.065
(1.689)
(1.718)
10.631
8.163
(1.139)
(1.177)
11.667
(4.956)
3.667
1.326
(0.597)
(0.762)

ECU

0.747
(0.104)
9.868
(1.777)
8.122
(1.251)
11.612
(6.043)
3.688
1.376
(0.678)
(0.803)

0.745
(0.06)
13.056
(1.935)
10.741
(1.394)

La
Rabida

−0.700 −0.213 −1.101
(0.082)
(0.155)
(0.164)
0.524
0.628
0.507
(0.053)
(0.105)
(0.05)

86.653

0.812
0.880
(0.01)
(0.012)
26.482
26.601
(1.314)
(1.11)
10.710
6.913
(0.698)
(1.183)
20.976
(0.869)
2.420
0.748
(0.19)
(0.391)

La
Rabida

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Welfare and decomposition of giving
Average welfare per house. −1.102 −0.442 −1.093 −0.435 −1.330
of fund-raiser (in $)
(0.145)
(0.301)
(0.15)
(0.297)
(0.128)
Share of givers who seek
0.518
0.528
0.514
0.526
0.543
the fund-raiser
(0.041)
(0.095)
(0.041)
(0.095)
(0.056)

SSE

Mean altruism a,
conditional on a>0
Std. dev. of altruism a,
conditional on a>0
Curvature of altruism
function
Social pressure cost
of giving 0 in person

Share with zero altruism

Charity parameters

Notes. Estimates from minimum-distance estimator with moments listed in the Appendix and weights given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix. Benchmark
estimates in column (1) are from Table IV. Estimates in column (2) assume a (nontruncated) normal distribution for altruism a with no mass at a=0. Estimates in column (3) and (4)
assume, respectively, an exponential distribution and a log-normal distribution for altruism a as well as a mass at a=0. Estimates in column (5) allow for a different elasticity eta of
the cost function for increases and decreases in home presence. Estimates in column (6) allow for a share p of the population that have no altruism, nor social pressure. These agents
do not give to charity and do not complete the survey. In column (6), the share with zero altruism includes the share with no social preferences. Standard errors are in parentheses.
SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors.

Exponential distr.
altruism, allows
of mass at 0
(3)

Normal distr. of
altruism, no
mass at 0
(2)

43

−0.323
(0.262)
0.529
(0.096)

Benchmark
estimates
(1)

TABLE V
(CONTINUED)
TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

44

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

The estimates of η+ and η− are close, even though η+ is imprecisely estimated given that only the most favorable surveys
($10 payment for 5 minutes) increase on average the presence at
home. As a result, the estimates of the other parameters hardly
change.
In column (6) we remove the assumption of homogeneous
social pressure and allow for a simple form of heterogeneity.
We assume that a proportion p of households has no social
preferences, that is, does not exhibit altruism (a = 0) and does
not respond to social pressure (S = 0), and hence neither gives
to charity nor completes surveys.21 The remaining portion 1 − p
is described by the benchmark model. The data provide some
support for this type of heterogeneity, estimating a share p̂ of
0.142 (s.e. 0.13). In turn, this raises somewhat the estimated
share of households that observed the flyer r̂ up to 0.41 and
lowers the elasticity of the response η̂. Despite these changes, the
20. The convergence properties for the lognormal distribution are not as
good, presumably because of one additional parameter to be estimated in the
distribution of altruism (μ, σ, and z), relative to the censored normal (μ and σ)
and the exponential (λ and z) distribution.
21. We assume a deterministic value for doing the survey equal to the μS of the
social-preference types. Given the estimated values, these types will not complete
a 5-minute survey even for pay of $10.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

of altruism that is sufficiently small, or negative, is associated
with identical behavior—turning down the charity and avoidance.
Hence, the shape of the left tail of the altruism distribution is not
identified and, importantly, does not affect the estimates of the
other parameters. Next, we reestimate the model with alternative
assumptions for the distributions of altruism: in column (3) we
assume a negative exponential distribution of a (with mean λ1 )
with additional probability mass z at 0; the results are very
similar to the ones in the benchmark model. In column (4) we
assume a log-normal distribution (with parameters μ and σ) and
an added probability mass z at 0. The results are qualitatively
similar, but with some quantitative differences, such as lower
social pressure estimates.20
In column (5) we remove the assumption of a symmetric cost
function and allow for the cost of avoidance to differ from the cost
of sorting in:
(h−h0 )2
for h ≥ h0
2η
c (h) = (h−h+ )2
0
for h < h0 .
2η−

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

45

Welfare. We evaluate the welfare associated with a standard
no-flyer door-to-door drive. Figure VIIIB plots the utility for a
household that opens the door (utility is 0 for the other households) as a function of the altruism a. The utility is negative
for households with sufficiently low altruism a: these households
refuse the solicitation and pay the cost 10S. Households with
positive but small altruism give small amounts, but still experience negative utility because they give more than they prefer
22. With coarser giving moments (as in column (3)), however, the charity
moments cannot reliably identify η, indicating that the identification comes from
the amount given for small magnitudes and the bunching at $10.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

social pressure parameters for the charity hardly move, while the
estimated social pressure for survey completion increases. The
added degree of freedom improves to a limited extent the fit of the
model, in particular regarding the giving moments in the opt-out
treatments.
We present further robustness checks for the benchmark distribution of altruism (censored normal, Online Appendix Table 3)
and for the exponential distribution (Online Appendix Table 4).
Using more detailed information on the quantity given (that
is, the moments for giving (0, 3], (3, 7], (7, 10], (10, 20], (20, 50],
50+, column (2)) has a limited impact on the results. Using a
rougher set of giving moments, that does not account for bunching
at $10, ((0, 10], (10, 20], (20, 50], 50+, column (3)) also produces
similar point estimates, but larger standard errors, including on
the social pressure parameters. Not surprisingly, the information
contained in the exact amount given, and especially the bunching
at $10, helps provide identification. In columns (4) and (5) we
use, respectively, only the charity moments and only the survey
moments. The survey moments suffice to identify both the survey
parameters and the common parameters. The charity moments
identify the charity parameters, with estimates similar to the
benchmark ones in column (1). This indicates that the survey
moments are useful, but not necessary to identify η.22 Importantly, the two sets of estimates—using the charity moments
and using the survey moments—yield very similar values for
the common parameters such as η and r, an important validation of the model. Finally, in column (6) we show that the estimates are not sensitive to using the identity matrix as weighting
matrix.

46

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

23. For larger values of altruism, the utility level for La Rabida and ECU is the
same, since the only difference between the twocharities is the social pressure, and
social pressure does not affect larger donations.
24. The effect exclusively on the households at home is larger by a factor of
1
.
0.414
25. Notice that these are the estimated amounts raised according to the model,
and differ somewhat from the observed ones (Table II, column (9)).

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

and because they still incur some social pressure cost. For higher
altruism, the utility of giving becomes positive. 23
On net, a fund-raising campaign can either increase
or decrease welfare of the solicitees, depending on which
force dominates. Given the estimated distribution of altruism
(Figure VIIIA), our fund-raiser lowers the utility for a large
majority (the nondonors and the unhappy donors) while raising
the welfare of only a small minority (the happy donors). Hence,
the welfare effect is substantially negative once we average over
all households contacted, including the ones not at home (whose
welfare effect is 0): −$1.10 for La Rabida and smaller but still
negative (−$0.44) for ECU (Panel A of Table VI).24 The welfare
effect is more negative for the more liked charity, because this
charity induces higher social pressure to give. The finding of
negative welfare effects is robust to all the different specifications
(bottom row of Table V and Online Appendix Tables 3 and 4), and
is smaller when allowing for types without social preferences. Our
fund-raising drives are on average welfare-diminishing for the
solicitees.
These welfare estimates do not account for the welfare of
the recipient. For La Rabida, the estimated money raised per
household contacted is $0.72, which amounts to $0.24 on net after
taking into account a solicitor wage of $9.50 per hour (visiting 20
households per hour).25 Hence, the money raised needs to be used
very efficiently to generate positive societal welfare. For ECU, the
net money raised is negative, implying a negative societal welfare
effect.
The introduction of flyers changes the welfare implications.
Flyers give the opportunity to sort and hence temper the negative
welfare implications for the solicitees. Counterintuitively, flyers
can also increase the amount of money raised. Even though sorting out is more frequent than sorting in, the households sorting
in contribute substantially higher amounts. This generates, in
our estimates, a small but positive effect on the amount given.
After taking into account the added cost of hanging the flyers

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

47

TABLE VI
WELFARE AND DECOMPOSITION OF GIVING
Specification:
Charity:

Benchmark estimates
ECU charity
(2)

−1.102 (0.145)
0.719 (0.035)
0.244 (0.035)

−0.442 (0.301)
0.333 (0.046)
−0.142 (0.046)

−0.952 (0.122)
0.860 (0.044)
0.249 (0.044)

−0.410 (0.288)
0.389 (0.057)
−0.221 (0.057)

−0.564 (0.077)
0.808 (0.045)
0.292 (0.045)

−0.234 (0.201)
0.370 (0.055)
−0.145 (0.055)

Panel B. Decomposition of giving in standard (no-flyer) fund-raiser
Share of givers who would give
0.745
without social pressure (S = 0)
(0.056)
Share of amount that would be given
0.726
without social pressure (S = 0)
(0.03)
Share of givers who seek
0.518
the fund-raiser (happy givers)
(0.041)

0.848
(0.079)
0.816
(0.093)
0.528
(0.095)

Panel C. Sorting in fund-raiser with flyer
Increase in answering the door due to
altruism (sorting in)
Decrease in answering the door due to
social pressure (sorting out)

0.003
(0.001)
−0.018
(0.01)

0.007
(0.001)
−0.045
(0.01)

Note. Welfare, decomposition, and sorting are computed using estimates from minimum-distance
estimator with weights given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix (column (1) in Table IV).
The amount of money raised refers to the predicted amount given the estimated parameters. To compute
the salary cost of the solicitor we assume an hourly wage of $9.5 and 20 households reached in one hour
of fund-raising (25 in the opt-out treatment). We also assume that a solicitor flyers 70 households in one
hour.

(70 households per hour), the net amount raised is about the
same as in the baseline treatment in our estimates. A flyer with
opt-out is even more beneficial for the welfare of the households
visited, since the opt-out option eliminates the cost of sorting
out (conditional on seeing the flyer), and still makes it possible
to sort in. In addition, the opt-out option can increase net fundraising because it increases the number of households the solicitor can approach per hour. Hence, providing information about
an upcoming fund-raiser and allowing solicitees to sort out can
be a win-win solution for both the charity and the households
visited.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Panel A. Welfare
Welfare in standard (no-flyer) fund-raiser
Welfare per household contacted (in $)
Money raised per household contacted
Money raised per household, net of salary
Welfare in fund-raiser with flyer
Welfare per household contacted (in $)
Money raised per household contacted
Money raised per household, net of salary
Welfare in fund-raiser with opt-out
Welfare per household contacted (in $)
Money raised per household contacted
Money raised per household, net of salary

Minimum-distance
La Rabida charity
(1)

48

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

VI. ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
We discuss four alternative interpretations of our empirical
results.
Signaling of Quality of the Charity. Door-hangers are unusual in fund-raising campaigns. It is possible that they were
taken as a signal of the quality of the charity, even though we
made sure that they did not convey any different information than
presented in person. Toexplain our results, the door-hangers with
a Do-Not-Disturb box must have sent a more negative signal than
the standard door-hangers. Perhaps, the opt-out box signaled that
it was acceptable to avoid the fund-raiser. This explanation, however, does not obviously explain why the opt-out box is associated

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Decomposition of Giving and Sorting. We decompose the
observedgiving intogiving due toaltruism andgiving due tosocial
pressure, an exercise that is not possible using only the reducedform results. For the no-flyer treatment, which is representative of
a standard door-to-door campaign, we compute the counterfactual
giving with social pressure set to 0, holding the other parameters
at their benchmark estimates (Panel B of Table VI). Interestingly,
74.5% of the La Rabida donors and84.8% of the ECU donors would
give even without social pressure. These measures, however,
neglect a second effect of social pressure: a respondent who would
happily give, say, $2 in the absence of social pressure may feel
compelled by social pressure to instead give $5. To avoid this, she
may sort out.
Taking into account these distortions, the share of givers who
assign positive overall utility to the fund-raiser is 51.8% for La
Rabida and 52.8% for ECU. This result—that about half of the
observeddonors are not happy givers—is very robust (bottom rows
in Table V and Online Appendix Tables 3 and 4).
Next, we use the model to estimate the amount of sorting
into, and out of, answering the door in the flyer treatment (Panel
B of Table VI). Notice that the reduced-form estimates only
identify the sum of the two forces. Sorting in due to altruism is
limited, contributing on average to an increase in the probability
of answering the door of only 0.7% for La Rabida and 0.3% for
ECU. Sorting out, instead, is substantial, equal to 4.5% for La
Rabida and 1.8% for ECU. (There is less sorting out for the lessliked charity because the estimated social pressure cost is lower).

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

49

with a reduction in small donations, but not of large donations.
A change in perceived quality would presumably affect the whole
distribution of giving.

Dislike of Interaction with the Solicitor. A fund-raising visit
may lower the welfare of the solicitees even in the absence of
social pressure. Consider individuals who are altruistic toward
a charity but dislike interacting with solicitors, perhaps because
of the time involved. In a standard fund-raising campaign, these
individuals, faced with a surprise home visit, give to the solicitor.
In a campaign with a flyer, though, the individuals may avoid
the solicitor, or check the opt-out box, if the disutility from the
personal interaction is larger than the utility from giving. Hence,
this interpretation can explain the observed patterns of door
opening and giving. It even predicts that the opt-out effect is
concentrated among small giving, since a distaste for interaction
is more likely to outweigh the utility from giving a small amount.
This explanation shares several features with social pressure,
including the negative welfare implications of door-to-door campaigns. A key difference, however, separates the twoexplanations:
An altruistic donor who dislikes solicitors, when alerted of a
campaign by a flyer, should seek alternative ways to give that
do not involve personal interaction, such as via mail or Internet.
Instead, we observe no such substitution, as predicted by social
pressure.
Time Inconsistency. Our estimates use the sorting decision to
answer the door toestimate the preferences for giving. If the agent
is time-inconsistent—for example, likes giving when in a warm
state (e.g., when in a person-to-person interaction), but not in a

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Self- and Other-Signaling. Our model of social pressure assumes that individuals incur disutility when being ungenerous in
person, but not when avoiding a solicitor. A related explanation
is that individuals give to (costly) signal to themselves or to
others (the solicitor) that they are generous types (Bodner and
Prelec 2003; Benabou and Tirole 2006; Grossman 2010). To the
extent that avoiding a fund-raiser does not sendthe same negative
signal as an outright no, this explanation is very similar to the
one we propose. However, this explanation does not explain as
easily why so many households made use of the opt-out box,
which is a clear signal to the solicitor, as well as possibly to the
neighbors.

50

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

cold state (e.g., when reading a flyer)— we estimate the utility of
the ex ante self reading the flyer.
VII. CONCLUSION

26. The campaigns may still improve welfare overall if the charities spend the
money very effectively.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Are donations welfare-enhancing for the giver? We develop
a theoretical framework and an empirical design to measure two
reasons for giving: altruism and social pressure. As an illustration
of our methodology, we present a fieldexperiment that involves solicitors approaching thousands of households. We vary the extent
to which the households are informed of the fund-raising drive
ex ante and also conduct a complementary survey that varies
cash payments. This design allows us to structurally estimate the
parameters of interest.
We find evidence that both altruism and social pressure affect
door-to-door charitable giving. We estimate that about half of
donors would prefer not to be contacted by the fund-raiser either
because they would prefer not to donate, or because they would
prefer to donate less. We estimate a social pressure cost of turning
down a giving request of $1 to$4, depending on the type of charity.
As a result, the estimated average welfare effect of the door-todoor campaigns in our sample is negative.
If we take our fund-raising campaigns to be representative
of door-to-door solicitation, our results indicate that unsolicited
campaigns may lead to utility losses equivalent to hundreds
of millions of dollars for the givers.26 These results have implications for the optimal taxation regime of charitable giving,
as they suggest that high-social-pressure solicitations may be
welfare-decreasing for the giver. Although this could be used as
an argument to introduce a do-not-solicit or do-not-call list for
charities, our findings suggest a simple alternative: to provide
an opportunity to the households to sort or, even better, to
opt out.
In this article we focus on only one form of giving—door-todoor fund-raising—to showcase our approach. We conjecture that
our results are likely to extend to other high-pressure approaches
to raise money, such as phone-athons, charity banquets, auctions,
lotteries, and so on, but likely have less explanatory power with
lower-pressure approaches, such as mail solicitations.

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

51

VIII. MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX
0

s

)
ˉ ≡ vu0 (g(W−g
We define the three thresholds a
,
s ,G
−i )

a (S) ≡

a (S) ≡

 u0 (W−gs )−S
 v+0 (gs ,G )
−i

 u0 (W−gs )−S
v−0 (gs ,G

−i )

 0
 vu+0(W)−S
(0,G )
−i

 u0 (W)−S
v−0 (0,G

−i )

if u0 (W − gs ) ≥ S
if u0 (W − gs ) < S
if u0 (W) ≥ S
if u0 (W) < S

,

,

ˉ = a (0). The threshold
ˉ ≥ a (S) ≥ a (S) for a given S and a
with a
ˉ is always positive, while a (S) and a (S) can be negative for
a
high S.
LEMMA 1A (Giving in Person) For any a,there is a unique optimal
donation g∗ (a, S), conditional on being at home, which is
weakly increasing in a and takes the form: (i) g∗ (a, S) = 0 for
a ≤ a (S) ; (ii) 0 < g∗ (a, S) < gs for a (S) < a < a (S) ; (iii)
ˉ.
ˉ ; (iv) g∗ (a, S) > gs for a > a
g∗ (a, S) = gs for a (S) ≤ a ≤ a
Define am ≡ u0 (W)/θv+0 (0; G−i ), with am ≥ a (S) for all S.

LEMMA 1B (Giving via Mail) For any a and provided 0 < θ < 1,
there is a unique optimal donation via mail g ∗m (a) (conditional on not being at home), which is weakly increasing in
a and takes the form: (i) g∗m (a) = 0 for a ≤ am ; (ii) g∗m (a) > 0
for a > am ; (iii) for a ≤ a (S) , g∗ (a; S) = g∗m (a) = 0 and for
a > a (S) , g∗ (a; S) > θg∗m (a). If θ = 0, g∗m (a) = 0 for all a.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

In addition to presenting novel empirical findings, this article
alsodistinguishes itself because of its methodological contribution
of linking tightly a behavioral model with a field experiment
designed to test its predictions. We first developed the theoretical model, which then informed the nature of the experimental
treatments, and the experiments in turn informed the parameters
of the model. Most of the extant literature, instead, overlays the
structural model on experimental data already gathered. Our
approach enables parameter estimates and welfare evaluations
that complement the reduced-form evidence. We hope that future
research builds on this strategy to provide more evidence on
behavioral phenomena.

52

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Lemma 2 characterizes the solution for h∗ as a function of the
parameters a and S.

The next lemma refers to a0 (S) from Lemma 2. We break ties
by assuming that if the agent is indifferent between h=h0 and
h = 0, she does not opt out, that is, h = h0 .
LEMMA 3 (Opting Out). If S = 0, the agent never opts out. If S > 0,
the agent opts out for sufficiently low altruism, a < a0 (S).
Probabilities of Presence at Home and of Giving. Lemmas 2
and 3 implies that the probabilities of presence at home are
P(H)NF = h0 ,
P(H)F = (1 − r)h0 + r
P(H)OO = (1 − r)h0 + r

Z ∞

−∞
Z ∞
aOO

h∗ (a, S)dF,
h∗ (a, S)dF,

where aOO = −∞ for S = 0 and aOO = a0 (S) for S > 0.
Lemma 1Aa implies that the probabilities of giving in person are
P(G)NF = [1 − F(a (S) )]h0
P(G)F = (1 − r)[1 − F(a (S) )]h0 + r

Z ∞

h∗ (a, S)dF

P(G)OO = (1 − r)[1 − F(a (S) )]h0 + r

Z ∞

h∗ (a, S)dF.

a(S)

a0 (S)

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

LEMMA 2 (Presence at Home) For any a, there is a unique optimal
probability of being at home h∗ (a, S) that is weakly increasing
in a. For S = 0, h∗ (a, 0) = h0 for a ≤ a (0) and h∗ (a, 0) > h0
ˉ)
for a > a (0). For S > 0, there is a unique a0 (S) ∈ (a (S) , a
∗
∗
such that h (a, S) < h0 for a < a0 (S) , h (a0 (S) , S) = h0 , and
h∗ (a, S) > h0 for a > a0 (S).

Panel A: Fund-raising
moments
P(Home) no flyer
P(Home) flyer
P(Home) opt-out
P(opt out) opt-out
P(Giving) no flyer
P(Giving) flyer
P(Giving) opt-out
P(0<Giving<10), no flyer
P(0<Giving<10), flyer
P(0<Giving<10), opt-out
P(Giving=10), no flyer
P(Giving=10), flyer
P(Giving=10), opt-out
P(10<Giving<=20), no flyer
P(10<Giving<=20), flyer
P(10<Giving<=20), opt-out
P(20<Giving<=50), no flyer
P(20<Giving<=50), flyer
P(20<Giving<=50), opt-out
P(Giving>50), no flyer
P(Giving>50), flyer
P(Giving>50), opt-out
N

Charity

(2)
0.4137
0.3757
0.2917
0.1295
0.0665
0.0711
0.0629
0.0251
0.0227
0.0166
0.0205
0.0211
0.0189
0.0135
0.0167
0.0167
0.0072
0.0106
0.0106
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
N = 4962

0.4130
0.3733
0.3070
0.1202
0.0717
0.0699
0.0515
0.0245
0.0233
0.0163
0.0216
0.0200
0.0138
0.0137
0.0186
0.0083
0.0103
0.0078
0.0138
0.0016
0.0002
−0.0006
N = 4962

Estimated
moments

0.4171
0.3806
0.3281
0.0988
0.0455
0.0461
0.0272
0.0303
0.0268
0.0118
0.0051
0.0041
0.0014
0.0084
0.0125
0.0136
0.0020
0.0030
0.0008
−0.0003
−0.0002
−0.0005
N = 2706

(3)

Empirical
moments

Minimum-distance estimates

(1)

Empirical
moments

La Rabida charity

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Specification:

APPENDIX
EMPIRICAL MOMENTS AND ESTIMATED MOMENTS

ECU charity

0.4137
0.3989
0.2835
0.1336
0.0423
0.0451
0.0389
0.0271
0.0266
0.0204
0.0051
0.0056
0.0056
0.0081
0.0099
0.0099
0.0021
0.0030
0.0030
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
N = 2706

(4)

Estimated
moments

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

53

0.4137
0.3725
0.3891
0.3984
N = 1865

0.4138
0.3576
0.4118
0.4033
N = 1865

0.4009
0.3913
0.3812
0.3816
0.4038
0.4377
0.3427
0.3637
N = 10035

Moments 2009
No flyer $0, 5min
No flyer $5, 5min
Flyer $0, 10min
Flyer $0, 5min
Flyer $5, 5min
Flyer $10, 5min
Opt-out $0, 5min
Opt-out $5, 5min
N
0.1486
0.1246
0.1478
0.1729
0.2035
0.2558
0.1460
0.1745
N = 10035

0.1025
0.1025
0.1819
0.1720
N = 1865

(3)

Empirical
moments

0.1318
0.1576
0.1229
0.1646
0.1996
0.2373
0.1576
0.1920
N = 10035

0.1003
0.1230
0.1646
0.1873
N = 1865

(4)

Estimated
moments

P(Do survey)

Estimated
moments
(6)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0.1061
0.0982
N = 2704

(5)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0.1336
0.0846
N = 2704

P(Opt-out)
Empirical
moments

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Notes. The table presents the empirical moments and the estimated moments from a minimum-distance estimator. The empirical moments are obtained as regression estimates
after controlling for the randomization fixed effects and as such can occasionally be negative. The minimum-distance estimates are in Table IV, column (1).

0.4135
0.4135
0.3723
0.3889
0.4033
0.4193
0.3432
0.3605
N = 10035

(2)

(1)

Estimated
moments

Panel B: Survey moments
Moments 2008
No flyer $0, 10min
Flyer $0, 10min
Flyer $0, 5min
Flyer $10, 10min
N

Empirical
moments

P(Home)

APPENDIX
(CONTINUED)

54
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

TESTING FOR ALTRUISM AND SOCIAL PRESSURE

55

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, AND NATIONAL BUREAU
OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, AND NATIONAL BUREAU
OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

An Online Appendix for this article can be found at QJE
online (qje.oxfordjournals.org).
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115 (2000), 715–753.
Andreoni, James. “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(1989), 1447–1458.
———, “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
Giving.” The Economic Journal, 100(1990), 464–477.
———, “Philanthropy.” In Handbook of Giving, Altruism, and Reciprocity, SergeChristophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier, eds., 1201–1265. (Amsterdam:
Elsevier/North-Holland, 2006).
Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier, “Doing Good or Doing Well? Image
Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially.” American
Economic Review, 99(2009), 544–555.
Asch, Solomon E., “Effects of Group Pressure Upon the Modification and Distortion
of Judgment.” in Groups, leadership, and men. H. Guetzkow, ed. (Pittsburgh:
Carnegie Press, 1951).
Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of Social Interactions” Journal of Political Economy,
82(1974), 1063–1093.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American
Economic Review, 96(2006), 1652–1678.
Bodner, R. and Drazen Prelec, “The Diagnostic Value of Actions in a Self-Signaling
Model,” in The Psychology of Economic Decisions, Vol.1, I. Brocas and
J.D. Carrillo, eds., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003).
Card, David, Stefano DellaVigna, and Ulrike Malmendier, “The Role of Theory in
Field Experiments”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2011), 39-62.
Charness, Gary, and Matthew Rabin, “Understanding Social Preferences with
Simple Tests,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2002), 817–869.
Conlin, Michael, Ted O’Donoghue, and Timothy J. Vogelsang, “Projection Bias in
Catalog Orders,” American Economic Review, 97(2007), 1217–1249.
Croson, Rachel, and Jen Shang, “A Field Experiment in Charitable Contribution:
The Impact of Social Information on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods,”
Economic Journal, 119(2009), 1422-1439.
Dana, Jason D., Daylian M. Cain, and Robyn M. Dawes, “What you don’t know
won’t hurt me: Costly (but quiet) exit in dictator games,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100(2006): 193–201.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gächter, “Fairness and Retaliation—The Economics of
Reciprocity,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(2000), 159–181.
Fong, Christina, and Erzo Luttmer, “What Determines Giving to Hurricane
Katrina Victims? Experimental Evidence on Racial Group Loyalty,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2009), 64–87.
Garicano, Luis, Ignacio Palacios-Huerta, and Canice Prendergast, “Favoritism
Under Social Pressure,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2005):
208–216.

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

56

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Downloaded from http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/ at Serials Department on June 12, 2012

Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer, “Social Pressure
and Voter Turnout: The Results of a Large Scale Field Experiment.” American
Political Science Review, 102(2008), 33–48.
Grossman, Zack, “Self-Signaling versus Social Signaling in Giving,”UCSB Working paper, 2010.
Harbaugh, William T., “What do donations buy?: A model of philanthropy based
on prestige and warm glow,” Journal of Public Economics, 67(1998), 269–284.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “Estimating Discount
Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle,” Working paper,
2007.
Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and Nicholas Rupp,
“Towards an understanding of the economics of charity: Evidence from a field
experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2006), 747–782.
Lazear, Edward, Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto Weber,“Sorting in Experiments
with Application to Social Preferences,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, Forthcoming.
Levine, David K., “Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiment,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 1(1998), 593–622.
List, John A., and David Lucking-Reiley, “The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds
on Charitable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital
Campaign,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2002), 215–233.
Mas, Alexander, and EnricoMoretti, “Peers At Work,” American Economic Review,
99(2009), 112–145.
Milgram, Stanley., “Behavioral study of obedience,” Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 67(1963), 371–378.
Powell, M. J. D., “Variable Metric Methods for Constrained Optimization,” in
Mathematical Programming: The State of the Art, A. Bachem, M. Grotschel
and B. Korte, eds., 288–311 (New York: Springer Verlag, 1983).
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002).

