Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Heliyon
journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon

Review article

University brand: A systematic literature review
Xiao Yaping a, Nguyen Thi Thu Huong b, *, Nguyen Hoang Nam c, Phan Dinh Quyet d,
Cao Tuan Khanh e, Dao Thi Ha Anh f
a

School of Economics, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
VNU School of Interdisciplinary Studies, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Viet Nam
Falculty of Economics and Business, PHENIKAA University, Yen Nghia, Ha Dong, Hanoi, Viet Nam
d
Deputy Head of Department of External Affairs and Communication, Thuongmai University, Viet Nam
e
Head of Department, Faculty of Marketing, Thuongmai University, Hanoi, Viet Nam
f
VNU University of Economics and Business, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Viet Nam
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
University brand
Brand management
Brand positioning
University identification
Higher education marketing

Despite its significant role, brand management is an oft-overlooked and challenging aspect in the
development of academic institutions, especially in higher education context. Based on a sys­
tematic review of journal articles from various sources including ScienceDirect, Emerald Insight
and SpringerLink during the 2000–2021 period, the authors of this paper seek to identify, eval­
uate, and analyze university brand. After careful consideration of academic publications based on
their relevance for the research objectives, 43 articles have been included in this comprehensive
and integrative review. Special attention is paid to the theories underlying brand management,
brand positioning, brand identity of a higher education institution, marketing strategies, as well
as implications for management, students, and staff. Moreover, some valuable lessons which a
university can learn from a company in marketing are identified. Thereby, the competitive ad­
vantages of a university would be firmly enhanced. It is our hope that this paper will explore a
new path for further research and provide another perspective for administrators, authors and
practitioners in the area of university brand.

1. Introduction
Recently, universities have been developing better strategies for branding in response to growing global competitive challenges [1].
These challenge call for the adoption of a differential strategy in higher education institutions [2]. It is worth noting that higher
education is now widely referred to as a market by scholars from different backgrounds. There has been relatively fierce competition
for students’ enrollment among higher learning institutions [3]. To maintain the success and expansion of universities’ business, it is
imperative to develop and maintain a distinctive brand identity through overall branding strategy improvement [4,5]. Even though
previous studies show that universities pay a great deal of attention to their reputations, few demonstrate the implementation of
branding activities to meet with the growing challenges of the new era. Rarer still are studies that laid out strategies for brand
positioning and increasing brand presence, especially for universities with low reputational capital to attract new students and to
bolster the position of their brand identity as perceived by stakeholders (parents, students and employees). The race to the top of the
global leaderboard of higher educational institutions should rest upon the ability to effectively develop brand name recognition and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: huong1485.sis@vnu.edu.vn (N.T.T. Huong).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e16825
Received 2 March 2023; Received in revised form 25 May 2023; Accepted 30 May 2023
Available online 3 June 2023
2405-8440/© 2023 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

reputation, be it a national or international university.
Although there has been extensive research concerning the issue of university brand, the number of studies in this area is still
limited, especially those that focus on specific aspects of university brand. Among them are studies on the importance of university
brand [6,7], the perception of brand image and how to improve brand image [8], the factors of brand satisfaction [9], brand love and
brand loyalty [10], types of brand strategies and their influences on brand engagement [11], the role of brand identification [12],
brand equity [13], brand reputation [14] and other topics [15,16]. The effect of university brand on universities competitive
advantage is actually complicated and multi-dimensional but there has been no integrative and comprehensive approach to evaluate
the relationship between university brand and students’ perceived as well as brand positioning, brand identify and university mar­
keting communication. Therefore, based on a systematic literature review [17], the author hope to provide satisfactory answers to the
research questions below.
1) Which are the main theories applied in university brand research?
2) What are the related topics and key findings of these primary areas?
3) How does university brand affect students, employees and universities competitive advantage?
4) What are critical lessons from company brand marketing?
As presented above, this study not only pays little attention to the role of theories in university brand study, but there are also
analises characteristics and applications of these theories in increasing the university’s competitive advantage. In addition, a summary
of the related topics and key findings of these primary areas have figured out that the research on university brand is quite varied and
copious. More interesting, this paper pays special attention on analyzing the influence of university brand with varying mechanisms of
stakeholder’s perception about university brand. Finally, the article emphasised on the lessons from company brand marketing in
practice to position and communicate the university’s identity to the target audiences.
2. Methodology
This study employs a structured literature review to analyze university brand related issues. This approach is used to evaluate and
interpret a large number of articles of scientific journals [18]. A systematic review is useful as it helps construct a deeper and more
comprehensive narrative about the topic of interest [19]. More specifically, the process was conducted in the following steps.
2.1. Identification and selection of database
Articles utilized in the review were extracted from the following databases: ScienceDirect, Emerald Insight and SpringerLink. Our
search for articles, review articles and research articles in peer-reviewed journals in English during 2000–2021 using the keywords
‘‘university”, “brand’‘, returned 232,219 results. We narrowed the results to studies more relevant to the research topic by including
only articles with ‘‘university’’ and ‘‘brand’’ in the titles, returning 43 articles (Table 1). These studies were thoroughly analyzed.
2.2. Descriptive analysis
Fig. 1 reports the quantity of articles utilized from each journal. Among these, the International Journal of Educational Manage­
ment published the most papers on university brand, followed by the Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences. A total of 43 articles
published in 25 journals were included in this review. The brand, marketing and education-related journals were discussed exten­
sively. The remainder of the studies published more general subjects, such as reputation, social and behavioral sciences journals.
A comprehensive search of related existing literature from 2000 to 2021 was conducted as the focus of this study is to investigate
the evolution of research on university brand in the twenty-first century. As shown in Fig. 2, 2003 is the earliest year in which an article
included in the review was published. There was no article in our databases in the following eight years: 2000, 2001, 2002, 2005, 2008,
2012, 2013 and 2017. In 2016, the number of articles started to rapidly increase, but dropped again in 2018 and 2019, then reached a
peak of 8 articles in 2020. This pattern indicates that the topic of university brand topic has not attracted regular attention from
scholars.
Fig. 3 shows the different countries involved. We found that the large number of studies carried out in UK and multi-countries,
Table 1
Databases and search options.
Databases

Search options

ScienceDirect
Emerald Insight
SpringerLink
Total

121,790
39,000
71,429
232,219

• By keywords: ‘university’, ‘brand’
• Content type: Articles/Review articles and Research articles
• Year: From 2000 until 2021
• Language: English

2

• Advanced search: Title with ‘university’ and ‘brand’

10
20
13
43

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

Fig. 1. Number of articles used by journal.

Fig. 2. Evolution of the number of reviewed articles over time.

accounting for more than 70% of all articles referenced, but there is little research focused on developing countries in Asia. This can be
explained by the increased internationalization of universities, the need to address brand reputation, brand engagement in interna­
tional environment, service quality and brand personality arises.
3. Critical analysis and review of the current contributions
3.1. Major theories used in university brand research
Various theoretical approaches of university brand research have emerged throughout the period. This paper discusses most
common theories used in university brand literature (see Table 2). We focus on the brand equity theory and social theories in university
brand study such as social identity theory, social exchange theory, theory of social representations and theory of brand community,
because most existing literature fall under these theories based on our review. In addition, other theories that scholars employ in
university brand are also mentioned in this article.
3

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

Fig. 3. Countries studied in university brand.
Table 2
Theories used in university brand literature.
Theory

Key findings

Authors

Brand equity theory

University brand equity is constituted by various constructs, including students’ perceived quality, aware of the brand,
trust, loyal and brand association.
University brand identification is how a student perceives his or her sense of belonging or oneness with the university
as a result of their interaction with the organization. It is essential in reinforcing a student’s positive behaviors towards
the university.
Employing this theory to a better understanding of developing university brand as an employer rests upon an implicit
commitment to offer a unique employment experience to its staff with monetary and non-monetary compensation.
A brand is a social representation which enables the communication and interaction among social groups and the
establishment of tangent social constructs, such as once the university’s logo is deeply entrenched in stakeholders’
consciousness, it functions as a lens through which one may observe the brand and the connotations associated with
the organization.
A brand community is generated by the social bonds among a brand’s users through the acknowledgement of their
shared values, rituals, customs, and a sense of loyalty towards the brand. Nurturing and developing a university brand
community, and that they are more complete with a network that connects related institutions to students, as well as a
brand, its products, and services.
Theory of reasoned action discovers the association between university success and brand loyalty in terms of university
level and department level; The relationship between the actual service provided and the students’ experience as well
as their satisfaction are determined by the expectation disconfirmation theory; Need to belong theory provides a
theoretical foundation to explain why students develop relationship with other students and staff, who are involved in
university social augmenters, and what makes them invest and remain more time and effort in these relationships; Selfcongruity theory and self-concept motivations finds that value congruence has a significant positive impact on
behavioral outcomes, such as students’ trust, satisfaction, affective commitment and loyalty.

[20,21]

Social identity theory
Social exchange theory
Social representations
theory
Brand community theory

Other theories

[2,4,
22–24]
[25–29]
[12]

[30]

[2,5,8,23,
31]

3.1.1. Brand equity theory
According to Keller [32], brand equity associates with brand, brand name and logo, and significantly influences the value of
products or services. Consequently, consumers’ experience of the brand, including their discovery, feeling, received message and
interaction with its environment determine how powerful the brand is in the long run. Brand equity is a distinctive element of brand
recognition whereas recognizing a brand name positively influences consumers’ responses to the product or service [33,34]. Marketers
create brand equity by capitalizing on the brand’s superior quality, perceived social impacts, trustworthiness, and consumers’
self-identification with the brand [32,33,35]. As far as the market for higher education is concerned, general university brand equity is
constituted by various constructs, including how customers view an institution’s quality, to what degree they are aware of the brand,
whether they trust the brand and are loyal to it and what values the brand associate with [20]. These are the deciding factors in the
development of value and brand equity that contribute to students’ brand experience. Furthermore, according to Ng and Forbes [21]:
auxiliary services including enrollment protocol, payment options, campus facilities and students’ housing are all important in aug­
menting the core service experience. Although these supporting activities alone may not be sufficient in creating a superior university
experience, they are instrumental to achieving that objective and the two layers of activities (core and supporting) are intrinsically
intertwined in the creation of the entire university experience for users.

4

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

3.1.2. Social theories
3.1.2.1. Social identity theory. Ashforth and Mael [36] define identification as an individual’s self-association and integration within
an organization to such an extent that he or she perceives the organization’s accomplishments and failures as his or her own.
Accordingly, identification indicates the extent to which an organization exhibits and elevates an individual’s personality. The in­
dividual’s perception, understanding, and experience with the organization are deciding factors in measuring how strong the iden­
tification is [37]. In a later study, Wilkins & Huisman [38] indicated that brand identification is a perceptual concept that, at a
psychological level, demonstrates the integration of an individual’s character into that of an organization. From this perspective, brand
identification can extend to include persons who are not members of the organization. In the context of the higher education, brand
identification is essentially how a student perceives his or her sense of belonging or oneness with the university as a result of their
immediate interaction with the organization [4]. The common goals, identities, and values of the university and the students are
products of the positive correlation between their perceived attractiveness of the university’s identity and their identification with the
university [2,22,39]. Consequently, it is possible to formulate students’ attitudes and behaviors based on their identification with the
university. Students and alumni’ self-esteem and self-efficacy are affected by university identification which ultimately impacts their
goal-oriented behaviors [23,24]. Thus, university identification is essential in reinforcing a student’s positive behaviors towards the
university.
3.1.2.2. Social exchange theory. Developing university brand as an employer rests upon an implicit commitment [25–27] to offer a
unique employment experience to its staff with monetary and non-monetary compensation [40]. As the social exchange theory [28]
holds, an institution must show an obligation to provide personal and professional fulfillment and is reciprocated by employees
through high retention rate, superior performance, and a higher level of commitment [29,41].
3.1.2.3. Social representations theory. From a psychological standpoint, a brand is a social representation which enables the
communication and interaction among social groups and the establishment of tangent social constructs, such as products and services,
[42]. Consumer perceptions [43], brand positioning [44], and brand connections have all been studied using the theory of social
representations [45]. Both social representations and brand connections are used to arrange social objects to elicit communication and
establish a common vision. Erjansola et al. [12] use a free-association approach based on the social-representation paradigm to
investigate the associations produced by a university logo symbol. Once the university’s logo is deeply entrenched in stakeholders’
consciousness, it functions as a lens through which one may observe the brand and the connotations associated with the organization.
Nevertheless, it may be a time-consuming process to establish a connection between the logo and the brand.
3.1.2.4. Brand community theory. A brand community, according to Muniz and O’Guinn [46], is generated by the social bonds among
a brand’s users, notwithstanding their geographical location, through the acknowledgement of their shared values, rituals, customs,
and a sense of loyalty towards the brand. Intriguingly, scholars agree that it is possible to nurture and develop a brand community, and

Table 3
Primary areas of study and key findings.
Area of study

Number of
articles

Key findings

Authors

University brand

10

[3,5–7,15,
47–51]

Brand image

8

Outcome of brand
management
Brand strategy

8
8

Brand identification

8

Brand equity

5

Brand reputation

5

Brand engagement in
international environment
Service quality

5

Emphasizing the need for universities to understand brand concept and develop good
brand, which can benefit universities. Stating the measurements of evaluating brand
universities and many attributes of “good” university brand through interviewing students.
Identifying the perception of brand image and the attributes of brand image, and how to
improve brand image. Identifying the factors of brand image and the influence of brand
image on brand engagement.
Identifying the factors of brand satisfaction, brand love, and brand loyalty, such as brand
image, university service quality.
Identifying the necessary of a good brand strategy and demonstrating some brand
strategies and their influences on brand engagement, such as social media, library strategy
and employer strategy.
Stating the interpretation of brand identification and the role of brand identification on
brand engagement and outcome.
Identifying the importance of brand equity; Describing the dimensions of brand equity and
their relationships. Identifying the factors and the influence of brand equity on university.
Identifying the importance of brand reputation; Identifying the factors and the influence of
brand reputation on brand engagement.
Identifying the difficulties of brand engagement under international perception.

4

Brand personality
Employer branding

3
3

Identifying the importance of high service quality and the influence of service quality in
brand management.
Identifying the scale of brand personality and the factors of student satisfactions.
The influence of employer brand on brand management and the perception of employees
are congruent on employer brand across different situation.

5

[8–10,14,
52–55]
[8–10,15,27,
31,54,56]
[6,16,48,51,
57–60]
[2,4,12,23,52,
61–63]
[1,5,13,20,64,
65]
[8,14,50,56,
58]
[11,66–69]
[8,10,27,54]
[2,5,15]
[16,27,70]

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

that they are more complete with a network that connects related institutions to customers, as well as a brand, its products, and
services [30].
3.1.3. Other theories
Need to belong theory provides a theoretical foundation to explain why students develop relationship with other students and staff,
who are involved in university social augmenters, and what makes them invest and remain more time and effort in these relationships
[5]. Erdomuş et al. [31] demonstrate the association between university success and brand loyalty in terms of university level and
department level using the theory of reasoned action. Students’ attitudes of their department are positively influenced by teaching
personnel, graduate job opportunities, and course success. The teaching staff and the general atmosphere, however, influence students’
attitudes about universities. Panda et al. [8] employed the expectation disconfirmation theory to discover that if the gap between the
actual service provided and the students’ experience is negative, satisfaction decreases, and vice versa. A positive disconfirmation
binds a customer to a brand and encourages loyalty. Finally, self-congruity theory and self-concept motivations finds that value
congruence has a significant positive impact on behavioral outcomes, such as students’ trust, satisfaction, affective commitment and
loyalty [2,23].
In the following section, we focus on the primary areas of study and key findings related to the university brand.
3.2. Primary areas of research topics
Table 3 states a summary of the related topics and key findings of these primary areas.
The paper will stratify the results of the studies into the following points.
3.2.1. Brand image, outcome of brand management, brand strategy and brand identification
Most studies examine the factors of brand image, how to improve brand image and the influence of brand image on brand
engagement [8–10,14,52–55]. Moreover, some studies focus on the outcomes of brand management demonstrate the factors of brand
satisfaction, brand love, and brand loyalty [8–10,15,27,31,54,56]. In addition, brand strategy topics include some brand strategies and
their influence on brand engagement, such as social media, library strategy and employer strategy as well as managing brand inter­
nationally [6,16,48,51,57–60]. Finally, some researchers discover the impact of brand identification on prestige, interorganizational
and intraorganizational competition, and outcome of brand management (word-of mouth, active engagement and loyalty) [2,4,12,23,
52,61–63].
3.2.2. University brands assessment
Almost a quarter of the articles focused on the assessment of university brands and discovery of the characteristics of a “good”
university brand as well as the strategies for developing a university brand with high prestige [5,7,15,50,51]. Some studies also
emphasize the importance of university brand, which may influence the students’ satisfaction and benefit the universities themselves,
and devise some strategies to improve university brand, such as an adapted branding strategy in international market [6], establishing
a brand community with alumina [47], and applying social media to attract students [3].
3.2.3. Other respects
Besides, a variety of other topics were examined, such as: brand equity [1,5,13,20,64,65], brand reputation [8,14,50,56,58], brand
engagement in international environment [11,66–69], service quality [8,10,27,54], brand personality [2,5,15] and employer branding
[16,27,70]. Thus, it can be said that the research on university brand is quite diverse and abundant with many aspects exploited by
researchers.
Table 4
University brand influence.
University brand influence

Key findings

Authors

Improving students’ satisfaction, loyalty, trust,
and their behavioral intention
Attracting students and retaining employees

University brands influence students’ service quality trust, university reputation influence
students’ loyalty and thier behavioral intention.
Social responsibility, ethics, and professional development opportunities are principal
factors affecting the students’ choice of school. And employer image, recognition, upward
mobility, and job security are instrumental to maintaining a high retention rate of current
employees.
Awareness of the brand, perception of the quality, the association with the brand as well as
learning and emotional environment, brand trust, brand loyalty, and university reputation
advance students’ university learning experiences.
University branding plays a crucial role in reinforcing students’ association with the
university’s brand identity. They promote the university by disseminating positive wordof-mouth, engaging in recruitment activities, and wearing school-related attire.
University brands can support to control brand expectation by minimizing the discrepancy
between the university’s projected image and its impression on student.
University branding plays a crucial role in cementing competitive differentiation among
universities with regards to reputation, trustworthiness and attractiveness.

[1,8,13,30,54,
56]
[2,9,11,27,71]

Promoting students’ university learning
experiences
Enhancing students’ identification
Reducing the disparity between the university’s
and student’s expectation of the brand
Sustaining competitive advantage of the
universities

6

[1,5,59]
[2,4]
[8,55,72]
[8,14,15,50,
56,58,73]

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

4. University brand influence
University brand influence students, employees, and universities competitive advantage with different mechanisms of stake­
holder’s perception about university brand (see Table 4 and Fig. 4). Some of the major areas are reviewed hereafter.
4.1. Improving students’ satisfaction, loyalty, trust, and their behavioral intention
University brands influence students’ satisfaction, loyalty, trust, and behavioral intention. According to McAlexander et al. [48],
fostering loyalty leads to a good return on investment with regards to increased support for the university, as well as its products and
programs. Furthermore, authors have indicated that students’ satisfaction, service quality trust, and behavioral intentions are posi­
tively affected by the university’s brand image [8,54]. More interesting, there is a strong positive correlation between students’
sentimental connection with the institution and brand equity, student satisfaction as well as an improved sense of community [1,13].
Recently, Kaushal and Ali [56] argued that university reputation influence students’ loyalty both directly and indirectly through
satisfaction.

Fig. 4. University brand influence.
7

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

4.2. Attracting students and retaining employees
University branding plays a crucial role in attracting incoming students to the university, academic talent, international students
and retaining employees [9,11,27]. The papers by Basha et al. [11] discussed various aspects of international universities brands
including the main campus location, the offered academic programs and the employed delivery methods affecting students’ per­
ceptions, which is consistent with the findings from Hemsley-Brown and Oplatka [71]. Almost all authors agree that university brand
marketing strategies have made a significant contribution to attract international students. In addition, the position of the university in
national and international university rankings is also a principal factor affecting the students’ choice of school [2]. Furthermore, Alwi
et al. [9] and Yameen et al. [74] have found that an organization’s sense of social responsibility, ethics, and professional development
opportunities are essential in attracting academic talent, whereas employer image, recognition, upward mobility, and job security are
instrumental to maintaining a high retention rate of current employees.
4.3. Promoting students’ university learning experiences
According to Pinar et al. [1], influence students’ collective and/or individual university learning experiences are affected by several
aspects of university brand such as: awareness of the brand, perception of the quality, the association with the brand as well as learning
and emotional environment, brand trust, brand loyalty, and university reputation. Furthermore, students’ social experiences could
potentially be used to target incoming students as a pre-enrollment factor [5]. Participation in university co-curricular activities is one
of the most common things students post about their university experience on social media sites. Students frequently try to introduce
themselves to people in their social networks through this activity. Making a student’s identification with the university and its
co-curricular activities accessible to everyone in his or her social network may be interpreted as a public confession of love for the
university. Thus the interaction with potential students are beneficial to developing and reinforcing students’ positive behaviors to­
wards the university.
4.4. Enhancing students’ identification
Students’ identification with the university benefits from university brand reputation. Researchers have highlighted the role of
national and international rankings of universities as well as students’ perception of such rankings [2]. As a result, they promote the
university by disseminating positive word-of-mouth, engaging in recruitment activities, and wearing school-related attire. Further­
more, effective brand strategies can reinforce students’ and parents’ association with the university’s brand identity [4].
4.5. Reducing the disparity between the university’s and student’s expectation of the brand
Universities reinforce brand image by employing various information sources [72]. Brand management controls brand expectation
by minimizing the discrepancy between the university’s projected image and its impression on student [8]. Currently, the Covid-19
pandemic has necessitated the development and increased application of technological innovations, as the majority of higher edu­
cation institutions have initiative online outreach programs to create favorable e-word-of-mouth towards their brand image. In
addition, Shehzadi et al. [55] indicate that students’ e-learning process and their satisfaction are positively impacted by the quality of
information and telecommunication technology, e-service, and e-information. More interesting, other research results also determine
that electronic word-of-mouth and students’ satisfaction contribute to the improvement of the universities’ brand image.
4.6. Sustaining competitive advantage of the universities
Plummer [75] have indicated that consumers’ decision in selecting which brands to engage with is rooted in their view of the
brands’ character or brand personality. Understanding the concept of brand personality is useful in cementing competitive differ­
entiation among universities with regards to reputation, trustworthiness, attractiveness, liveliness, attention to detail, and cosmo­
politan dimensions [15]. [8,14,15,50,56,58,73]. In addition, recent studies indicate that the quality of higher education is an essential
element of country competitiveness [73].
5. University brand strategy
Branding is desired and more important to universities. Because branding theory has its origins in product marketing, the challenge
for higher educations may be that the application to education services is limited. This study pays special attention on analyzing the
critical lessons from company brand marketing. It considered timely and suitable in furthering understanding in the area of university
brand. The research outlines the brand positioning strategy, brand identify and marketing communication strategy in details hereafter.
5.1. Brand positioning strategy
In recent years, universities have focus on brand positioning as a significant piece of their strategic development plan [4,67].
Marketers use positioning techniques to ensure that their target audiences receive consistent brand messages [48]. Marketing prac­
titioner have increasingly relied on relationship-derived models and language to establish superior brands beyond mere positioning,
8

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

according to Ref. [76]. And to accomplish specific positioning statements, universities are increasingly investing in advertising,
marketing techniques such as logos, mascots as well as student activities, and facilities. In particular, university administrators in their
advisory capacity are well-positioned to identify the preferences and subtleties of a university brand community to ensure competitive
positioning strategies. Empathic awareness of customers’ demands, preferences, attitudes, and behaviors are required to effectively
establish brand community. A thriving brand community recognizes the community’s core values and rewards its members in a
manner that is compatible with the institution’s goals [48]. Furthermore, university social augments represent a cost-effective measure
in appealing to new students while fostering the brand’s positioning in the eyes of present students. Researchers also suggest university
administrators encourage students to share school-related contents including their co-curricular events on social media platforms as an
effort of brand identity positioning [5].
5.2. Brand identify and marketing communication strategy
While numerous studies show that university identification can positively influence students’ view of the university, few explore
how university identification elements and procedures are established, which has an impact on students’ behavior toward the uni­
versity [4]. The article written by Ali-Choudhury et al. [61] found that building a university brand makes sense for different potential
students, fulfilling this task while avoiding brand dilution and/or reducing its appeal to certain groups is a complicated problem and
needs to be prioritized to be solved. Moreover, brand identification has a positive effect on the brand-supportive behaviors of alumni.
To put it another way, higher education may have a distinct mission, a high-quality curriculum, well-trained faculty, and cutting-edge
technology, but universities are advised not to belittle students. Students’ perceptions of the university experience are shaped in part
by functional factors such as programs’ quality and staff qualifications [77], but also by on-campus social life [78] and university social
experience [79].
Dealing with the above issues, the authors recommend that higher education should establish and design prestigious extracur­
ricular activities for students, and create maximum conditions for interaction between regular students with high-quality students and
staff to increase the diversity of university social experiences [5,79]. Furthermore, through internal marketing communication ac­
tivities, university administrators should make every effort to boost the brand image of social enhancers. This can be accomplished by
communicating to the internal audience a strong, remarkable, and distinct brand identity of co-curricular activities through brand
marketing efforts (e.g., students). Through activities and experience provided by the university, students foster a personal bond with
the institution and as reciprocation engage in higher-level university-supporting behaviors, ultimately acting as genuine “university
ambassadors” [4]. Furthermore, brand and marketing managers should carefully evaluate their business environment while rede­
signing a visual identity [12]. Some authors recommend that institutions develop an integrated plan for implementing these brand
management operations so that the communications portray a consistent, distinctive, and appealing product [49,71,80]. Finally, brand
recognition should be monitored on a regular basis and factored into predictive modeling as part of institutional strategic planning
[23]. These implications for education managers since they can control the branding expenditures like communication spending, social
spending, and other brand-building investments towards university brand.
6. Discussion
Despite its crucial role and the monumental challenge it involves, brand management is often neglected in higher education
context. Existing related research has not adopted a comprehensive systematize perspective to analyze and discuss the theories used in
university brand research, the effect of university brand on students, employees and universities competitive advantage as well as the
effectually positioning and higher education marketing communication strategy. This study argues that the theory of brand equity by
Keller [32] and theory of social identity by Ashforth and Mael [36] are the most employed and thus most consequential in the area of
university brand. They focus on the student perceptions and their response to university brand. Thus, the complex psychological
process of students encourages further discussion of the brand management in higher education. This study pays special attention on
analyzing the effect of university brand on students, employees, and universities competitive advantage as well as their mechanisms.
With regard to students, university brands influence students’ satisfaction, loyalty, trust, and behavioral intention, while the effects of
university brands on employees has been growth opportunities and job security [8–10,15,27,31,54,56]. Further, it influences the
students’ university learning experiences and their identification [1,2,4,5], in this circumstance, more effort is needed on researchers’
part to study how brand strategies can actively foment the associations of the institution’s brand identity. Concerning to unceasingly
increase universities’ competitive advantage, based on the type of classification as academic or applied university, profit or non-profit
one, each university/college should pay enough attention to valuable lessons from corporate marketing.
7. Implications
This study provides an in-depth analysis and synthesis of the body of knowledge so far produced in the area of university brand. In
terms of implications for managers, this paper provides to the several critical lessons which a university can learn from industries to
apply in education markets. First, a university should consider behavioral aspects in its efforts to communicate the university’s identity
to the target audiences. A university’s identity is conveyed through messages displayed by the behavior of employee and management
as well as organizational approach to social and environmental issues. The behavioral aspect of a university’s identity mix elements
manifests in the university’s treatment of its employees and students, the representation of the university’s values by managers in the
media and public engagements, and the extent to which a university supports environmental and social causes.
9

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

Second, universities should focus on three main aspects of communication which require well-thought-out planning: 1) inter­
personal communication (word of mouth information from a contained environment); 2) intermediary communication (word of mouth
information disseminated by local mass media, governmental bodies; and 3) intrapersonal communication (psychological effect of past
experiences and deeply-entrenched images of the institution). Specifically, the effect of university brands on stakeholders is
complicated by the application of technology products in e-learning process, the national education brand program, and the public
policy perspective. This review highlights that managers is needed to garner deeper understanding about the characteristics of uni­
versities competitive advantage from difference aspects.
Third, positioning university decisions, brand identify and higher education marketing communication plans may also vary
depending on the difference in the each country’s macro environment, cultural and socio-economic conditions as well as the psy­
chophysiological characteristics of different types of students.
Fourth, the study explores in depth the different mechanisms of student’s perception about university brand, which points to the
fact that students’ satisfaction, service quality trust, and behavioral intentions are positively affected by the university’s brand image.
More importantly, a university does not only need to provide students a distinctive vision, high-quality curriculum, highly-trained
lecturer, highly advanced technology, but also to improve the social, academic, and psychological environment for them. In sum,
university need not only introduce strong strategies regarding their brand performances but also reevaluate comprehensively the
brand building and management activities, brand development policies and regulate their university brand strategies accordingly.
In terms of implications for scholars, apart from summarizing the related research on the brand management in higher education,
the paper stimulates future research a new issue that universities may face with their brand is the increasing importance of online
presence and reputation. With the rise of online education and remote learning, universities must ensure that their brand is effectively
represented on digital platforms. This includes having a user-friendly website, engaging social media presence, and positive online
reviews. Some research questions can be raised as.
- How does digital marketing affect the university brand, and how do students and stakeholders perceive the university brand
through digital channels?
- How do different stakeholders, such as students, faculty, staff, and alumni, perceive the university brand, and how can universities
develop a cohesive brand message that resonates with all stakeholders?
- How do universities maintain a consistent brand across different campuses, satellite locations, and online programs, and what
challenges do they face in doing so?
- What is the impact of the university brand on fundraising efforts, and how can universities build a stronger brand to attract more
donors and funding?
We hope that this paper will explore a new path for further research and provide another perspective for academics and practi­
tioners interested in the topics of university brand.
8. Conclusions
This study examined peer-reviewed journal articles from the ScienceDirect, Emerald Insight and SpringerLink database using a
structured literature review during the 2000–2021 period to identify, evaluate and analyze university brand. The main innovation is to
provide a comprehensive and systematic review of the current literature in university brand, while simultaneously exploring the
impact of existing research on branding university and brand management, especially brand positioning and communication strategy
for universities. As such, these findings enrich the extant knowledge on the brand management in higher education.
Despite our efforts, this study inevitably suffers from some limitations. First, concerning the identification and selection of data­
base, we are aware that there are articles we may have overlooked such as books, conference proceedings and other relevant sources in
the literature. Therefore, it is our hope that future work may use more established databases such as Ebsco, Pubmed, ProQuest etc., and
other reliable documents apart from journal articles for even more relevant and interesting studies. Second, many articles that we
analyzed are based in the UK and the USA. Thus, this limitation leaves room for improvement in future studies with a focus on other
parts of the world, especially in the developing countries in Asia. Third, higher education policies and strategies of governments and
institution all over the world have placed an increasing focus on interdisciplinarity, from the positioning, developing of brand identity
to overall brand management. Therefore, future study could classify brand issues approaches such as students, stakeholders, society,
law, policy, accounting, marketing etc. Certainly, this important topic should receive more attention by researchers in the future.
Author contribution statement
All authors listed have significantly contributed to the development and the writing of this article.
Data availability statement
Data included in article/supp. Material/referenced in article.

10

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

Additional information
Supplementary content related to this article has been publish online at [URL].
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper
References
[1] M. Pinar, T. Girard, C. Basfirinci, Examining the relationship between brand equity dimensions and university brand equity: an empirical study in Turkey, Int. J.
Educ. Manag. 34 (7) (2020) 1119–1141.
[2] R. Fazli-Salehi, M.R. Esfidani, I.M. Torres, et al., Antecedents of students’ identification with university brands: a study on public universities in Iran, Asia Pac. J.
Mark. Logist. 31 (4) (2019) 830–854.
[3] R. Rutter, S. Roper, F. Lettice, Social media interaction, the university brand and recruitment performance, J. Bus. Res. 69 (8) (2016) 3096–3104.
[4] M. Balaji, S.K. Roy, S. Sadeque, Antecedents and consequences of university brand identification, J. Bus. Res. 69 (8) (2016) 3023–3032.
[5] A. Eldegwy, T.H. Elsharnouby, W. Kortam, How sociable is your university brand? An empirical investigation of university social augmenters’ brand equity, Int.
J. Educ. Manag. 32 (5) (2018) 912–930.
[6] B.J. Gray, K. Shyan Fam, V.A. Llanes, Branding universities in Asian markets, J. Prod. Brand Manag. 12 (2) (2003) 108–120.
[7] B.S. Atmaja, A.S.L. Budi, The effect of brand DNA on the interactive marketing: perspective of junior lecturers from the faculty of economics of a catholic
university, Procedia-Social and Behav. Sci. 224 (2016) 459–466.
[8] S. Panda, S.C. Pandey, A. Bennett, et al., University brand image as competitive advantage: a two-country study, Int. J. Educ. Manag. 33 (2) (2019) 234–251.
[9] S. Alwi, N. Che-Ha, B. Nguyen, et al., Projecting university brand image via satisfaction and behavioral response: perspectives from UK-based Malaysian
students, Qual. Mark. Res. Int. J. 23 (1) (2020) 47–68.
[10] K.K. Twum, A.A. Yalley, G.K.-Q. Agyapong, et al., The influence of Public University library service quality and library Brand image on user loyalty, Int. Rev.
Public Nonprofit Mark. 18 (2) (2020) 207–227.
[11] N. Kamal Basha, J.C. Sweeney, G.N. Soutar, Evaluating students’ preferences for university brands through conjoint analysis and market simulation, Int. J. Educ.
Manag. 34 (2) (2020) 263–278.
[12] A.-M. Erjansola, J. Lipponen, K. Vehkalahti, et al., From the brand logo to brand associations and the corporate identity: visual and identity-based logo
associations in a university merger, J. Brand Manag. 28 (3) (2021) 241–253.
[13] T.A. Hanson, M.R. Bryant, K.J. Lyman, Intercollegiate athletic programs, university brand equity and student satisfaction, Int. J. Sports Mark. Spons. 21 (1)
(2020) 106–126.
[14] P. Foroudi, Q. Yu, S. Gupta, et al., Enhancing university brand image and reputation through customer value co-creation behaviour, Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change 138 (2019) 218–227.
[15] P.A. Rauschnabel, N. Krey, B.J. Babin, et al., Brand management in higher education: the university brand personality scale, J. Bus. Res. 69 (8) (2016)
3077–3086.
[16] A. Matongolo, F. Kasekende, S. Mafabi, Employer branding and talent retention: perceptions of employees in higher education institutions in Uganda, Ind.
Commerc. Train. 50 (5) (2019) 217–233.
[17] A. Fink, Conducting research literature reviews: from the Internet to paper, J. Adv. Nurs. 55 (6) (2010) 792.
[18] M. Rodgers, A. Sowden, M. Petticrew, et al., Testing methodological guidance on the conduct of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews: effectiveness of
interventions to promote smoke alarm ownership and function, Evaluation 15 (1) (2009) 49–73.
[19] T. Turzo, G. Marzi, C. Favino, et al., Non-financial reporting research and practice: lessons from the last decade, J. Clean. Prod. (2022) 131–154.
[20] M. Pinar, P. Trapp, T. Girard, et al., University brand equity: an empirical investigation of its dimensions, Int. J. Educ. Manag. 28 (6) (2014) 616–634.
[21] I.C. Ng, J. Forbes, Education as service: the understanding of university experience through the service logic, J. Market. High Educ. 19 (1) (2009) 38–64.
[22] B. Atmaja, A.S. Lukito-Budi, The effect of brand DNA on the interactive marketing: perspective of junior lecturers from the faculty of economics of a catholic
university, Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 224 (2016) 459–466.
[23] A.L. Stephenson, D.B. Yerger, Does brand identification transform alumni into university advocates? Int. Rev. Public Nonprofit Mark. 11 (3) (2014) 243–262.
[24] T. Porter, K. Hartman, J.S. Johnson, Books and balls: antecedents and outcomes of college identification, Res. Higher Educ. Journal 13 (2011) 1–14.
[25] M. Wallace, I. Lings, R. Cameron, et al., Attracting and Retaining Staff: the Role of Branding and Industry Image, Springer, 2014.
[26] A. Butt, R.N. Lodhi, M.K. Shahzad, Staff retention: a factor of sustainable competitive advantage in the higher education sector of Pakistan, Stud. High Educ. 45
(8) (2020) 1584–1604.
[27] M. Yameen, S. Bharadwaj, I. Ahmad, University Brand as an Employer: Demystifying Employee Attraction and Retention, Vilakshan-XIMB J. Manag. (2020).
[28] D. Hoppe, Linking employer branding and internal branding: establishing perceived employer brand image as an antecedent of favourable employee brand
attitudes and behaviours, J. Prod. Brand Manag. 27 (4) (2018) 452–467.
[29] C. Sheehan, T.L. Tham, P. Holland, et al., Psychological contract fulfilment, engagement and nurse professional turnover intention, Int. J. Manpow. 40 (1)
(2019) 2–16.
[30] J.H. McAlexander, H.F. Koenig, J.W. Schouten, Building a university brand community: the long-term impact of shared experiences, J. Market. High Educ. 14
(2) (2006) 61–79.
[31] İ. Erdoğmuş, S. Ergun, Understanding university brand loyalty: the mediating role of attitudes towards the department and university, Procedia-Social and
Behav. Sci. 229 (2016) 141–150.
[32] K.L. Keller, Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, fourth ed., Pearson, Boston, MA, 2013.
[33] K.L. Keller, Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity, J. Market. 57 (1) (1993) 1.
[34] W.G. Kim, H.-B. Kim, Measuring customer-based restaurant brand equity, Cornell Hotel Restaur. Adm. Q. 45 (2) (2004) 115–131.
[35] L. Schiffman, L. Kanuk, Consumer Behavior, ninth ed., Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2007.
[36] B.E. Ashforth, F. Mael, Social identity theory and the organization, Acad. Manag. Rev. 14 (1) (1989) 20–39.
[37] J.M. Balmer, M.N. Liao, Student corporate brand identification: an exploratory case study, Corp. Commun. Int. J. 12 (3) (2007) 356–375.
[38] S. Wilkins, J. Huisman, Student evaluation of university image attractiveness and its impact on student attachment to international branch campuses, J. Stud.
Int. Educ. 17 (5) (2013) 607–623.
[39] J.E. Cameron, Social identity and the pursuit of possible selves: implications for the psychological well-being of university students, Group Dynam.: Theory, Res.
Pract. 3 (3) (1999) 179.
[40] T. Ambler, S. Barrow, The employer brand, J. Brand Manag. 4 (3) (1996) 185–206.
[41] P. Blau, Exchange and Power in Social Life, Wiley, New York, 1964.
[42] B. Schmitt, The consumer psychology of brands, J. Consum. Psychol. 22 (1) (2012) 7–17.
[43] K. Roininen, A. Arvola, L. Lähteenmäki, Exploring consumers’ perceptions of local food with two different qualitative techniques: laddering and word
association, Food Qual. Prefer. 17 (1–2) (2006) 20–30.

11

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

[44] A.-M. Lebrun, L. Souchet, P. Bouchet, Social representations and brand positioning in the sporting goods market, Eur. Sport Manag. Q. 13 (3) (2013) 358–379.
[45] G. Michel, N. Donthu, Why negative brand extension evaluations do not always negatively affect the brand: the role of central and peripheral brand associations,
J. Bus. Res. 67 (12) (2014) 2611–2619.
[46] A.M. Muniz, T.C. O’guinn, Brand community, J. Consum. Res. 27 (4) (2001) 412–432.
[47] C. Jevons, Universities: a prime example of branding going wrong, J. Prod. Brand Manag. 15 (7) (2006) 466–467.
[48] J.H. McAlexander, H.F. Koenig, J.W. Schouten, Building relationships of brand community in higher education: a strategic framework for university
advancement, Int. J. Educ. Adv. 6 (2) (2006) 107–118.
[49] D.L. Bunzel, Universities sell their brands, J. Prod. Brand Manag. 16 (2) (2007) 152–153.
[50] C.-V. Priporas, I. Kamenidou, Perceptions of potential postgraduate Greek business students towards UK universities, brand and brand reputation, J. Brand
Manag. 18 (4) (2011) 264–273.
[51] B. Šramová, Brand engagement for university students in depending on the structure of values, Procedia-Social and Behav. Sci. 174 (2015) 2519–2523.
[52] C. Brandt, C.P. De Mortanges, City branding: a brand concept map analysis of a university town, Place Branding and Public Diplomacy 7 (1) (2011) 50–63.
[53] J. Plungpongpan, L. Tiangsoongnern, M. Speece, University social responsibility and brand image of private universities in Bangkok, Int. J. Educ. Manag. 30 (4)
(2016).
[54] P. Sultan, H.Y. Wong, How service quality affects university brand performance, university brand image and behavioural intention: the mediating effects of
satisfaction and trust and moderating roles of gender and study mode, J. Brand Manag. 26 (3) (2019) 332–347.
[55] S. Shehzadi, Q.A. Nisar, M.S. Hussain, et al., The role of digital learning toward students’ satisfaction and university brand image at educational institutes of
Pakistan: a post-effect of COVID-19, Asian Educ. Dev. Stud. 10 (2) (2020) 276–294.
[56] V. Kaushal, N. Ali, University reputation, brand attachment and brand personality as antecedents of student loyalty: a study in higher education context, Corp.
Reput. Rev. 23 (4) (2020) 254–266.
[57] C.H. Bélanger, S. Bali, B. Longden, How Canadian universities use social media to brand themselves, Tert. Educ. Manag. 20 (1) (2014) 14–29.
[58] C. Chapleo, Interpretation and implementation of reputation/brand management by UK university leaders, Int. J. Educ. Adv. 5 (1) (2004) 7–23.
[59] M. Lobban, ILL, a dying breed or a new brand? The experience of Edinburgh University, Interlend. Document Supply 34 (1) (2006) 15–20.
[60] S.M. Valitov, University brand as a modern way of winning competitive advantage, Procedia-Social and Behav. Sci. 152 (2014) 295–299.
[61] R. Ali-Choudhury, R. Bennett, S. Savani, University marketing directors’ views on the components of a university brand, Int. Rev. Public and Nonprofit Market. 6
(1) (2009) 11.
[62] A. Brewer, J. Zhao, The impact of a pathway college on reputation and brand awareness for its affiliated university in Sydney, Int. J. Educ. Manag. 24 (1) (2010)
34–47.
[63] N.G. Bagautdinova, Y.N. Gorelova, O.V. Polyakova, University management: from successful corporate culture to effective university branding, Procedia Econ.
Finance 26 (2015) 764–768.
[64] R. Whisman, Internal branding: a university’s most valuable intangible asset, J. Prod. Brand Manag. 18 (5) (2009) 367–370.
[65] M. Pinar, P. Trapp, T. Girard, et al., Utilizing the brand ecosystem framework in designing branding strategies for higher education, Int. J. Educ. Manag. 25 (7)
(2011) 724–739.
[66] R. Sidhu, The ‘brand name’research university goes global, High Educ. 57 (2) (2009) 125–140.
[67] C. Chapleo, What defines “successful” university brands? Int. J. Public Sect. Manag. 23 (2) (2010) 169–183.
[68] M. Lobban, ILLiad and the New Brand of ILL Service in the University of Edinburgh, Interlending & document supply, 2011.
[69] P.D. Nguyen, L.T.T. Tran, J. Baker, Driving university brand value through social media, Technol. Soc. 65 (10) (2021) 15–88.
[70] A.L. Stephenson, A. Heckert, D.B. Yerger, College choice and the university brand: exploring the consumer decision framework, High Educ. 71 (4) (2016)
489–503.
[71] J. Hemsley-Brown, I. Oplatka, Universities in a competitive global marketplace: a systematic review of the literature on higher education marketing, Int. J.
Public Sect. Manag. 19 (4) (2006) 316–338.
[72] C.W. Yoo, G.L. Sanders, J. Moon, Exploring the effect of e-WOM participation on e-Loyalty in e-commerce, Decis. Support Syst. 55 (3) (2013) 669–678.
[73] C. Baumann, H. Winzar, The role of secondary education in explaining competitiveness, Asia Pac. J. Educ. 36 (1) (2016) 13–30.
[74] M. Yameen, S. Bharadwaj, University brand as an employer: demystifying employee attraction and retention, Vilakshan - XIMB J. Manag. 18 (1) (2020) 26–41.
[75] J.T. Plummer, Brand personality: a strategic concept for multinational advertising, in: Marketing Educators’ Conference, Young & Rubicam, New York, 1985,
p. 31.
[76] D.A. Aaker, Building Strong Brands, Free Press, New York, NY, 1996.
[77] R. Yuan, M.J. Liu, J. Luo, et al., Reciprocal transfer of brand identity and image associations arising from higher education brand extensions, J. Bus. Res. 69 (8)
(2016) 3069–3076.
[78] B.A. Vander Schee, Students as consumers: programming for brand loyalty, Serv. Market. Q. 32 (1) (2010) 32–43.
[79] A. Palmer, N. Koenig-Lewis, Y. Asaad, Brand identification in higher education: a conditional process analysis, J. Bus. Res. 69 (8) (2016) 3033–3040.
[80] E. Anctil, Recommendations for selling higher education, ASHE High. Educ. Rep. 34 (2) (2008) 89–98.
Xiao Yaping is lecturer in School of Economics at Central South University of Forestry and Technology. She researches in the areas of investors’ behavior and con­
sumers’ behavior. Her works have published in internationally recognised journals such as Journal of Business Economics and Management; Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence; Sustainability.
Postal address: School of Economics, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China [Postal Address, No.498 South Shaoshan
Street, Changsha City, Hunan province, 410,004, China]; Email: xiaoyaping@hnu.edu.cn
Nguyen Thi Thu Huong is lecturer in green marketing and brand management at Vietnam National University, Hanoi. She teaches and publishes in the areas of green
consumption, brand management, greenwashing behavior and marketing ethics. Her research has appeared in internationally recognised journals such as Journal of
Business Economics and Management; Ciencia e Tecnica Vitivinicola; Journal of Asian Finance, Economics and Business; and Sustainability. She also received invitation
to review manuscript for some journal such as Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, Journal of Environmental Planning and Management and International
Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research and Journal of distribution science.
Postal address: VNU School of Interdisciplinary Studies, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam [Postal Address: 144 Xuan Thuy Street, Cau Giay District,
Hanoi City, 113,000, Vietnam]; Email: huong1485.sis@vnu.edu.vn; Telephone number: +84966076688
Nguyen Hoang Nam is a Ph.D in applied economics in 2019 from Hunan University, China. He is specialized in both economics and business. For now, He is working as
a dean of faculty of banking and finance in Dai Nam university in Hanoi, Vietnam. So far, He had published 3 papers on business and economics in ISI journals.
Postal address: Falculty of Economics and Business, PHENIKAA University, Yen Nghia, Ha Dong, Hanoi City, 12,116, Vietnam. Email: nam.nguyenhoang@
phenikaa-uni.edu.vn; Telephone number: +840866496873; ORCID: 0000-0002-3726-7986
Phan Dinh Quyet is Deputy Head of Department of External Affairs and Communication, Thuongmai University, Hanoi, Vietnam. His research focuses on sustainable
strategy, consumer behavior, marketing, logistics and supply chain. He has participated in several research projects funded by universities, ministries and provinces in
Vietnam.

12

Heliyon 9 (2023) e16825

X. Yaping et al.

Postal address: Deputy Head of Department of External Affairs and Communication, Thuongmai University, Vietnam [Postal Address: 79 Ho Tung Mau Street, Mai
Dich Ward, Cau Giay District, Hanoi City, 122,868, Vietnam]; Email: quyetphan@tmu.edu.vn
Cao Tuan Khanh is Associate Professor working for Faculty of Marketing, Thuongmai University, Hanoi, Vietnam. His research orientation focuses on marketing
management, marketing strategy, sustainable consumer behavior, food consumption and green marketing. He has had papers published on internationally recognised
journals such as International Journal of Marketing Studies, Journal of Consumer Behavior, Sustainability, Foods, Strategic Direction and Publishing Research Quar­
terly. He has managed several research projects funded by universities and ministries of Vietnam.
Postal address: Head of Department, Faculty of Marketing, Thuongmai University, Hanoi, Vietnam [Postal Address: 79 Ho Tung Mau Street, Mai Dich Ward, Cau
Giay District, Hanoi City, 122,868, Vietnam]; Email: khanhct@tmu.edu.vn
Dao Thi Ha Anh is a Doctor of Business Administration working for Faculty of Business Managemnet, University of Economics and Business, Vietnam National Uni­
versity, Hanoi, Viet Nam. Her research orientation focuses on brand management, marketing strategy & services, consumers’ behavior and loyalty. She has had papers
published on internationally recognised journal such as International Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research. Besides, she also consulted on marketing for some
companies in Vietnam such as Smiletech Digital Technology Joint Stock Company and ICT Law International Law Firm.
Postal address: VNU University of Economics and Business, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam [Postal Address: 144 Xuan Thuy Street, Cau Giay District,
Hanoi City, 113,000, Vietnam]; Email: Daohaanh@vnu.edu.vn

13

