Eliciting consumer engagement, experience, and value co-creation to foster consumerbased-brand-equity in service context: Moderation of perceived-health-beliefs

Mir Shahid Satar
Assistant Professor, College of Administrative and Financial Sciences, Saudi Electronic University,
Saudi Arabia, Riyadh
m.satar@seu.edu.sa
Raouf Ahmad Rather (Corresponding Author)
Scientific Independent Researcher, J&K, India
r.raouf18@gmail.com
Shakir Hussain Parrey
DST-CSRI Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Management Studies, Central University of Kashmir
shakirparray@kashmiruniversity.ac.in

Huda Khan
Senior Lecturer, Marketing
Africa-Asia Centre of Sustainability Research, University of Aberdeen
Business School
King’s College, AB24 3FX
Aberdeen, United Kingdom
huda.khan@abdn.ac.uk
Tareq Rasul
Senior Lecturer, Australian Institute of Business, Department of Marketing, 27 Currie Street,
5000 Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
tfrasul@gmail.com

Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Conflict of interest: None.
Acknowledgments: None.

Eliciting consumer engagement, experience, and value co-creation to foster consumerbased-brand-equity in service context: Moderation of perceived-health-beliefs

Abstract
Although consumer-brand-engagement (CBE) and consumer-brand-experience (CBX) are
identified as important research priorities, empirically-based insights regarding their relationship
with tourism-consumers’ resulting consumer-value cocreation (CVC), emotional-attachment and
consumer-based-brand-equity (CBBE) remains scant, particularly during COVID-19 pandemic.
In responding to this research gap, following Service-Dominant-Logic and ProtectionMotivation-informed theories, we propose and test a model that explores the influence of CBE
and CVC on CBX, which consequently effects emotional-attachment and CBBE with tourism
service-brands. To explore such issues, we recruit a sample of 318 customers by using PLSSEM. PLS-SEM-results indicate that CBE has a positive impact on CVC and CBX. Second,
findings reveal CBX’s positive influence on emotional-attachment and CBBE. Third, results
corroborated the CBE’s and CVC’s indirect effect on emotional-attachment and CBBE, as
mediated through CBX. Finally, findings illustrated a negative moderating influence of
perceived-severity and positive moderating effect of self-efficacy among projected associations.
We offer significant theoretical/managerial implications that develop from this study.

Keywords: Consumer brand engagement; consumer value co-creation; consumer brand
experience; consumer-based brand equity; perceived severity; service context.

激发消费者参与、体验和价值共同创造，在服务环境中促进以消费者为基础的品牌公平
：适度感知健康信念

摘要
虽然消费者品牌参与（CBE）和消费者品牌体验（CBX）被认为是重要的研究重点，但
基于经验的关于它们与旅游消费者产生的消费者价值协同（CVC），情感依恋和消费者
品牌资产（CBBE）的关系的见解仍然很少，特别是在COVID-19大流行期间。
为了回应这一研究差距，我们提出并测试了一个模型，探讨了CBE和CVC对CBX的影响
，从而影响了情感依恋和CBBE与旅游服务品牌的影响。为了探讨这些问题,我们使用PLSSEM招募了318个客户的样本.

PLS-SEM-结果表明CBE对CVC和CBX具有积极影响。

其次，研究结果揭示了CBX对情绪依恋和CBBE的积极影响。第三，结果证实了CBE和C
VC通过CBX介导的对情绪依恋和CBBE的间接影响。最后，研究结果表明，在预测的关
联中，感知严重程度的负面调节影响和自我效能感的积极调节作用。我们提供了从这项研
究中发展起来的重要理论/管理含义。
关键词：消费者品牌参与；消费者价值共同创造；消费者品牌体验；基于消费者的品牌
资产；感知严重性；服务环境。

Introduction
Service industries, involving tourism destinations/sites are still confronting substantial challenges
in view of global COVID-19 pandemic (UNWTO, 2022). It is due to pandemic, consumer’s
engagement, experience, behaviour, and/or attitudes have altered with how services are delivered
and designed during and/or after-pandemic (Cambra-Fierro et al., 2022b; Miao et al., 2022;
Prentice et al., 2021). In this context, the related and key issues of consumer engagement,
experience and value co-creation have been constantly the consideration and attention of scholars
in the service marketing and tourism fields (Kumar, Panda, & Adhikari, 2022; Kumar et al.,
2019; Rather et al., 2019). Specifically, consumer brand engagement (CBE), as part of consumer
engagement, plays a critical role in the tourism and/or service marketing literature (Addo et al.,
2021; Flavián et al., 2020; Hollebeek et al., 2014; Kabadayi, Aksoy, & Turkay, 2022; Rather et
al., 2021). Thus, this research is inspired by the increasing significance on both the practical
suggestions of Marketing Science Institute (2020), to conduct further research on this subject,
and the academic field (see also, Hollebeek et al., 2021a; Lim et al., 2021). For example,
Algharabat et al. (2020) investigated the importance of consumer’s participation and
involvement on CBE, which in turn affects brand equity among mobile-phone service providers.
Algharabat et al. (2020) claim that understanding of CBE is at an initial stage and thereby more
research is needed in different nomological network models and different cultural contexts (Park
& Gong, 2023; Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022).
Second, while, in conceptual study Shoukat and Ramkissoon (2022) argue that customer
engagement is useful in generating customer experience and revisit intent with the hospitality
industry, concerned visitors in outbreak may be mostly propelled by safety problems (Huang &
Jahromi, 2021). As one more example, Kabadayi et al. (2022) understand the role of
customer/brand love in steering consumer engagement/experience towards restaurant brands,
which, during the pandemic might be superseded (balanced) through variables encompassing the
tourism/destination brand’s perceived-severity, self-efficacy, or protection. That is, during such
COVID-19-crises, customer engagement and behaviour has been anticipated to reveal different
or typical dynamics (like, by displaying high perceived-severity/risk; Han et al., 2022; Zheng et
al., 2021), thereby, expected to challenge several insights documented in research within regular
market contexts or (pre-pandemic) times, and warranting more exploration.

Third, in tourism service brand contexts, Chen et al. (2021) and Harrigan et al. (2019)
argued that CBE is a contemporary topic, and additional exploration is needed owing to its
substantial role in strategic brand decision making (Pansari & Kumar, 2017; So et al., 2020b).
Recently, Kumar et al. (2022) and Wongsansukcharoen (2021) asserts that, CBE in tourism is
still un-explored, and consequently warrants more investigation, particularly during pandemicinduced situations and contexts (Miao et al., 2022; Rather, 2021). Existing literature in the
pandemic-induced tourism industry leads to remark that it has never been tested the effects of
CBE and consumer value co-creation (CVC) on consumer brand experience (CBX), which
consequently effects (post)-consumption behaviors (i.e., emotional attachment/EA, and
consumer-based brand equity/CBBE in pandemic. Further, though few scholars have explored
the impact of CBE on various marketing variables including social interactivity or loyalty (Addo
et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022; Rather et al., 2019), brand associations, awareness and perceived
quality (Algharabat et al., 2020) customer brand relationships (Hollebeek et al., 2014),
satisfaction/trust (Rather et al., 2018; So et al., 2020a), limited agreement exists regarding the
tourism-based CBE’s effect on CVC and CBX in fostering consumer’s emotional attachment and
CBBE during (vs. pre-) COVID-19 pandemic, as explored here. Moreover, this research would
contribute a value by determining and testing the key consequences of CBE in a developing
country, wherein no study have tested such related issues in pandemic times. Thus, by
investigating the dynamics and consequences of CBE in pandemic, we anticipate this study
would provide strategic, novel insights.
Fourth, consumer brand experience and CBBE have disseminated in marketing research
and practice (Algharabat et al., 2020; Bianchi et al., 2014; Lemon & Verhoef, 2017; Rather et al.,
2021). CBX and CBBE have been argued to encourage better firm performance and consumer’s
lifetime value, informing top managerial preferences (Aaker, 1991; Arici et al., 2022; Homburg
et al., 2016). Though, debate surrounds CBX’s conceptualisation pertaining to interrelatedmarketing variables (like CBE/CBBE; Iglesias et al., 2020; Lemon and Verhoef, 2017), and
measurement (Brakus et al., 2009; Cambra-Fierro et al., 2022a). Taking into account, Taheri et
al. (2019) and Lemon and Verhoef (2017, p. 85) admit the call for “to explore how existing
marketing factors, like consumer brand engagement [or] equity ... relate to consumer
experience,” as examined in pandemic (tourism)-service context (Huang & Jahromi, 2021; Li et
al., 2022).

Fifth, despite the extensive set of literature concerning perceived health/pandemic linked
crises employing diverse theories or empirical contexts (Cambra-Fierro et al., 2022b; Ren et al.,
2022), the impediment of COVID-19 pandemic affirms to revisit pandemic response strategies
(Itani & Hollebeek, 2021; Prentice et al., 2021). Pandemic/health beliefs like protection
motivation theory (PMT)-based threat (e.g., perceived-severity) and coping- (e.g., self-efficacy)
appraisal halt tourist-destinations in many nations (Zheng et al., 2021). The distressing pandemic
impacts also need destination (tourism) managers to re-design the health beliefs, CBE, CBX and
CBBE, which are known as the fundamental facets of tourism and service industries, or service
brands (Hollebeek et al., 2021b; Miao et al., 2022) during (vs. pre) pandemic.
In responding the aforementioned research gaps, the present study generates following
key contributions to service marketing and tourism literature. First, as noted earlier, regardless of
the growing insights of CBE/CBX in marketing (Islam et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2022; So et al.,
2020a), limited remains known concerning the effect of tourism-based CBE on CBX and CVC
during (vs. pre) pandemic (Hollebeek et al., 2021b; Miao et al., 2022; Shoukat & Ramkissoon,
2022). Investigating the effect of CBE on CBX and CVC is important, as prior service/tourisminduced research has hardly considered such factors in isolation, analysis of these relations lags
behind, thus, warranting additional research during (vs. pre-) pandemic tourism service brands.
Second, this study identifies tourism-induced CBX to have positive influence on the
improvement of emotional attachment and CBBE, underscoring CBX’s crucial role during the
outbreak to deal with tourism/destination brands. Third, this study determines CBX’s key
mediating role in effecting the links between CBE/EA, CBE/CBBE, CVC/EA and CVC/CBBE
in pandemic, thus broadening Algharabat et al. (2020), Kumar et al. (2022), Omar et al. (2022)
and Rather et al. (2021). Fourth, this study further explores the moderating roles of
health/pandemic-related beliefs (self-efficacy and perceived-severity) on associations relating
CBX/emotional attachment, and CBX/CBBE, revealing a specific key managerial insight.
Thus, this research adds to promising area of tourism/destination branding by addressing
the key gaps in existing research with reference to Indian destinations/sites. It is important as
tourism industry augments a leading contribution to GDP in this region (Rather, 2017, 2020).
The present research was performed at ending 2021. During the December/January months due
to the festive excitement of New Year and Christmas celebrations, the destinations/sites

witnessed the highest-ever visitors (Financial Express, 2022). To estimate the research
hypotheses, we adopted PLS-SEM on a sample of 318 visitors. Finally, following PLS-SEMbased results, tourist-destination managers and marketers can increase emotional attachment and
CBBE to attract tourist flows through activities, which encourage the CBE, CBX and value cocreation, thereby spawning imperative managerial implications with tourism service brands.
Theoretical background and hypotheses development
Service dominant logic perspective
In tourism and marketing literature, unlike goods-dominant logic (GDL), service dominant logic
(SDL)-informed lens is considered as an underlying research perspective, which proposes a
service-driven comprehension of exchange (Park & Vargo, 2013). Vargo and Lusch (2004, p. 2)
propose central propositions of SDL-perspective as, ‘intangibility, exchange processes, and
relationships are central’ which are especially applicable in tourism/destination marketing
(Blazquez-Resino et al., 2016). In tourism environment, SDL provides a crucial significance to
process of (value)-creation that include the consumer as a (co)-creator of value and/or direct
stakeholder (Font et al., 2021). Tourism/destination ecosystem is rooted in tourist’s experience,
suggesting that destination providers/brands and tourists interact strongly at each phase of their
relationship/s (Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022). The transformation to tourism-products/services
based on customer experiences, related to Pine and Gilmore’s (1999) concept of experience
economy.
The particular perspective realizes the active/dynamic participation (engagement) of
consumers in improvement of their individual-based experience, where value has been shaped
while interacting with destination/tourism brands’ resources (Font et al., 2021; Blazquez-Resino
et al., 2016). This perspective emphasizes consumer-brand relationship due to dialog and
interaction (Shaw et al., 2011). Against this background, SDL presents a theoretical framework
that would help destination brands/firms to build a cutthroat benefit and to identify how the
tourist is becoming fundamental in the development of destination brand in increasing valuecocreation, experience, and consequent brand equity (Rihova et al., 2018).

Effect of consumer-brand-engagement on consumer brand experience
SDL-informed CBE is defined as the degree of emotional (passion), cognitive (knowledge), and
behavioral (activation) investment into specific brand interactions/connections (Hollebeek et al.,
2019b). Pansari & Kumar (2017) refer CBE as a mechanics of consumer’s value addition
towards brand/firm, either due to direct or indirect contributions. In tourism-marketing literature,
adoption of strategic-CBX focus is broadly encouraged (Chen et al., 2021; Hao, 2020; Rather &
Hollebeek, 2021; So et al., 2020a, b). CBX is consumer’s perception of emotional, sensory, and
cognitive consequences of interactions towards the service brands/firms (Barnes et al., 2014;
Kumar et al., 2022; Rather et al., 2021). The consumer is intellectually, emotionally, physically
and spiritually involved by influential elements (Brakus et al., 2009; Homburg et al., 2016).
Consumer brand experience includes consumers’ entire purchase journey encompassing
pre, intra, and/or post- purchase phases (Arici et al., 2022; Lemon & Verhoef, 2017; Jaziri &
Rather, 2022). While comparing the scope of CBE, which is limited to client’s (intra)interaction-based dynamics, existing research including Hollebeek et al. (2014) arguing CBE as a
driver of CBX (see also, Khan et al., 2019). Moreover, Shoukat and Ramkissoon (2022) in their
conceptual study proposed that consumer’s (intra)-interaction engagement increases their (trans)interaction experiences as it progresses alongside CBX-journey (Khan et al., 2022). For that
reason, excessive and frequent-interactions, CBE’s (intra)-interaction strengthens clients brand
experience journey; Jeong & Shin, 2020; Rather & Ramkissoon, 2023). In other words, CBX
cannot be optimized until tourism-destination-related CBE is evaluated, thus we posit:
H1: CBE positively affects CBX towards a tourist destination.
Effect of consumer brand engagement on consumer value co-creation
The CBE concept is considered in order that customer attitudes/behavior outside the purchase
can affect brands/firms (Hollebeek et al., 2019b; Kumar et al., 2022). Tourism practitioners are
also fascinated in the likelihood of engaging consumers or (visitors) in the co-creation with the
purpose of to elicit consumer value (e.g., Nangpiire et al., 2022; Woratschek, Horbel, & Popp,
2020). The SDL proposes that tourism suppliers jointly generate value by service exchange
process while interacting with the tourists (Park & Vargo, 2013) that is especially applicable in
destination (tourism) marketing environment (Shaw et al., 2011). The tourism is typically rooted

into consumers’ experience, denoting that consumers and service providers immensely interact at
each phase of the relationship (Rasoolimanesh et al., 2021; Font et al., 2021).
In relation to SDL-informed perspective (Font et al., 2021; Park & Vargo, 2013; Rather,
2023), value might be co-created in collaboration- with a consumer instead surrounded by the
brand/firm; thereby consumer-focused brands are advised to involve consumers in value cocreation (Hollebeek & Rather, 2019; Woratschek et al., 2020). Consumers are involved and can
be developed as direct-stakeholders in value cocreation (Shaw et al., 2011; Vargo & Lusch,
2016). As CBE elicits in the long run, consumers are expected to reveal their individual
information (experience) with others (Font et al., 2021; Grissemann & Stokburger-Sauer, 2013).
Though, the importance of CBE/CVC has been previously linked in diverse marketing and
service contexts (Assiouras et al., 2019; Yen et al., 2021), the influence of destination-based
CBE on consumer value co-creation have yet to be investigated, specifically in tourism brand
setting. For instance, while, Jaakkola and Alexander (2014) studied CBE’s influence in
developing CVC in healthcare service setting, France et al. (2018) corroborated that CBE as an
important variable in persuading consumer brand co-creation behavior. Correspondingly, Yen et
al. (2021) checked the influence of consumer’s engagement on value-cocreation behaviors within
restaurant industry. While consumer brand engagement and consumer value cocreation have
been formerly linked, as outlined (e.g., Assiouras et al., 2019; Yen et al., 2021), insight of this in
tourism during pandemic based relationship is yet evolving with other behavioral variables
(including CBX, emotional attachment), thus we posit:
H2: CBE positively affects consumer value co-creation towards a tourist destination.
Impact of consumer value co-creation on consumer brand experience
The notion of consumer co-creation of value results from service dominant logic perspective, as
noted (Vargo & Lusch, 2016). SDL-based consumer value co-creation is defined as their
perceived-value occurs through collaboration, interaction and customized actions with
stakeholder/organization (Rihova et al., 2018). SDL-informed co-creation concept is rooted on
customer as a value creator and collaborating (interacting) with firms/brands to co-create value
(e.g., Grissemann & Stokburger-Sauer, 2013; Prebensen & Xie, 2018). Organizations/brands can
use the value cocreation concept as one of the tactics to sustain valuable consumers (Rihova et

al., 2018). Existing research revealed that (online)-cocreation deepens the impact of consumer’s
experience, also promotes purchase intent and behavior with the brand (Anshu et al., 2022), thus,
supports excellent CBX-journey (Sugathan & Ranjan, 2019). Hence offering pleasant/positive
consumer’s experience via value cocreation might assist the brands/providers to retain, attract,
and build consumers part of their business (Anshu et al., 2022).
Tourism is turning out to be more interactive and complex owing to the amalgamation of
multiple touch-points (e.g., destination-brand, where visitor is visiting) facilitating customers to
connect with a brand via differing media/channels, especially earlier to consumption-journey
(Lemon & Verhoef 2017). CVC might develop the CBX-journey (Shaw et al., 2011), and the
interaction/collaboration resulting from the value co-creation offers actual-experience (Prebensen
& Xie, 2018). CVC acts as a combining linkage between tourism context and service suppliers
(Blazquez-Resino et al., 2016). Therefore, destination providers need to encourage tourists into
value (co)creating processes by providing resources to construct consumer experience journey
over time; Assiouras et al., 2019). Further, if the consumer has robust values, which affiliate with
tourism-destination/attraction, relationship would be the determined, and the CBX journey would
be reinforced. Hence, we hypothesize that:
H3: Consumer value co-creation positively influences CBX with a tourist destination.
Customer experience’s effect on emotional attachment
With regard to attachment theory within psychology, attachment is believed to be an emotional
connection/bond between a person and a target object/brand (Bowlby, 1979). Further, the object,
which elicits these feelings could be a destination, place, or brand (Barreda et al., 2020), like a
tourism/destination brand. Based on attachment theory, emotional attachment is defined as a
psychological bond between an individual and a brand, typified by profound feelings of
affection-, connection-, and passion (Grisaffe & Nguyen, 2011). In other words, it includes the
affective elements of the brand, like deep feelings of connection, affection, love or passion
(Hang et al., 2020). Customers articulating positive emotional attachments can be employed as a
substitute measure for marketers in measuring crisis management success (Wang et al., 2021).
Customers usually articulate their emotions in major crisis at their loved attractions/destination to
reveal their closeness, support, and to assist its recovery (Zheng et al., 2021).

To attain emotional attachment, tourism managers should recognize emotional bonding
antecedents towards the brands/service offerings (Liu et al., 2020). Published literature on CBX
(e.g., Verhoef et al., 2009) denoted that consumer experience is personal, which involves their
emotions, thinking, feelings, or senses. This involvement relating to CBX stimulates the
customer’s bond (attachment) with a destination (Barreda et al., 2020). Such bonds (attachments)
persist throughout the entire consumers purchase journey as soon as they develop emotionalconnections with other customers, destinations, or brands (e.g., Hussain et al., 2020). Thus, we
anticipate:
H4: CBX positively influences emotional attachment with a tourism destination.
Consumer brand experience’s effect on consumer-based brand equity
Brand equity is one of the most vital factors in brand management field from managerial as well
as academic viewpoints (Bianchi et al., 2014; Iglesias et al., 2020; Omar et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2016). Within tourism market/industry, destination-brand has been used as a communication tool
to increase the performance of a tourist-destination (Rahman et al., 2020). The destination brand
strategy can lead destination-based brand equity development; a notion that could elucidate the
overall value generated into visitors minds (Sürücü et al., 2019). Various researchers
conceptualise brand-equity as a relational- and market-led asset created through relationships and
interactions between brands and their consumers (Iglesias et al., 2020; Sürücü et al., 2019).
Destination marketers continually seek to measure and understand brand-based effectiveness
through CBBE concept of Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993). Over the last decade, CBBE concept
developed by Aaker (1991) and Keller (2003) has received raising interest from tourism scholars,
as a way to assess the effectiveness of branding (Bianchi et al., 2014). In accordance with Pike
(2010), CBBE is defined as the understanding of how marketing initiatives impact customers’
learning and re-calling of brand information due to a specific symbol or sign developed by a
firm/brand (see also, Bianchi et al., 2014).
The association between CBX and brand equity is investigated in the service sector, for
example Iglesias et al. (2020) offer an empirical support for a positive impact of customer’s
sensory brand experience on brand equity in banking industry. In the hotel industry Sürücü et al.
(2019) finds that, brand image, brand awareness and physical quality are the important building

blocks to CBBE. Yang et al. (2016) indicates that destination service performance and word of
mouth has a significant effect on destination-brand equity in mainland Chinese outbound
visitors. In tourism heritage destination brand context, Rahman et al. (2020) explored the role of
tourist’s heritage brand experience and heritage destination loyalty on the development of
CBBE. We argue that experience marketing theory (Brakus et al., 2009) is a suitable theoretical
lens to examine consumer-based brand equity. Consumer brand experience is improvable and
controllable to some extent and consumers’ service experiences play a key role in developing
competitive advantage and brand loyalty (Algharabat et al., 2020; Meyer & Schwager, 2007) or
brand formation (e.g., Berry, 2000). CBBE is specifically significant for tourist-destinations, as
different consumers have diverse perceptions regarding the same attraction/destination. Thus, it
is crucial to identify, how tourists’ experience, through direct or indirect contact with the
site/destination impacts CBBE. Nonetheless, the association between CBX and CBBE is still
unclear and evolving in pandemic contexts, hence we suggest:
H5: CBX positively influences CBBE towards a tourism-destination.
The mediating-role of consumer brand experience
As noted, SDL-based CBE refers to a customer’s motivationally-based, volitional investments of
focal-operant resources (like, emotional, cognitive, behavioural, and social knowledge/skills),
and operand-resources (e.g., equipment) in brand interactions (Kumar et al., 2019; Hollebeek et
al., 2019b) that we expect to affect CBX, emotional attachment and CBBE. CBE is very critical
factor in developing customer satisfaction, increasing loyal consumers, and generating affective
connections (Anshu et al., 2022; Arici et al., 2022). Despite this recognition, limited remains
acknowledged with respect to engagement and co-creation’s potential indirect influence on
emotional attachment and CBBE. For instance, published research argued the direct influence of
CBE on CBX (Islam et al., 2019; Hollebeek et al., 2014) or exposing CVC’s effect on CBX
(Prebensen & Xie, 2018; Sugathan & Ranjan, 2019). Correspondingly, customer engagement’s
affect on their loyalty or CBBE has been further established (Harrigan et al., 2019; Khan et al.,
2022).
In other words, although existing literature emphasized the direct association between
CBE, CBX, and CVC in the tourism and hospitality industries (Harrigan et al., 2019; Rather et

al., 2019), the indirect link through CBE/CVC is still remains unfamiliar (Arici et al., 2022).
Implementation of CBE may be optimized in relationship with CBX (Hollebeek & Rather,
2019), as outlined. Further, Rather et al. (2021) exposed that consumer intra-interaction-based
engagement expands to their trans-interaction-led experience, because it elicits in conjunction
with the CBX-journey (e.g., Islam et al., 2019; Jeong & Shin, 2020). We, thus, aim to identify if
CBE and CVC have an effect on emotional attachment and CBBE through CBX. To respond
these queries, we propose:
H6: CBX mediates the relationship with regard to CBE and emotional attachment (H6a);
CBE and CBBE (H6b).
H7: CBX mediates the relationship with regard to CVC and emotional attachment (H7a);
CVC and CBBE (H7b).
Moderating role of health beliefs - perceived severity and self-efficacy
Derived from cognitive- and affective- frame of behaviour (Rogers, 1975), protection motivation
theory or (PMT) aims to assess the health-related behaviour/attitude, and is extensively
employed into the tourism/destination research (Cifci et al., 2023; Itani & Hollebeek, 2021; Zhao
et al., 2016). PMT-informed perspective recommends that, both threat as well as copingappraisal elements are fundamental to predict/assess the pandemic/health-related behavioural
intents (Liu et al., 2017; Rogers, 1975). The threat appraisal consist of perceived (threat)-severity
that states the beliefs concerning seriousness of perceived-threat (Wang et al., 2019).
Furthermore, coping-appraisal involves the assessment of health-based protective behaviour
responses/intentions to prevent threat, its affects to produce perceived self-efficacy (Zheng et al.,
2021). Self-efficacy asserts person’s perceived capacity to carry out the recommended
behaviours (Bozkurt et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2016). The threat/coping-appraisals steer person’s
motivational intents or course-of-actions to protect from perceived threats (Zheng et al., 2021).
Published works substantiated that threat (e.g., perceived pandemic severity) and/or
coping (e.g., self efficacy) elements can be dominant variables that persuade customer’s attitudes
and behaviors in the context of crises (Liu et al., 2017; Prentice et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021).
We thus examine if perceived pandemic severity and perceived self-efficacy can change the
tourist’s experience/behaviour to elicit emotional attachment and CBBE with a destination.

Since, perceived-severity or self-efficacy moderates the association linking risk perception and
(cruise) travel intention (Liu et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2016) or prediction of tourist activity
(Cambra-Fierro et al., 2022b). Hence, we investigate that both health/pandemic-based perceivedseverity as well as self-efficacy resulting due to COVID-19 crises moderates the association
between CBX/emotional attachment and CBX/CBBE with destinations. Thus, we propose (see
also Figure 1):
H8: Self-efficacy moderates the association between CBX and emotional attachment
(H8a); CBX and CBBE (H8b).
H9: Perceived severity moderates the association between CBX and emotional
attachment (H9a); CBX and CBBE (H9b).
Insert Figure 1 here
Methodology
Measures
We adapted measurement items to evaluate CBX through (Barnes et al., 2014), which includes
dimensions of sensory, affective, behavioral and intellectual brand experience (refer also, Brakus
et al., 2009). We borrowed CBE scale items via (Hollebeek et al., 2014), which integrates the
dimensions of cognitive, affective, and behavioral brand engagement (Rather & Hollebeek,
2021). Further, we assessed value cocreation via (Grissemann & Stokburger-Sauer, 2013),
emotional-attachment instrument through (Hang et al., 2020), CBBE from the (Bianchi et al.,
2014), and perceived-severity/self-efficacy through (Zhao et al., 2016; Itani & Hollebeek, 2021)
measured on 7-Point Likert Scale (refer Appendix A). Before carrying out the ultimate datacollection process, we pre-tested forty respondents to corroborate the scale instrument’s contentvalidity, which advised no issues.
Research design and data collection
In the current research, we employ a questionnaire to gauge the factors summarized in
model. We selected Indian tourism destinations (e.g., Gulmargh, Kokernag, Phalgam etc.), as
these sites are famous tourist-destination/sites, and where the tourism-industry raises a foremost
contribution towards nation’s GDP (e.g., Rather, 2020). Moreover, tourism’s intrinsically higher

levels of tourist-brand interactions affirm assessment of our model in this ecosystem (So et al.,
2020a, b). Third, COVID-19 outbreak has had a global effect on health, economy, business and
tourism in India (Statista, 2021), highlighting the further merit of our study.
Our study is cross-sectional in nature, which is a commonly adopted research design in
tourism/travel research (Itani & Hollebeek, 2021; Liu et al., 2020; So et al., 2020b; Zheng et al.,
2021). We finished the questionnaires in the months of November-December 2021, utilizing
convenience-sampling method through self-administrative-survey (Rasoolimanesh et al., 2021).
Non-probability-based convenience sampling acts as a vigorous data collection method (Itani &
Hollebeek, 2021). To get high-quality data, as per pandemic social distancing rules, the lead
author and two experienced research assistants approached respondents while leaving the
site/destination at different exit-points (Kumar et al., 2022). Initially, we check out participants
by a question: Are you a tourist in this destination? The respondents who replied “yes” continued
to complete the survey. We requested them to re-call their more recent tourism-based
experience/s at any one of preferred sites/destinations. Overall, we disseminated 500
questionnaires, and collected 318, designating 63.5% response-rate. As presented in Table 1,
54% of sample included male, and 46% female participants. Also, In relation to age, 36% of the
participants were 18-28 years; 22% were aged 29-39; 41% were 39 years. Table 1 offers the
socio-demographic and travel-related information.
Insert Table 1 here
Analysis and results
Testing of measurement model
We utilized partial-least-squares-structural-equation-modeling or (PLS-SEM) to analyze our
proposed model in contrast to covariance-based SEM. First, it deals best with complex-models,
predictive/exploratory studies and moderating effects (Hair et al., 2018). Second, it is a
renowned technique wherein many constructs are investigated simultaneously (e.g., Hair et al.,
2018). Third, it is also recognized as a decent methodological-alternative to theory testing (Raza
et al., 2021). Further, it is prevalent approach used in tourism/destination studies (Abbasi et al.,
2022a, b).

Table 2 revealed constructs’ reliability as well as validity of measurement-model. Table 2
indicated standardized path-loadings extended from 0.765 to 0.936, thereby, exhibiting
satisfactory convergent validity levels (i.e., > 0.70). Likewise, Cronbach’s alpha and composite
reliability (CR) values exceeding the cutoff point 0.70, while average variance extracted (AVE)
surpassing 0.50, advocating also agreeable reliability and convergent-validity (Hair et al., 2018).
Also, variance-inflation-factors (VIF) were estimated (Table, 2), which denotes that commonmethod-bias not exists in our study, because their values were below 5 (Kock, 2015). Relatedly,
Harman’s single-test illustrated the similar results, explained 36.7% of variance (less than cut-off
value of 50%; Podsakoff et al., 2003).
Insert Table 2 here
The Fornell and Larcker (1981) principle was used to assess discriminant validity. As
indicated in Table 3, square-root of AVE-values for each factor surpassed bivariate correlations,
among these factors, corroborating the affirmation of discriminant validity.
Insert Table-3 here
Testing of structural model
All modeled associations were supported, and the path-coefficients revealed positive- effects
amongst latent factors. First, we found the positive-effect of CBE on CBX, thus supports H1 (β =
0.631, p < 0.01). Correspondingly, we found significant/positive evidence in the link between
CBE and CVC (β = 0.582, p < 0.01), thus supports H2. That’s why, this study provides full
support to H1 and H2 suggest that CBE drives CBX and CVC during pandemic. In addition,
CVC have a significant/positive- influence on CBX (β = 0.597, p < 0.01), thus supports H3.
Further, H4-H5, which envisages that CBX elicits emotional attachment (β= 0.618, p < 0.01) as
well as CBBE (β= 0.624, p < 0.01) were supported also (Table 4).
Next, we assessed predictive relevancy (Q2) and explanatory power (R2) of our outcome
variables, which surpassed the upper-limit 0.10 (Falk & Miller, 1992; Henseler et al., 2016) that
proves the good enough predictive-model relevance (Table 4). Moreover, we assessed Cohen’s
(1988) effect-size (f2) of our main predictors. The values of f2 extended from (0.06 - 0.37)
reflecting weak- to stronger- effects (Table 4).

Insert Table 4 here
Mediation and moderation effects
To check mediation effects, we utilized PROCESS with 5000 bootstrapping resamples procedure
at 95% confidence intervals (CI) (Preacher & Hayes, 2008), as this approach has been
extensively adopted in tourism (Rather et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). In mediation models,
bootstrapping offers important analysis to understand the indirect effects (Hayes, 2013). The
confidence intervals meant for the indirect effects did not encompass zero, indicating that
mediation was supported in favor of H6a-H7b (Table 5). CBE established an indirect influence
on EA through CBX (β = 0.34, 95% CI [0.14, 0.25]). Besides, the direct impact of CBE and EA
was statistically significant, implying partial-mediation and supported H6a. Overall, results
propose that CBE indirectly boosts emotional attachment and CBBE by improving CBX during
COVID-19 epidemic (see, Table 5).
Insert Table 5 here
Lastly, in our structural model, the moderating effect of health belief-based self-efficacy
and perceived pandemic severity in hypothesized causal relationships linking CBX and EA; and
CBX and CBBE was estimated adopting Fassott et al.’s (2016) two-stage PLS-method. Firstly,
we ran PLS path model for main-effects to attain construct scores of in-dependent (X), and
moderator (M) factors. Second, we develop interaction-term (X.M), as an element-wise product
of construct (structure) scores of X and M (Fassott et al., 2016). As a result, we found a
significant- and negative moderating interaction effect of pandemic-based perceived severity on
emotional attachment (β = -0.261, p < 0.01), and CBBE (β = -0.285, p < 0.01), thereby
confirming H8a/b. However, we established a significant positive moderating interaction effect
of self-efficacy on emotional attachment (β = 0.267, p < 0.01), and CBBE (β = 0.322, p < 0.01),
thus, substantiating H9a/b (Table 6).
Insert Table 6 here
Discussion and conclusion
The present research investigated the dynamics of consumer brand engagement on consumervalue co-creation and consumer brand experience, and its consequent impact on their emotional

attachment and CBBE, by evaluating a structural model via PLS-SEM. The typical pandemic
context of our study provides more insights in the modeled associations amongst these important
factors beyond many of the existing research (Kabadayi et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2022; Park &
Gong, 2023; Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022; So et al., 2021). Particularly, such novel findings on
pandemics effecting tourist’s engagement, experience, or behaviour prepares destination
marketers to effectively manage enduring effects of COVID-19 outbreak, including after globalpandemic, by learning from past crises/outbreaks (Zheng et al., 2021).
This research also procures a broad glance at consumer journey in tourism-destination
and resulting variables that impact the (post)-consumption behaviors (e.g., CBBE). Particularly,
the proposed SDL-framework offers a theoretical foundation to evaluate how CBE affects
tourists’ value co-creation and experience. Thus, this experience also impacts subsequent (post)consumption behaviors (i.e., attachment and CBBE) during pandemic. Existing research has
investigated the impact of media engagement and health (protective) behavior on global
pandemic tourism (Cambra-Fierro et al., 2022b; Rather, 2022), although, interface of CBE,
CVC, CBX, attachment, CBBE, and perceived health beliefs has remained un-explored.
As further corroborated in this research, CBX significantly affects emotional attachment
and CBBE. We thus expands existing literature on the association between CBX, attachment and
CBBE in the field of psychology (Bowlby, 1979) by verifying and discussing the association
between CBX and tourists emotional attachment and CBBE into a particular field of service
marketing (i.e., tourism/destination). The findings are in agreement with the contemporary
knowledge in tourism/destination service research which advocates that visitors who have
positive/pleasant experience towards a destination/brand are more expected to yield strong
emotional attachments/bonds with that site/brand (Verhoef et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2020) as well
as build increased brand equity with the destination (Bianchi et al., 2014). Although, as research
on CBBE is burgeoning in tourism/destination context; Rahman et al., 2020; Sürücü et al., 2019),
it might be important for future studies to explore its dimensions/aspects (e.g., brand-loyalty,
awareness perceived quality; Algharabat et al., 2020) within the destination/brand context. This
will assist to provide more insight of CBX on respective CBBE’s aspects.
Further, mediating role of CBX on emotional attachment and CBBE through CBE and
CVC follows existing studies (Arici et al., 2022; Khan et al., 2022; Prebensen & Xie, 2018;

Jeong & Shin, 2020), sustaining the significance of generating pleasant and positive-experiences
to encourage tourist’s emotional attachment and CBBE. CBX, as an extensive evaluation of a
consumer journey (Lemon & Verhoef, 2017; Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022) effects tourist’s
emotional attachment and consumer based brand equity. Eventually, while enhanced significance
need be put on consumer’s based brand equity, the online (social) media and broad socialnetworks, once it comes to generation of positive- (or negative) experiences, the crucial focus
remains the engagement and value co-creation with a destination during pandemic.
To conclude, while moderating role of pandemic-based perceived severity/self-efficacy
are essential into the effect of CBE on attachment and CBBE, represents critical managerial
insights. During the pandemic, decay in travel and tourist’s intentions typically occurs from their
perceived risk/severity to become infected or due to long-term travel restrictions (Ren et al.,
2022). Given that existing literature view perceived severity/self-efficacy as drivers of particular
proposed associations (Itani & Hollebeek, 2021; Liu et al., 2017; Prentice et al., 2021), this study
envisaged the strength of investigated associations, which would fluctuate among visitors
displaying unique threat or coping appraisal-levels.
Theoretical implications
The present study generates the following contributions to marketing, tourism, and branding
literature. The COVID-19 crises has considerably effected consumers consumption behaviors
and engagement (UNWTO, 2022), producing new challenges for tourism-destination marketers.
To limit these challenges, tourism-marketers are increasingly employing consumer-brand
relationship strategies (Algharabat et al., 2020; Kabadayi et al., 2022; Miao et al., 2022;
Wongsansukcharoen, 2021). Thus, we developed and tested a proposed conceptual model, which
integrates customer’s brand engagement, value co-creation, experience, emotional attachment
and CBBE during pandemic-based tourism context. Given the enclosure of such variables on
research priorities of Marketing Science Institutes (2020), the progress of additional knowledge
of these concepts and their link into COVID-19 outbreak exposes an imperative development in
marketing (service tourism/destination) research, as delineated. This research thereby contributes
to theoretical comprehension of these concepts in tourism/destination and service brand context.

Second theoretical contribution is to examine the CBX’s effect on tourist’s emotional
attachment and CBBE, which revealed that CBX employs a positive impact on their emotional
attachment/CBBE towards destinations/sites during the pandemic. This finding adds to a better
knowledge of the drivers of CBX/brand equity, which can contribute in eliciting the tourismCBBE and attaining increased competitiveness among tourist-destinations/sites during COVID19 times. Thus, robust site/destination-powered CBX yields tourists more productive assessment
in improving relationship and psychological connection with a service destination brand (Kumar
et al., 2022; Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022; Wongsansukcharoen, 2021). Particularly, tourists
were recognized to be primarily driven through CBX in eliciting their emotional attachment and
consumer-based brand equity with the destination in pandemic times.
The third theoretical contribution has been related to CBX’s mediating effect. While
extant works confirmed a direct influence of CBE on CBX or CBBE (Iglesias et al., 2020; Islam
et al., 2019), the empirically-led examination in the association of our modeled factors remained
limited to date; Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022; MSI, 2020), especially in tourism/destination and
service marketing-based pandemic environment. The aforesaid finding in proportion to previous
research (Harrigan et al., 2019; Jeong & Shin, 2020), however also produces a novel contribution
to the SDL perspective. In other words, we contribute to marketing/tourism and SDL-literature
by improving insights about CBE/CBBE development process, which is especially relevant and
needs more scholastic attention in tourism-destination literature.
The finally theoretical contribution of this research is to provide increased insight in the
moderating role of perceived health beliefs- (perceived self-efficacy and pandemic severity) into
the projected relationships. Owing to our attain insight, PMT-informed lens offers an important
theoretical framework to update COVID-19 pandemic research (Han et al., 2022), therefore,
informing various future research possibilities. Such as: How does the estimated modeled links,
like moderating role of pandemic/health-based factors on visitor’s prevention behavior
during/post-outbreak (Prentice et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2022), as described also in last section.
Managerial implications
This research further outlines implications for marketing and tourism practitioners and managers.
Firstly, the study’s findings encourage the implementation of CBE in mix with CBX/CBBE

tactics to produce supreme outcomes during outbreak (Hollebeek et al., 2021b; Miao et al.,
2022). Accordingly, we advocate destination managers to elicit visitors’ (intra)-interaction as a
strategic opportunity to increase their (trans)-interaction CBX journey (Jeong & Shin, 2020;
Shoukat & Ramkissoon, 2022). Hence, (intra)-interaction engagement acts as an influential
building block for experience.
Second, tourism-destination marketers can consider in eliciting CBE towards a particular
destination/brand to obtain a competitive benefit over their industry rivals (Kumar et al., 2022;
So et al., 2021). Destination-brand marketers and DMOs may require to focus on CBE at touristdestinations/sites, and need to extend stakeholder involvement in tourism planning process
(Rather, 2022), comprising small travel agencies or local-community. This can assist destinations
marketers to change their focus from goods-dominant logic to SDL and thereby enhance CBEbased value co-creation and experience (Park & Vargo, 2013; Blazquez-Resino et al., 2016).
Consequently, CBE with destination-brands facilitates them to offer suggestions about uprising
value to service-delivery process, advices concerning the current level of services, complements,
complaints, and recommendations for generating more emotional/cognitive brand experiences.
Third, to nurture CBE-based value co-creation and CBX, we advocate tourism marketers
to foster tourist resource investment/s in their destination (brand) interactions. Such as, to
integrate customized services, high interactive offerings (e.g., personalized tour/visit packages,
visitor’s educational-programs; Kumar et al., 2022; Rather & Hollebeek, 2021; So et al., 2021).
Artificial-intelligence, augmented/virtual reality-powered interaction/s might be used to foretell
visitor’s needs, desires, or preferences in COVID-19 crises; Li et al., 2022). Further, marketers
should assess consumers’ activities/actions into particular platforms to support favorable brand
content. This content may highlight or imparting social actions (i.e., user-generated content),
hedonic activities (i.e., recreational, leisure, entertaining), or informational benefits (i.e., historic,
cultural, heritage) (Anshu et al., 2022). Further, tourism-brands’ contents with utmost
applicability to its potential consumers (by content-marketing) is tend to facilitate the
improvement of destination/brand connection/equity (e.g., Indian slogan: Incredible India or
Taiwan’s: The heart of Asia slogan displays meaning, warmth, value, love; Aro et al., 2018),
thus, eliciting tourist’s CBBE and emotional attachment towards an attraction/destination.

Fourth, new/potential visitors look for more engaging, memorable, compelling, and
robust experiences (Pine & Gilmore, 1999; Homburg et al., 2016; Lemon & Verhoef, 2017). Our
integrative conceptual framework strengthens this idea by stressing on CBX, which (marketing)
destination managers can adopt to engage visitors and increase attachment and consumer-based
brand equity (Berry, 2000; Pansari & Kumar 2017). Thus, destination marketers, DMOs, and
policymakers can develop historical and cultural heritage whereas preserving natural attractions
(Rahman et al., 2020). Tourism marketing managers can also ponder destination awareness
campaigns and heritage-protection-schemes to conserve destinations/sites in fostering visitors’
memorable brand experiences, attachment, or brand equity (Rather & Hollebeek, 2021).
Finally, findings verify the moderation impacts of pandemic/health belief-based selfefficacy/perceived-severity initiated by COVID-19, thus, policy makers and tourism mangers
should give importance in their marketing and tourism tactics, communicating perceived-risk
reduction strategies, or strategic responses to reinforce CBX, which in turn elicits emotional
attachment and consumer-based brand equity during the recent global-outbreak (Han et al., 2022;
Ren et al., 2022).
Limitations and scope for future research
Nonetheless, this paper contributes to tourism/destination marketing knowledge; it also proffers
several limitations for potential analysis. Firstly, this research was conducted in Indian context,
future studies would expand the data-collection process (e.g., Australia, Africa, Europe), and
analyze the proposed-model in other nations and cultures, to attain an additional general results.
Second, this work was based on cross-sectional research design, implying that survey-data was
gathered at one specified period. Accordingly, future research can adopt longitudinal study to
provide more generalisable results.
Third, while we explore the role of only two direct consequences of CBE (CVC/CBX),
thus, future study may scrutinize other consequences of consumer brand engagement including
brand trust, satisfaction, positive/negative word-of-mouth, commitment, identification and/or
image to spawn extra knowledge (Bahri et al., 2021; Do & Bowden, 2023; Parrey et al., 2020;
Rather & Camilleri, 2019; Shams et al., 2020).

Fourth, we examine two antecedents of CBX (e.g., CBE/CVC), future research may wish
to include antecedents of CBX like relationship marketing orientation, consumer participation,
consumer involvement or self-expressive brand (Algharabat et al., 2020; Kabadayi et al., 2022;
Rather, 2018). Fifth, we examine two important outcomes of CBX (emotional attachment and
CBBE). Thus, other variables might be adopted such as, brand love and brand loyalty (Rather et
al., 2022a,b) and/or travel avoidance (Zheng et al., 2021) that can create supplementary insights.
Sixth, we inspect moderating impact of pandemic-based self-efficacy/perceived severity;
further research would consider other moderating effects, like tourist’s age, gender in probing
CBE, CVC and CBX associations (Kautish et al., 2021). Finally, future research would also
investigate the role of mobile, social media technologies, metaverse-based virtual or augmented
reality in evolving sustainable consumer engagement, experience, and social business (Abbasi et
al., 2023; Hollebeek et al., 2022; Vo-Thanh et al., 2021; Wongsansukcharoen, 2021).

References
Aaker, D.A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity, Free Press, New York, NY.
Abbasi, A., Hussain, K., Kaleem, T., Rasoolimanesh, S. M., Rasul, T., Ting, D. H., & Rather, R. (2022a).
Tourism promotion through vlog advertising and customer engagement behaviours of generation
Z. Current Issues in Tourism, 1-20, Online First.
Abbasi, A., Rather, R., Hooi Ting, D., Nisar, S., Hussain, K., Khwaja, M. G., & Shamim, A. (2022b). Exploring
tourism-generated social media communication, brand equity, satisfaction, and loyalty: A PLS-SEMbased multi-sequential approach. Journal of Vacation Marketing, Online First, 13567667221118651.
Abbasi, A., Tsiotsou, R., Hussain, K., Rather, R., & Ting, D. (2023). Investigating the impact of social media
images’ value, consumer engagement, and involvement on eWOM of a tourism destination: A transmittal
mediation approach. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Forthcoming.
Addo, C. P., Fang, J., Asare, A., & Kulbo, N. (2021). Customer engagement and purchase intention in livestreaming digital marketing platforms. The Service Industries Journal, 41(11-12), 767-786.
Algharabat, R., Rana, N. P., Alalwan, A. A., Baabdullah, A., & Gupta, A. (2020). Investigating the antecedents of
customer brand engagement and consumer-based brand equity in social media. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, 53, 101767.
Anshu, K., Gaur, L., & Singh, G. (2022). Impact of customer experience on attitude and repurchase intention in
online grocery retailing: A moderation mechanism of value Co-creation. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, 64, 102798.
Arici, H. E., Köseoglu, M. A., & Sökmen, A. (2022). The intellectual structure of customer experience research in
service scholarship: a bibliometric analysis. The Service Industries Journal, 42(7-8), 514-550.
Aro, K., Suomi, K., & Saraniemi, S. (2018). Antecedents and consequences of destination brand love—A case
study from Finnish Lapland. Tourism Management, 67, 71-81.
Assiouras, I., Skourtis, G., Giannopoulos, A., Buhalis, D., & Koniordos, M. (2019). Value co-creation and
customer citizenship behavior. Annals of Tourism Research, 78, 102742.
Bahri-Ammari, N., Rather, R., & Kallal, R. (2021). Brand engagement and identification in virtual brand
community: the moderating role of brand community subscription seniority, International Journal of Web
Based Communities, Forthcoming.
Barnes, S. J., Mattsson, J., & Sørensen, F. (2014). Destination brand experience and visitor behavior: Testing a
scale in the tourism context. Annals of Tourism Research, 48, 121-139.
Barreda, A. A., Nusair, K., Wang, Y., Okumus, F., & Bilgihan, A. (2020). The impact of social media activities
on brand image and emotional attachment. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology.
Berry, L. L. (2000). Cultivating service brand equity. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28(1), 128–
137.
Bianchi, C., Pike, S. and Lings, I. (2014), “Investigating attitudes towards three South American destinations in
an emerging Long Haul market using a model of consumer-based brand equity (CBBE)”, Tourism
Management, Vol. 42, pp. 215-223.
Blazquez-Resino, J. J., Molina, A., & Esteban-Talaya, A. (2016). Service-Dominant Logic in tourism: the way to
loyalty. Current issues in Tourism, 18(8), 706-724.
Bowlby, J. (1979). The making and breaking of affectional bonds. London: Tavistock.
Bozkurt, S., Gligor, D., Locander, J., & Rather, R. (2023). How social media self-efficacy and social anxiety
affect customer purchasing from agile brands on social media, Journal of Research in Interactive
Marketing, Online First.

Brakus, J. J., Schmitt, B. H., & Zarantonello, L. (2009). Brand experience: What is it? How is it measured?
Does it affect loyalty? Journal of Marketing, 73(3), 52–68.
Cambra-Fierro, J., Gao, L., López-Pérez, M. E., & Melero-Polo, I. (2022a). How do macro-environmental factors
impact customer experience? A refined typology, integrative framework, and implications. The Service
Industries Journal, 1-35.
Cambra-Fierro, J., Gao, L., Melero-Polo, I., & Patrício, L. (2022b). Theories, constructs, and methodologies to
study COVID-19 in the service industries. The Service Industries Journal, 42(7-8), 551-582.
Cifci, I., Rather, R., Taspinar, O., & Altunel G. (2023). Demystifying destination attachment, self-congruity and
revisiting intention in dark tourism destinations through the gender-based lens, Tourism Recreation
Research, Forthcoming.
Chen, S., Han, X., Bilgihan, A., & Okumus, F. (2021). Customer engagement research in hospitality and tourism:
a systematic review. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management, 30(7), 871-904.
Do, D. K. X., & Bowden, J. L. H. (2023). Negative customer engagement behaviour in a service context. The
Service Industries Journal, 1-24. Online First.
Falk, R. F., & Miller, N. B. (1992). A primer for soft modeling. University of Akron Press.
Fassott, G., Henseler, J., & P. Coelho, S. (2016). Testing moderating effects in PLS path models with composite
variables. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 116 (9), 1887-1900.
Financial Express (2022). 2022: Year of hope for tourism in Kashmir. Accessed January 10, 2022.
https://www.financialexpress.com/lifestyle/travel-tourism/2022-year-of-hope-for-tourism-inkashmir/2402424/
Flavián, C., Ibáñez-Sánchez, S., & Orús, C. (2019). The impact of virtual, augmented and mixed reality
technologies on the customer experience. Journal of Business Research, 100, 547-560.
Font, X., English, R., Gkritzali, A., & Tian, W. S. (2021). Value co-creation in sustainable tourism: A servicedominant logic approach. Tourism Management, 82, 104200.
Fornell, C. & Larcker, D. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39-50.
France, C., Grace, D., Merrilees, B., & Miller, D. (2018). Customer brand co-creation behavior: conceptualization
and empirical validation. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 2(7), 0263-4503
Grisaffe, D. B., & Nguyen, H. P. (2011). Antecedents of emotional attachment to brands. Journal of Business
Research, 64(10), 1052-1059.
Grissemann, U. & Stokburger-Sauer, N. (2013). Customer co-creation of travel services: the role of company
support and customer satisfaction with the co-creation performance. Tourism Management, 33(6) 14831492.
Hair, J.F., Hult, G.T.M., Ringle, C. &Sarstedt, M. (2018). A Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural Equation
Modeling (PLS-SEM). Sage, Thousand-Oaks, CA.
Han, S., Yoon, A., Kim, M. J., & Yoon, J. H. (2022). What influences tourist behaviors during and after the
COVID-19 pandemic? Focusing on theories of risk, coping, and resilience. Journal of Hospitality and
Tourism Management, 50, 355-365
Hang, H., Aroean, L., & Chen, Z. (2020). Building emotional attaching during COVID-19. Annals of Tourism
Research, 83, 103006.
Hao, F. (2020). The landscape of customer engagement in hospitality and tourism: a systematic review.
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 32(5), 1837-1860.
Harrigan, P., Evers, U., Miles & M., Daly, T. (2019). Customer engagement with tourism social media brands.
Tourism Management, 59, 597-609.

Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis. New York:
Guilford Publications.
Henseler, J., G. Hubona, and P. A. Ray. 2016. Using PLS path modeling in new technology research: updated
guidelines. Industrial Management & Data Systems 116: 2-20.
Hollebeek, L. D., Glynn, M. S., Brodie, R. J. (2014). Consumer brand engagement in social media:
conceptualization, scale development and validation. Journal of Interactive Marketing 28(2), 149–165.
Hollebeek, L. D., & Rather, R. A. (2019). Service innovativeness and tourism customer outcomes. International
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 31(11), 4227-4246.
Hollebeek, L. D., Sharma, T. G., Pandey, R., Sanyal, P., & Clark, M. K. (2021a). Fifteen years of customer
engagement research: a bibliometric and network analysis. Journal of Product & Brand Management,
31(2), 293-309.
Hollebeek, L. D., Smith, D. L., Kasabov, E., Hammedi, W., Warlow, A., & Clark, M. K. (2021b). Customer brand
engagement during service lockdown. Journal of Services Marketing. Forthcoming.
Hollebeek, L.D., Sprott, E.S., Andreassen, T.W., Costley, C., Klaus, P., Kuppelwieser, V., and Rather, R.A.
(2019a). Customer engagement in evolving technological environments: synopsis and guiding
propositions. European Journal of Marketing, 53(9), 2018-2023.
Hollebeek, L. D., Srivastava, R. K., & Chen, T. (2019b). SD logic–informed customer engagement: integrative
framework, revised fundamental propositions, and application to CRM. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 47(1), 161-185.
Hollebeek, L. D., Urbonavicius, S., Sigurdsson, V., Clark, M. K., Parts, O., & Rather, R. (2022). Stakeholder
engagement and business model innovation value. The Service Industries Journal, 1-17.
Homburg, C., Schwemmle, M., & Kuehnl, C. (2016). New product design: Concept, measurement, and
consequences. Journal of Marketing, 79(3), 41-56.
Huang, A., & Farboudi Jahromi, M. (2021). Resilience building in service firms during and post COVID-19. The
Service Industries Journal, 41(1-2), 138-167.
Hussain, K., Jing, F., Junaid, M., Zaman, Q. U., & Shi, H. (2020). The role of co-creation experience in engaging
customers with service brands. Journal of Product & Brand Management. Forthcoming.
Iglesias, O., Markovic, S. & Rialp, J. (2020). How does sensory brand experience influence brand equity?
Considering the roles of customer satisfaction, customer affective commitment, and employee empathy.
Journal of Business Research, 96, 343-354.
Islam, J. U., Hollebeek, L. D., Rahman, Z., Khan, I., & Rasool, A. (2019). Customer engagement in the service
context: an empirical investigation of the construct, its antecedents and consequences. Journal of
Retailing and Consumer Services, 50, 277-285.
Islam, J. U., Shahid, S., Rasool, A., Rahman, Z., Khan, I. & Rather, R. (2020). Impact of website attributes on
customer engagement in banking: A solicitation of stimulus-organism-response theory, International
Journal of Bank Marketing, 38(6), 1279-1303.
Itani, O. S., & Hollebeek, L. D. (2021). Light at the end of the tunnel: Visitors' virtual reality (versus in-person)
attraction site tour-related behavioral intentions during and post-COVID-19. Tourism Management, 84,
104290.
Jaakkola, E., & Alexander, M. (2014). The role of customer engagement behavior in value co-creation: a service
system perspective. Journal of Service Research, 17(3), 247-261.
Jaziri, D., & Rather, R. (2022). Contemporary approaches studying customer experience in tourism research,
Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing Limited.

Jeong, M., & Shin, H. H. (2020). Tourists’ experiences with smart tourism technology at smart destinations and
their behavior intentions. Journal of Travel Research, 59(8), 1464–1477. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0047287519883034.
Kabadayi, E. T., Aksoy, N. C., & Turkay, P. B. (2022). How does customer engagement value occur in
restaurants? A stimulus-organism-response (SOR) perspective. The Service Industries Journal, 1-28.
Kautish, P., Hollebeek, L., Khare, A., & Rather, R. (2021). The effect of consumer values on engagement and
behavioral intent: Moderating role of age, In: Rajagopal, & Behl, R. (Ed.), Managing Disruptions in
Business Causes, Conflicts, and Control. Palgrave Macmillan New York.
Keller, K.L. (1993), “Conceptualizing, measuring and managing customer-based brand equity”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 1-22.
Khan, I., Hollebeek, L. D., Fatma, M., Islam, J. U., & Rahman, Z. (2019). Brand engagement and experience in
online services. Journal of Services Marketing, 34(2), 163-75.
Khan, I., Hollebeek, L. D., Fatma, M., Islam, J. U., Rather, R., Shahid, S., & Sigurdsson, V. (2022). Mobile app
vs. desktop browser platforms: The relationships among customer engagement, experience, relationship
quality and loyalty intention. Journal of Marketing Management, Forthcoming
Kock, N. (2015). Common method bias in PLS-SEM: A full collinearity assessment approach”, International
Journal of E-Collaboration (Ijec), IGI Global, 11 (4), 1–10.
Kumar, N., Panda, R. K., & Adhikari, K. (2022). Transforming tourists’ intentions through destination
engagement: insights from transformative learning theory. The Service Industries Journal, 42(9-10), 688715.
Kumar, V., Rajan, B., Gupta, S., & Pozza, I. D. (2019). Customer engagement in service. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 47(1), 138-160.
Lemon, K. N., & Verhoef, P. C. (2017). Understanding customer experience throughout the customer
journey. Journal of Marketing, 80(6), 69-96.
Li, S., Wang, Y., Filieri, R., & Zhu, Y. (2022). Eliciting positive emotion through strategic responses to COVID19 crisis: Evidence from the tourism sector. Tourism Management, 90, 104485.
Lim, W. M., Rasul, T., Kumar, S., & Ala, M. (2021). Past, present, and future of customer engagement. Journal
of Business Research, 140, 439-458
Liu, B., Pennington-Gray, L., & Krieger, J. (2017). Tourism crisis management: can the extended parallel process
model be used to understand crisis responses in the cruise industry?. Tourism Management, 55, 310-321.
Liu, Y., Hultman, M., Eisingerich, A. B., & Wei, X. (2020). How does brand loyalty interact with tourism
destination? Exploring the effect of brand loyalty on place attachment. Annals of Tourism Research, 81,
102879.
Meyer, C., & Schwager, A. (2007). Understanding customer experience. Harvard Business Review, 85(2), 116
Miao, L., So, K. K. F., Im, J., & Jiang, T. (2022). The pandemic’s effects on customer-to-customer engagement in
hospitality consumption: A multi-country investigation. International Journal of Hospitality
Management, 102, 103158.
MSI – Marketing Science Institute, (2020). 2020–2022 Research Priorities. Cambridge, MA. Retrieved from
https://www.msi.org/uploads/articles/MSI_RP20-22.pdf
Nangpiire, C., Silva, J., & Alves, H. (2022). Customer engagement and value co-creation/destruction: The internal
fostering and hindering factors and actors in the tourist/hotel experience. Journal of Research in
Interactive Marketing, ahead-of-print
Omar, N. A., Kassim, A. S., Shah Alam, S., & Zainol, Z. (2022). Perceived retailer innovativeness and brand
equity: Mediation of consumer engagement. The Service Industries Journal, 41(5-6), 355-381.

Pansari, A., & Kumar, V. (2017). Customer engagement: the construct, antecedents, and Consequences. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science. 45(3), 294–311.
Park, S. Y., & Vargo, S. L. (2013). The service-dominant logic approach to tourism marketing strategy. Strategic
Marketing in Tourism Services, 231, 231-246.
Park, Y. N., & Gong, T. (2023). Curvilinear relationship between customer engagement and responses to service
failures. The Service Industries Journal, 1-27.
Pike, S. (2010). Destination branding case study: tracking brand equity for an emerging destination between 2003
and 2007. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 34(1), 124-139.
Pine, J., and Gilmore, J. H. (1999), “The experience economy: work is theatre & every business a stage”, Harvard
Business Press.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral
research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology,
88(5), 879-903.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing
indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40(3), 879-891.
Prentice, C., Altinay, L., & Woodside, A. G. (2021). Transformative service research and COVID-19. The Service
Industries Journal, 41(1-2), 1-8.
Prebensen, N. K., & Xie, J. (2018). Efficacy of co-creation and mastering on perceived value and satisfaction in
tourists’ consumption. Tourism Management, 60, 166–176.
Rahman, M. S., Fattah, F. A. M. A., Hussain, B., & Hossain, M. A. (2020). An integrative model of consumerbased heritage destination brand equity. Tourism Review.
Rasoolimanesh, S. M., Seyfi, S., Rather, R., & Hall, C. M. (2021). Investigating the mediating role of visitor
satisfaction in the relationship between memorable tourism experiences and behavioral intentions in
heritage. Tourism Review, In press.
Rather, R. (2018). Investigating the impact of customer brand identification on hospitality brand loyalty: A social
identity perspective. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management, 27(5), 487-513.
Rather, R. (2020). Customer experience and engagement in tourism destinations: The experiential marketing
perspective. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 37(1), 15-32.
Rather, R. (2021). Monitoring the impacts of tourism-based social media, risk perception and fear on tourist’s
attitude and revisiting behaviour in the wake of COVID-19 pandemic. Current Issues in Tourism, 24(23),
3275-3283.
Rather, R., (2022). Demystifying the effects of perceived risk and fear on customer engagement, co-creation and
revisit intention during COVID-19: A protection motivation theory approach. Journal of Destination
Marketing & Management, 20, 100564.
Rather, R. (2023). Brand co-creation tourism research: contemporary issues and challenges, USA/Canada: Apple
Academic Press, Inc.
Rather, R., & Camilleri, M.A. (2019). The effects of service quality and consumer-brand value congruity on
hospitality brand loyalty, Anatolia, 30(4), 547-559.
Rather, R., & Hollebeek, L. (2021). Customers’ service-related engagement, experience, and behavioral intent:
Moderating role of age. Journal of Retailing & Consumer Services, Forthcoming.
Rather, R., Hollebeek, L.D. & Islam J.U. (2019). Tourism-based customer engagement: The construct,
antecedents, and consequences. The Service Industries Journal, 39(7-8), 519-540.

Rather, R., Hollebeek, L. D., & Rasoolimanesh, S. M. (2021). First-time versus repeat tourism customer
engagement, experience, and value cocreation: An empirical investigation. Journal of Travel
Research, 61(3), 549-564.
Rather, R., Hollebeek, L. D., VO‐THANH, T., Ramkissoon, H., Leppiman, A., & Smith, D. (2022a). Shaping
customer brand loyalty during the pandemic: The role of brand credibility, value congruence, experience,
identification, and engagement. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 21(5), 1175-1189.
Rather, R., Parrey, S. H., Gulzar, R., & Rehman, S. U. (2022b). Does gamification effect customer brand
engagement and co-creation during pandemic? A moderated-mediation analysis. Journal of Global
Scholars of Marketing Science, 1-27.
Rather, R., Tehseen, S., Parrey, S.H. (2018). Promoting customer brand engagement and brand loyalty through
customer brand identification and value congruity. Spanish Journal of Marketing, 22 (3), 319–337.
Raza, A., Rather, R., Iqbal, M., & Bhutta. U. (2021). An assessment of corporate social responsibility on customer
company identification and loyalty in banking industry: A PLS-SEM analysis. Management Research
Review, 43(11), 1337-1370.
Ren, M., Park, S., Xu, Y., Huang, X., Zou, L., Wong, M. S., & Koh, S. Y. (2022). Impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on travel behavior: A case study of domestic inbound travelers in Jeju, Korea. Tourism
Management, 104533.
Rihova, I., Buhalis, D., Gouthro, M. B., & Moital, M. (2018). Customer-to-customer co-creation practices in
tourism: Lessons from customer-dominant logic. Tourism Management, 67, 362-375.
Rogers, R. W. (1975). A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change. The Journal of
Psychology, 91(1), 93-114.
Shams, G., Rather, R., Rehman, M.A., & Nawaz, L.B. (2020). Hospitality-based service recovery, outcome
favourability, satisfaction with service recovery, and consequent customer loyalty: An empirical analysis.
International Journal of Culture, Tourism, and Hospitality, 15(2), 266-284
Shoukat, M. H., & Ramkissoon, H. (2022). Customer delight, engagement, experience, value co-creation, place
identity, and revisit intention: a new conceptual framework. Journal of Hospitality Marketing &
Management, 31(6), 757-775.
Shaw, G., Bailey, A., & Williams, A. (2011). Aspects of service-dominant logic and its implications for tourism
management: Examples from the hotel industry. Tourism Management, 32(2), 207–214.
So, K. K. F., Li, X., & Kim, H. (2020a). A decade of customer engagement research in hospitality and tourism: A
systematic review and research agenda. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 44(2), 178-200.
So, K. K. F., Kim, H., & King, C. (2021). The thematic evolution of customer engagement research: a
comparative systematic review and bibliometric analysis. International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management, 33(10), 3585-3609.
So, K. K. F., Wei, W., & Martin, D. (2020b). Understanding customer engagement and social media activities in
tourism: A latent profile analysis and cross-validation. Journal of Business Research, 129, 474-483.
Statista (2021). Number of the coronavirus (COVID-19) cases across Indian states and union territories. May 24,
2021, Accessed: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1103458/india-novelcoronavirus covid-19 cases-bystate/ (May 24, 2021).
Sugathan, P., & Ranjan, K. R. (2019). Co-creating the tourism experience. Journal of Business Research, 100,
207-217.
Sürücü, Ö., Öztürk, Y., Okumus, F., & Bilgihan, A. (2019). Brand awareness, image, physical quality and
employee behavior as building blocks of customer-based brand equity: Consequences in the hotel
context. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 40, 114-124.

Taheri, B., Hosany, S., & Altinay, L. (2019). Consumer engagement in the tourism industry: new trends and
implications for research. The Service Industries Journal, 39(7-8), 463-468.
UNWTO (2022). International tourism back to 60% of pre-pandemic levels in january-july 2022. Released on 26,
Sep, 2022, https://www.unwto.org/news/international-tourism-back-to-60-of-pre-pandemic-levels-injanuary-july-2022
Vargo, S.L., & Lusch, R.F. (2016). Service-dominant logic 2025.International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 34(1), 46-67
Verhoef, P. C., Lemon, K. N., Parasuraman, A., Roggeveen, A., Tsiros, M., & Schlesinger, L. A. (2009).
Customer experience creation: Determinants, dynamics and management strategies. Journal of
retailing, 85(1), 31-41.
Vo-Thanh, T., Zaman, M., Hasan, R., Rather, R., Lombardi, R., & Secundo, G. (2021). How a mobile app can
become a catalyst for sustainable social business: The case of Too Good To Go. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 171, 120962.
Wang, J., Liu-Lastres, B., Ritchie, B. W., & Mills, D. J. (2019). Travellers' self-protections against health risks:
An application of the full Protection Motivation Theory. Annals of Tourism Research, 78, 102743.
Wang, Y., Zhang, M., Li, S., McLeay, F., & Gupta, S. (2021). Corporate responses to the coronavirus crisis and
their impact on electronic‐word‐of‐mouth and trust recovery: Evidence from social media. British Journal
of Management, 32(4), 1184-1202.
Woratschek, H., Horbel, C., & Popp, B. (2020). Determining customer satisfaction and loyalty from a value cocreation perspective. The Service Industries Journal, 40(11-12), 777-799.
Wu, J., Font, X., & Liu, J. (2021). Tourists’ pro-environmental behaviors: Moral obligation or
disengagement?. Journal of Travel Research, 60(4), 735-748.
Yang, Y., Liu, X., & Li, J. (2016). How customer experience affects the customer-based brand equity for tourism
destinations. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 32(1), 97–113.
Yen, C. H., Teng, H. Y., & Tzeng, J. C. (2021). Innovativeness and customer value co-creation behaviors:
Mediating role of customer engagement. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 88, 102514.
Zhao, G., Cavusgil, E., & Zhao, Y. (2016). A protection motivation explanation of base-of-pyramid consumers'
environmental sustainability. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 45, 116-126.
Zheng, D., Luo, Q., & Ritchie, B. W. (2021). Afraid to travel after COVID-19? Self-protection, coping and
resilience against pandemic ‘travel fear’. Tourism Management, 83, 104261.

