View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk

brought to you by  CORE

provided by Aston Publications Explorer

Consumer Based Brand Equity Conceptualization & Measurement:  

A Literature Review 

George Christodoulides* 
Lecturer in Marketing 
Birmingham Business School 
The University of Birmingham 
University House 
Edgbaston  
Birmingham B15 2TT  
United Kingdom 
Phone: + 44 (0)121 414 8343 
Fax: + 44 (0)121 414 7791 
Email: G.Christodoulides@bham.ac.uk 

Leslie de Chernatony 
Professor of Brand Marketing 
Università della Svizzera italiana, Lugano and Aston Business School, Birmingham 
Phone: +44-(0)7905088927 
Fax: +44-(0)121 449 0104 
Email: dechernatony@btinternet.com 

July 2009 

Paper accepted by the International Journal of Market Research  

© Christodoulides and de Chernatony, 2009 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

 
Consumer Based Brand Equity Conceptualization & Measurement: 

A Literature Review 

Abstract:  

Although there is a large body of research on brand equity, little in terms of a 

literature review has been published on this since Feldwick’s (1996) paper.  To 

address this gap, this paper brings together the scattered literature on consumer based 

brand equity’s conceptualization and measurement.  Measures of consumer based 

brand equity are classified as either direct or indirect.  Indirect measures assess 

consumer based brand equity through its demonstrable dimensions and are superior 

from a diagnostic level.  The paper concludes with directions for future research and 

managerial pointers for setting up a brand equity measurement system. 

Keywords:  literature review, brand equity, consumers 

2 

 
 
 
 
 Consumer Based Brand Equity Conceptualization & Measurement:  

A Literature Review 

Introduction: 

Marketers are continually under pressure to justify the impact of marketing activities 

and this has renewed interest in measures of marketing performance (O’Sullivan and 

Abela 2007).  The Marketing Science Institute has indicatively placed accountability 

and return on investment of marketing expenditure at the top of its research priorities 

for 2008-10 (MSI 2008).  Financial measures such as sales and profit provide only 

partial indicators of marketing performance due to their historical orientation and 

typically short term horizon (Mizik and Jacobson 2008).  Intangible, market-based 

assets on the other hand provide a richer understanding of marketing performance, 

reconciling short- and long-term performance (Ambler, 2003) as well as bridging 

marketing and shareholder value (Srivastava, Shervani, and Fahey 1998).  Whilst 

competitors can emulate financial and physical assets, intangible assets represent a 

more sustainable competitive advantage (Hunt and Morgan 1995).   

Brand equity is a key marketing asset (Ambler 2003; Davis 2000), which can 

engender a unique and welcomed relationship differentiating the bonds between the 

firm and its stakeholders (Capron and Hulland 1999; Hunt and Morgan 1995) and 

nurturing long term buying behavior.  Understanding the dimensions of brand equity, 

then investing to grow this intangible asset raises competitive barriers and drives 

brand wealth (Yoo, Donthu and Lee 2000).  For firms, growing brand equity is a key 

objective achieved through gaining more favorable associations and feelings amongst 

target consumers (Falkenberg 1996).  Previous research established a positive effect 

3 

 
 
 
of brand equity on: consumer preference and purchase intention (Cobb-Walgren, 

Ruble, and Donthu 1995); market share (Agarwal and Rao 1996); consumer 

perceptions of product quality (Dodds, Monroe, and Grewal 1991); shareholder value 

(Kerin and Sethuraman 1998); consumer evaluations of brand extensions (Aaker and 

Keller 1990; Bottomley and Doyle 1996; Rangaswamy, Burke, and Oliva 1993); 

consumer price insensitivity (Erdem, Swait, and Louviere 2002); and resilience to 

product-harm crisis (Dawar and Pillutla 2000). 

Over the last 15 years, brand equity has become more important as the key to 

understanding the objectives, the mechanisms, and net impact of the holistic impact of 

marketing (Reynolds and Phillips 2005).  In this context, it is not surprising that 

measures capturing aspects of brand equity have become part of a set of marketing 

performance indicators (Ambler 2003).  The discussion of brand equity and its 

measurement has a broad range of adherents, both academic and practitioner, that 

collectively share what can be described as a “black box” orientation (Reynolds and 

Phillips 2005).  Evidence of the importance of brand equity for the business world is 

the fact that there is currently a significant number of consulting firms (e.g. 

Interbrand, WPP, Young & Rubicam and Research International), each with their own 

proprietary methods for measuring brand equity (Haigh 1999).  In setting up the 

future research agenda for brand management, Keller and Lehman (2006) 

unsurprisingly identified brand equity and its measurement as a significant research 

topic. 

The literature on brand equity, although substantial, it is largely fragmented and 

inconclusive.  As Berthon et al. (2001) put it, “perhaps the only thing that has not 

4 

 
 
 
been reached with regard to brand equity is a conclusion.”  This paper provides a 

systematic review of the literature on brand equity conceptualization and 

measurement, and concludes with some directions for future research.  Figure 1 shows 

the structure of the paper and introduces the broad categories of methodologies to 

measure CBBE.  Although the whole purpose of setting up a brand equity monitor is 

to enable marketers to appreciate its key drivers, it is beyond the scope of this paper to 

review research on antecedents and consequences of brand equity as exemplified by 

Yoo, Donthu and Lee (2000). 

 - Insert Figure 1 about here -  

Firm Based versus Consumer Based Brand Equity 

As Winters (1991) states, “if you ask ten people to define brand equity, you are likely 

to get ten (maybe 11) different answers as to what it means” (p.70).  Since then, many 

studies have been published on brand equity but Winters’ statement is even more 

relevant today than it was in 1991.  Brand equity is such a complex concept that the 

diversity of its conceptualizations in the literature may be due to the “blind men and 

elephant” syndrome (Ambler 2003); different studies describing different aspects of 

this intangible asset.  The lack of an agreed definition of brand equity, has in turn 

spawned various methodologies for measuring the construct.  Although there is no 

universally accepted definition of brand equity, there is at least some consensus in that 

brand equity denotes the added value endowed by the brand to the product (Farquhar 

1989: RC7).  This value can serve as a bridge that links what happened to the brand in 

the past and what should happen to the brand in the future (Keller 2003).  Hence, 

5 

 
 
 
Ambler’s (2003) characterization of brand equity as a repository of future profits or 

cash flows that results from past marketing investment. 

Firms however are not the only recipients of brand value.  According to the literature 

the main recipients of brand value are either firms or customers and such a view is 

clearly presented in Aaker’s (1991) definition of brand equity as “a set of assets and 

liabilities linked to a brand, its name and symbol, that add to or subtract from the 

value provided by a product or service to a firm and/or that firm’s customers” (p.15).  

A similar yet more output oriented definition is that of Srivastava and Shocker (1991) 

who define brand equity “a set of associations and behaviors on the part of a brand’s 

consumers, channel members and parent corporation that enables a brand to earn 

greater volume or greater margins that it could without the brand name and, in 

addition, provides a strong, sustainable and differential advantage.”  So far, the brand 

equity construct has been viewed from two major perspectives in the literature.  Some 

authors focused on the financial perspective of brand equity (Farquhar et al 1991; 

Simon and Sullivan 1993; Haigh 1999) and others on the customer based perspective 

(Aaker 1991; You and Donthu 2001; Vazquez et al. 2002; Keller 1993; de Chernatony 

et al., 2004; Pappu et al., 2005; Christodoulides et al. 2006).  The first perspective 

discusses the financial value brand equity creates to the business and is often referred 

to as firm based brand equity (FBBE).  However, the financial value of brand equity is 

only the outcome of consumer response to a brand name. The latter, is considered the 

driving force of increased market share and profitability of the brand and it is based 

on the market’s perceptions (consumer based brand equity). 

6 

 
 
 
In a related study trying to understand interpretations of brand equity, Feldwick 

(1996) identified three different ways in which the term “brand equity” has been used:  

first to signify the total value of a brand as a separate asset –when it is sold or 

included on a balance sheet; second, as a measure of the strength of consumers’ 

attachment to the brand; and, third as a description of the associations and beliefs the 

consumer has about the brand.  Whilst the first sense of the term is associated with 

firm-based brand equity, the other two senses reflect consumer-based brand equity.  

Kapferer (2004) attempted to link consumer based brand equity dimensions (i.e. 

“brand assets”) to brand value (net discounted cashflow attributable to the brand after 

paying the cost of capital invested to produce and run the business and the cost of 

marketing) (e.g. price premium) through CBBE consequences such as price premium.  

For Kapferer it is essential for brands to yield financial benefits if they are to claim 

high levels of equity. 

Consumer-based brand equity 

The conceptualizations of consumer-based brand equity have mainly derived from 

cognitive psychology and information economics.  The dominant stream of research 

has been grounded in cognitive psychology, focusing on memory structure (Aaker 

1991; Keller 1993).  Aaker (1991) identified the conceptual dimensions of brand 

equity as brand awareness, brand associations, perceived quality, brand loyalty, and 

other proprietary brand assets such as patents, trademarks and channel relationships.  

The former four dimensions of brand equity represent consumer perceptions and 

reactions to the brand, while proprietary brand assets are not pertinent to consumer-

based brand equity.  Keller (1993) looked at consumer based brand equity strictly 

from a consumer psychology perspective and defined it as “the differential effect of 

7 

 
 
brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the brand” (p.2).  

According to this conceptualization, a brand has a positive (or negative) value if the 

consumer reacts more (or less) favorably to the marketing mix of a product of which 

he/she knows the brand name than to the marketing mix of an identical yet unbranded 

product.  Consumer response to the marketing mix of a brand can be translated at 

various stages of the purchase decision making sequence such as preference, choice 

intentions and actual choice.  According to Keller (1993), brand knowledge is a key 

antecedent of consumer based brand equity and is in turn conceptualized as a brand 

node in memory to which a variety of associations have been linked.  Brand 

knowledge is then decomposed into two separate constructs, brand awareness and 

brand image (associations).  The majority of conceptual studies summarized in Table 

1.1 agree that awareness and associations are important components of consumer 

based brand equity.  The majority of conceptual studies on CBBE took place in 

early/mid 1990s with subsequent research being mostly empirical.  It may also be 

argued that the emphasis of conceptual research has shifted from the relational 

intangible asset (i.e. brand equity) per se to the consumer-brand relationship (e.g. 

Fournier 1998) and customer equity (e.g. Rust et al. 2000; 2004). 

- Insert Table 1.1 about here – 

In parallel, brand equity research rooted in information economics draws on the 

imperfect and asymmetrical nature of markets (Erdem and Swait 1998).  In this 

context, economic agents are required to transmit information about their specific 

characteristics by means of signals.  According to Erdem et al. (2006), brand names 

act as signals to consumers.  A brand signal becomes the sum of that brand’s past and 

8 

 
 
 
 
present marketing activities.  Imperfect and asymmetrical market information 

produces uncertainty in consumers’ minds.  A credible brand signal generates 

consumer value by: (1) reducing perceived risk, (2) reducing information search costs, 

and (3) creating favorable attribute perceptions (Erdem and Swait 1998).  Under this 

approach, CBBE is defined as the value of a brand signal to consumers (Erdem and 

Swait 1998).From our review of the literature we regard the two research streams 

(cognitive psychology and information economics) as complementary and we propose 

a definition of CBBE that contains elements from both, i.e. “a set of perceptions, 

attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors on the part of consumers that results in increased 

utility and allows a brand to earn greater volume or greater margins than it could 

without the brand name.” 

Measurement of CBBE 

Although Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993) amongst others conceptualized brand equity 

they never operationalized a scale for its measurement.  This spawned a number of 

methodologies to quantify this highly regarded intangible asset, most of which 

employ complex statistical procedures (e.g. Leuthesser et al. 1995; Park and 

Srinivasan 1994), making them difficult to comprehend and use amongst practising 

marketers.  Empirical endeavors to operationalize consumer-based brand equity can 

be classified based on their approach to measurement (i.e. direct or indirect).  Direct 

approaches to brand equity measurement attempt to measure the phenomenon directly 

by focusing on consumers’ preferences (e.g. Park and Srinivasan 1994; Srinivasan 

1979) or utilities (e.g. Kamakura and Russell 1993; Swait et al. 1993), while indirect 

approaches measure brand equity through its demonstrable manifestations (e.g. Pappu 

9 

 
 
 
et al. 2005; Yoo and Donthu 2001).  Table 1.2 summarizes the main studies on 

consumer based brand equity measurement. 

- Insert Table 1.2 about here - 

Direct approaches 

Studies falling into the former group neglect the theoretical dimensions of the 

construct which, if properly operationalized, can provide actionable insights into the 

drivers of equity.  Ultimately, what these studies are trying to achieve is a separation 

of the value of the brand from the value of the product (e.g. by using the multiattribute 

model).  Over the years, this has proved to be conceptually and methodologically 

problematic as “brands supervene on products, much as the mental has been claimed 

to supervene on non-aesthetic properties” (Grassl 1999, p.323). 

Multiattribute Approaches 

Srinivasan (1979), Park and Srinivasan (1994), and Jourdan (2002) use the multi-

attribute model as a common departure point to measure consumer based brand 

equity.  Srinivasan (1979) defines brand equity, which back then he calls brand 

specific effect as “the component of a brand’s overall preference that is not explained 

by the multiattribute model” (p.12).  In line with this definition, Srinivasan (1979) 

measures brand equity by comparing observed preferences based on actual choice 

with consumer preferences derived from a multiattribute conjoint analysis.  The 

difference between overall preference and the preference estimated by the 

multiattribute model is subsequently quantified by means of a monetary scale (dollar-

10 

 
 
 
 
 
metric scale).  Estimates of brand equity that result from this method occur, at best, at 

the segment level.  As with every attempt to measure brand equity directly, this 

approach does not shed light on the sources of brand value.  Fifteen years later, Park 

and Srinivasan (1994) achieve measurement of brand equity at the individual level 

which they operationally define as “the difference between an individual consumer’s 

overall brand preference and his or her multiattributed preference based in objectively 

measured attribute levels” (p.273).  Objective preferences can be obtained by 

laboratory tests, blind tests or surveys with experts.  Park and Srinivasan (1994) also 

disaggregate consumer based brand equity into two parts: an attribute component, 

based on consumers’ evaluations of the brand’s physical characteristics; and a non-

(product) attribute component, based on symbolic associations attached to the brand.  

Although it provides important insights into the perceptual distortions caused by a 

specific product attribute, this method does not break down the non-attribute based 

component of brand equity.  It is also naïve to assume that experts (or dentists in the 

context of the study) are immune from the brand equity effect and are able to provide 

objective attribute scores.  Jourdan (2002) notes that the difference of utility implied 

in the Park and Srinivasan (1994) definition of brand equity may not entirely be 

imputable to the brand as part of it is due to measurement error.  Aside from the brand 

name effect, overall preference may not coincide with the preference based on 

objectively measured product attributes for two other reasons.  First, a consumer may 

positively evaluate all product attributes but yet choose another brand due to 

unobservable variables that affect preferences and may even be random to the 

individual consumer (i.e. random error).  Second, preference based on objective 

evaluations of a product’s attribute levels is estimated by means of the multiattribute 

model, the arbitrary choice of which, as well as the number and nature of the 

11 

 
attributes retained, may be potential sources of systematic error.  As such  Jourdan 

(2002) argues for an error component, which data from a repeated measures 

experiment shows is not negligible.  His amendment resulted in improved levels of 

reliability and validity of brand equity measurement.  Also, the choice of a single 

sample provides better control of distortional factors.  Despite this method’s 

advantages the complexity of its inherent experimental design translates into little 

managerial value. 

Other Direct Approaches 

Not deviating substantially from the underlying logic of the studies in the previous 

section, Leuthesser et al. (1995) begin with the assumption that personal evaluation of 

a given brand on a number of attributes is always biased.  This bias is caused by the 

fact that consumers are predisposed towards brands they know.  At the level of 

subjective attribute-by-attribute evaluations, this predisposition is manifest through 

the statistical “halo effect” (or error): the correlations of inter-attributes in the 

multiattribute model would be higher than if consumers held no a priori overall 

attitude (global effect) towards the brand being rated.  According to the authors, it is 

this perceptual distortion that forms the basis of brand equity.  In the same line of 

thinking, they postulate that the halo effect corresponds to the aggregate value of the 

brand.  In order to isolate the effect of this halo, Leuthesser et al. (1995) describe two 

statistical procedures: “partialling out” and “double centering”.  This method does not 

provide any indication of the sources of consumer based brand equity and is therefore 

of little value to brand managers.  More importantly, this method does not take into 

account the part of consumer based brand equity that hinges on associations attached 

to the brand name.  As a result, this method can only be applied in product categories 

12 

 
 
where the positioning of competitive brands is functional or experiential (Park, 

Jaworski and McInnis 1986).  Another weakness of this method is that equity is at 

best measured at the aggregate level rather than the individual level.  Finally, the 

method does not overcome the shortcoming of previous methods, which draw heavily 

on statistics, making it hard to use by brand managers. 

Unlike previous studies which focus on preference, Kamakura and Russell (1993) 

examine consumers’ actual purchase behavior by means of a segmentwise logit 

model.  The empirical estimation of the model is based on real purchase data from 

supermarket checkout scanners.  Consumer based brand equity is measured as “the 

implied utility or value assigned to a brand by consumers” (p.10).  By removing the 

effects of short term advertising and price promotions, Kamakura and Russell (1993) 

came up with a proxy of Brand Value.  Two major sources of brand equity were 

subsequently identified as a result of decomposing Brand Value into tangible and 

intangible components.  The authors go on to propose Brand Value and Intangible 

Brand Value as two alternative measures of brand equity.  While Brand Value 

provides a fairly good diagnostic for a brand’s competitive position, Intangible Brand 

Value isolates the utility associated with intangible factors such as brand associations 

and perceptual distortions.  While providing a preliminary breakdown of Brand Value, 

Intangible Brand Value is not decomposed further to enable brand managers to 

manage the sources of that value.  Similar to Srinivasan (1979), this approach does 

not allow evaluating consumer based brand equity at the individual consumer level.   

The method offers the advantage of reflecting actual consumer behavior as opposed to 

preferences, but at the same time is confined to contexts where scanner data is 

available.  Finally, the method assumes that brand separability is possible, a position 

13 

 
 
challenged severely by researchers who adopt an “inclusive” as opposed to an 

“additive” approach to branding (Ambler and Barwise 1998; Barwise et al. 1990). 

Building on the information economics paradigm, the approach adopted by Swait et 

al. (1993) uses the entire utility value attached to a brand rather than isolating specific 

parameters thereof.  Their argument is that the effect of brand equity occurs 

throughout the components of the utility function and therefore any measure of brand 

equity should reflect total utility.   Based on this, they propose a new measure of 

consumer based brand equity called “Equalisation Price” (EP), which encompasses 

“the monetary expression of the utility a consumer attributes to a bundle consisting of 

a brand name, product attributes and price” (p.30).  Based on a hypothetical choice 

task and additional information relating to consumers’ purchases and product usage, 

image and socio-demographics, EP is then calculated by means of a multinomial logit 

model.  This is the hypothetical price at which each brand would have the same 

market share in that consumer’s purchases (Barwise 1993).  One of the advantages of 

this measuring instrument is that it incorporates a series of qualitative variables 

related to symbolic associations.  The instrument developed by Swait et al. (1993) 

allows identifying the sources of brand associations and determining importance 

weights in the function of consumer utility.  Another advantage is that it permits the 

calculation of consumer based brand equity at the individual level.  Nevertheless, the 

specification of the model postulates that all consumers have identical preferences, 

rendering the method inappropriate for markets characterized by inhomogeneous 

consumer choice. 

14 

 
 
 
Shankar et al. (2008) developed a model of brand equity that combines financial and 

consumer survey data.  The two multiplicative components of brand equity are 

offering value and relative brand importance.  Offering value is the net present value 

of a product or product range carrying a brand name and can be estimated through 

financial measures such as forecast revenues and margin ratios.  Relative brand 

importance is a measure that seeks to isolate the effect of brand image on consumer 

utility relative to the effect of other factors that also affect consumer choice.  Shankar 

et al. identify brand reputation, brand uniqueness, brand fit, brand associations, brand 

trust, brand innovation, brand regard, and brand fame as drivers of brand image which 

may be captured through a consumer survey.  An advantage of this method is that it 

allows estimating brand equity for multicategory brands.  While this method is 

beneficial in terms of combining both financial and consumer data, it makes 

comparisons with rival brands difficult due to competitor financial measures often 

being unavailable at the brand level.  Moreover, this approach produces an aggregate 

estimate of brand equity as only relative brand importance is measured at the 

individual level. 

Indirect approaches 

Compared  to  direct  approaches,  indirect  approaches  to  CBBE  measurement  adopt  a 

more holistic view  of the brand and seek  to measure brand equity either through its 

manifest dimensions or through an outcome variable such as a price premium. 

Lassar et al (1995) defined consumer based brand equity as “the enhancement in the 

perceived utility and desirability a band name confers on a product” (p.10).    Based 

on  a  previous  study  conducted  by  Martin  and  Brown  (1990),  the  authors  suggested 

15 

 
 
 
five  CBBE  dimensions  namely,  performance,  value,  social  image,  trustworthiness, 

and  commitment.    The  hypothesized  structure  of  brand  equity  was  supported  by 

survey  data  collected  from  consumers  in two  product  categories  –  TV  monitors  and 

watches.  Lassar et al. (1995) also reported adequate levels of internal consistency and 

discriminant validity for the resultant 17-item likert-type CBBE scale.  Understanding 

the complexity of previous brand equity measurement techniques, Lassar et al. (1995) 

paved  the  way  for  a  simple  paper  and  pencil  instrument  that  enables  managers  to 

easily monitor their brand equity through its constituent dimensions.  Furthermore, the 

metric can also be applied to various product fields as individual scale items measure 

consumer perceptions at a rather abstract, non-product class specific level.  Despite its 

merits, Lassar et al.’s (1995) CBBE scale focuses solely on associations and excludes 

significant behavioral components of brand equity (e.g. behavioral loyalty).  Also, the 

scale  was  developed  and  validated  with  a  convenience  sample  of  113  consumers 

which  is  considered  inadequate  for  confirmatory  factor  analysis  (Hinkin  1995).  

Finally, the authors do not report any tests on the scale’s external validity. 

Similar to the previous authors’ holistic definition of brand equity, Vázquez et al. 

(2002) define consumer based brand equity as the “overall utility that the consumer 

associates to the use and consumption of the brand; including associations expressing 

both functional and symbolic utilities” (p.28).  It is notable that the above definition 

highlights ex-post (i.e., utilities obtained by consumers following a brand’s purchase) 

as opposed to ex-ante utilities (i.e., utilities obtained prior to purchase), the latter 

being the focus of investigation under the information economics paradigm.  Their 

empirical study involving consumer evaluations of athletic shoe brands verified the 

existence of four dimensions of brand utilities: product functional utility, product 

16 

 
 
symbolic utility, brand name functional utility, and brand name symbolic utility.  

Further tests including confirmatory factor analysis showed that their proposed 22-

item scale has strong psychometric properties.  An additional conclusion of the study 

is that neither the additive nor the inclusive conception of a brand is supported.  

Results showed that product and brand utilities maintain discriminant validity, 

suggesting that consumers do not view the two entities (i.e., product and brand) as 

identical.  Nevertheless, the strong inter-correlations between the dimensions require 

brand managers not to regard the product and brand name as entirely independent 

entities.  The resulting scale has a number of advantages over preceding methods of 

brand equity measurement.  In the first place, unlike previous methods which involve 

complex statistical modeling, the Vázquez et al. (2002) method is relatively easy to 

administer.  Second, the developed scale sheds light on the sources of consumer based 

brand equity through four dimensions.  Third, the scale allows measurement at the 

individual level.  Nevertheless, the scale was calibrated solely in the athletic shoes 

sector and therefore certain adaptations are required to administer the scale in other 

contexts.  Finally, this method focused on ex-post brand utilities, thus neglecting 

significant ex-ante brand utilities.  In a follow up study, Koçak et al. (2007) sought to 

replicate the results of Vázquez et al. (2002) and to determine whether their scale 

could be applied to a different cultural context, i.e. Turkey.  Koçak et al. (2007) 

therefore used the same dimensionality of consumer based brand equity (i.e. product, 

functional utility, product, symbolic utility) and to facilitate comparability of results 

tested the scale in the same product category (i.e. sport shoes).  The results showed 

that the original 22-item scale developed by Vázquez et al. (2002) in Spain was not 

appropriate for the Turkish sample.  Instead a 16-item scale that was similar but not 

identical to the original scale was supported by the data.  This led Koçak et al. (2007) 

17 

 
to conclude that the differences between the original and the replication study may be 

due to cultural diversity.  In other words, consumers may arrive at different 

evaluations of brands as a result of different cultural conditions. 

In a separate endeavor, Yoo and Donthu (2001) sought to develop an individual- level 

measure  of  consumer  based  brand  equity  that  is  reliable,  valid,  parsimonious,  and 

draws on the theoretical dimensions put forward by Aaker (1991) and Keller (1993).  

Data to calibrate and validate the scale was collected from three independent samples 

of  American,  Korean  American,  and  Korean  consumers.    The  resultant  battery 

measuring “multi-dimensional brand equity” consists of ten items reflecting the three 

dimensions of brand loyalty, perceived quality, and brand awareness/associations.  To 

assess MBE’s convergent validity, Yoo and Donthu (2001) further developed a 4-item 

unidimensional (direct) measure of brand equity, which they labeled as “overall brand 

equity”.  A strong and significant correlation was found between the two measures. 

Amongst  the  indirect  approaches  to  consumer-based  brand  equity  measurement,  the 

Yoo and Donthu (2001) study arguably has the most strengths and fewest weaknesses.  

First,  Yoo  and  Donthu’s  (2001)  adoption  of  an  etic  approach  to  scale  development, 

which refers to simultaneous use of samples from multiple cultures, suggests that the 

scale is culturally valid.  Second, the scale is applicable to various product categories 

without  requiring  further  adjustments  such  as  in  the  case  of  Vázquez  et  al.  (2002).  

Third,  the  instrument  is  parsimonious  and  easy  to  administer,  making  it  simple  for 

brand managers to regularly assess the equity of their brands.  Fourth, measurement of 

brand equity is made at the individual consumer level.  Fifth, the authors carried out a 

rigorous multi-step validation process. 

18 

 
 
 
Nevertheless, the study’s limitations, as outlined below, necessitate further scale 

development to allow researchers and practitioners to arrive closer to a universally-

accepted measure of consumer-based brand equity (Washburn and Plank 2002). 

The major limitation of Yoo and Donthu’s (2001) three factor consumer-based brand 

equity scale is that brand awareness and brand associations, two theoretically distinct 

underlying constructs of brand equity, collapsed into one dimension.  The question of 

whether or not brand awareness and brand associations should be collapsed is critical.  

Although the two constructs are clearly correlated, both Aaker (1991) and Keller 

(1993) distinguish between brand awareness and associations.  According to Aaker’s 

(1991) conceptualization, brand awareness must precede brand associations.  

Nonetheless, the two dimensions are not synonymous since one can be aware of a 

brand without having a strong set of brand associations linked in memory.  Pappu et 

al. (2005) achieved a distinction between the dimensions of brand awareness and 

brand associations; however their confirmatory factor model suffers from a serious 

limitation.  Two of brand equity’s dimensions, brand awareness and brand loyalty are 

operationalized by one and two indicators respectively, making the psychometric 

properties of their scale questionable (confirmatory factor analysis requires a 

minimum of three indicator variables for each exogenous construct).  Another 

limitation is related to the exclusive reliance on student samples to develop and 

validate their brand equity scale.  Students are generally not effective surrogates of 

consumers (James and Sonner 2001).  A third limitation is concerned with Yoo and 

Donthu’s (2001) selection of product categories.  In an era where branding has 

become critical for services (Brodie et al. 2006; van Riel et al. 2001), and several 

service brands enjoy prominent positions in Interbrand’s annual top brands ranking, it 

19 

 
 
is a serious omission that Yoo and Donthu (2001) only chose product brands for their 

survey (films, jeans, and athletic shoes).  Furthermore, while attentive to cultural 

variations, their study was based on specific country cultures.  Further evidence about 

the dimensionality of brand equity and the construct’s invariance amongst cultures 

was presented by Buil et al. (2008) who collected and compared data from consumers 

in the UK and Spain.  The hypothesized structure of consumer based brand equity 

consisting of brand awareness, perceived quality, brand loyalty and brand associations 

(decomposed into perceived value, brand personality and organizational associations) 

was supported in both countries.  Further research may look further into the 

conceptual and metric equivalence of brand equity such as in “individualist vs. 

collectivist” cultures, and also in “developed vs. developing” markets. 

Except for measures of consumer based brand equity intended to be applicable across 

product categories, the marketing literature also reports studies developing category 

/industry specific measures of brand equity (e.g. de Chernatony et al. 2004; 

Christodoulides et al. 2006).  For instance, de Chernatony et al. (2004) identified three 

dimensions of CBBE specific to financial service brands, namely brand loyalty, 

satisfaction, reputation.  Similarly, Christodoulides et al. (2006) focused on brand 

equity measurement in an online context and through interviews with experts 

identified five dimensions of e-tail brand equity, i.e. emotional connection, online 

experience, responsive service nature, trust and fulfillment.  Consumer surveys are in 

both cases used to then assess consumer based brand equity, each time through its 

manifest dimensions. 

Price premium 

20 

 
 
 
Another way to indirectly measure consumer based brand equity is through an 

outcome variable of consumer based brand equity, i.e. price premium.  This method 

calculates the additional income or profit which is generated as a result of the 

differential selling price between a branded and a generic (non-branded) product 

(Barwise et al. 1989).  Ailawadi et al. (2003) proposed a revenue premium measure as 

a proxy for measuring consumer based brand equity.  This is defined as “the 

difference in revenue (i.e. net price x volume) between a branded good and a 

corresponding private label” (p.3).  Two of the advantages of this measure are the 

reliance on actual market data (as opposed to subjective judgments) and the relative 

ease of calculation.  On the negative side, price premium does not provide insights 

into the sources of brand equity.  Also, brand equity building usually implies one of 

two generic strategies: a price premium strategy or a market share strategy (Park and 

Srinivasan 1994).  In the former case, revenue premium provides satisfactory results.  

However, in the case where the brand in question strives to increase its market share, 

the price premium method fails to deliver accurate results of brand value.  Third, often 

no equivalent generic product is available, but even when is available, it is likely to be 

extremely difficult to obtain a breakdown of competitors’ profitability figures by 

individual product line. 

In parallel with the academic research on brand equity measurement, various 

consultancies and market research firms have also developed their own methodologies 

- which cannot be neglected as they occasionally appear in scholarly research (e.g. 

Chu and Keh 2006; Mizik and Jacobson 2008).  The best known methodologies are 

summarized in table 1.3.  Comparing the measures used by different consultancies 

(see table 1.3) as well as the measures used by consultancies and academics (see table 

21 

 
 
1.1 and 1.3) shows little common ground in terms of the constituent dimensions of 

brand equity. 

- Insert Table 1.3 about here - 

Conclusions and Directions for Future Research 

Our extensive literature review identified two streams of research with regard to 

CBBE’s conceptualization: the dominant stream derives from cognitive psychology 

whilst a secondary stream draws on signaling theory from information economics.  

Although there is some agreement with regard to the definition of brand equity as the 

added value endowed by the brand to the product, additive approaches to measuring 

brand equity have recently given way to more holistic metrics.  Our literature review 

identifies two main classes of CBBE measurement methods.  First, methods that seek 

to quantify brand equity directly; and second, methods that seek to measure brand 

equity either through its demonstrable dimensions or through price premium (outcome 

variable).  It is mostly earlier studies that attempted to measure brand equity directly 

(e.g. Srinivasan 1979) and faced serious problems such as brand separability.  

Moreover, direct techniques have limited managerial value as they usually rely on 

complex statistical models and provide no insights into the sources of brand value.  

Indirect approaches, by contrast, use simple “pen and pencil” instruments to tap 

consumer based brand equity through its individual dimensions.  Despite their 

managerial usefulness as a diagnostic tool, indirect measures of brand equity still have 

limitations some of which derive from the lack of agreement on what dimensions 

constitute consumer-based brand equity although a wave of studies (e.g. Yoo and 

Donthu 2001; Washburn and Plank 2002; Pappu et al. 2005; Buil et al. 2008) endorse 

22 

 
 
 
Aaker’s (1991; 1996) dimensionality.  We believe that there is no such thing as a 

universal measure for brand equity and that the market sector and life-stage of the 

brand need to be taken into account when selecting an appropriate set of measures to 

assess brand equity (Baker et al. 2005).  It is notable from our literature review that 

while some CBBE facets may be product or category specific (e.g. car performance) 

others are “softer” and likely to be more generic in their applicability and scope (e.g. 

trust) (cf.  Morgan 2000).  Tables 1.1 and 1.3 suggest that not only is there diversity in 

the views of academics on CBBE’s dimensionality, but also there seems to be a gap 

between their views and consultants’ views.  This may be because consultants have a 

business model based on which they generate an income stream through their 

proprietary methodologies.  Future research should investigate the relevance of CBBE 

measures for practising managers.  Furthermore, our literature review shows a bias to 

reporting measures developed and validated in the US.  Future research should apply 

these scales to other contexts to assess the conceptual and psychometric equivalence 

of CBBE measures across cultures.  Finally, existing CBBE measures relied heavily 

on evaluations of product (esp. FMCG) brands.  Branding is essential not just for 

products but also for services.  As such, CBBE measures should be tested with service 

brands, and if necessary new service specific brand equity scales should be developed.  

Furthermore, we recognize that a market consists of clusters of individuals with 

different levels of loyalty (Dick and Basu 1994; Morgan 2000).  Research also shows 

that each of these clusters may differ significantly on brand equity suggesting that 

aggregate brand equity scores may be misleading (Rust et al. 2004).  Future research 

needs to address the relative strength of brand equity by type of user.  For instance, 

are committed, loyal customers typically the most valued?  Why should habitual 

customers not be just as valued?  (Knox 2001). 

23 

 
Finally, the largest contribution (in terms of volume) to the existing body of research 

knowledge on brand equity comes from studies adopting a psycho cognitive 

perspective which is largely underpinned by a linear consumer thinking process (see 

for example “hierarchy of effects”).  Emerging advances in neural psychology allude 

to a much more complex brain activity when consumers process a brand (e.g. 

Moutinho and Santos 2009; Quartz and Asp 2005; Yoon et al. 2006).  For instance, 

Yoon et al. (2006) have recently challenged the view that the processing of products 

and brands is akin to that of humans.  Further developments in neurosciences are 

expected to provide better understanding of how consumers feel about, resonate and 

value a brand. 

The following pointers are intended to assist practicing marketers and market 

researchers in setting up their own system to measure brand equity.  

1. Brand equity is a complex and multi-faceted concept and, as such, it needs to be 

captured through a set of measures rather than a single measure.  The measures 

selected should be aligned with the brand vision (Davis 2000).  For instance, a 

supermarket like Waitrose is likely to be more concerned about perceived quality than 

a discounter who would focus more on value-for-money.  Measures should also be 

attentive to the organizational culture of the corporation since externally focused 

organizations with flexible structures would be more attentive to particular facets than 

internally focused organizations with stable structures. 

2. Understanding brand equity is about understanding customer value within a 

particular situational context and level of co-producing value.  It is therefore 

24 

 
 
 
important for brand managers and market researchers to know how their brand 

contributes to the overall product experience. 

3.  Brand category is an important variable in brand equity measurement.  The 

usefulness of different dimensions of brand equity is not uniform across diverse 

industries.  A brand equity monitor should incorporate dimensions that drive value 

within the specific industry [e.g. satisfaction for financial services (de Chernatony et 

al. 2004), and online customer experience for e-brands (Christodoulides et al. 2006)].  

The holy grail of “universal” measures is akin to fools’ gold – a shining example of 

statistical depth with little that drives significant growth. 

4.  Brand equity monitor systems should consist of perceptual and motivational 

factors which can be modeled against consequential behavioral (e.g. purchase 

recency/frequency) measures. 

5.  Functional (e.g. performance), emotional (e.g. affinity), and experiential facets 

should be considered for inclusion in a brand equity measurement system to truly 

appreciate the evolving nature of brands. 

6. In recessionary periods managers may be excessively focused on the short term 

fiscal outcomes of brand strategies.  Insightful consultancy advice needs to exhort the 

importance of appreciating the facets of brand equity which have given rise to 

monetary gain – and how this can be sustained.

25 

 
References: 

Aaker, D.A. (1991) Managing Brand Equity, Free Press, NY. 

Aaker, D.A. (1996) Building Strong Brands, Free Press, NY. 

Aaker, D.A. and Keller, K.L. (1990) “Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions.” 

Journal of Marketing, 54, 1, pp. 27-41. 

Agarwal, M.K. and Rao, V.R. (1996) “An Empirical Comparison of Consumer-Based 

Measures of Brand Equity.” Marketing Letters, 7, 3, pp. 237-247.Ailawadi, K.L., 

Lehmann, D.R. and Neslin, S.A. (2003) “Revenue Premium as an Outcome Measure 

of Brand Equity”, Journal of Marketing, 67, 4, pp. 1-17. 

Ambler, T. (2003) Marketing and the Bottom Line: Creating the Measures of Success, 

Financial Times/Prentice Hall, London. 

Ambler, T. and Barwise, P. (1998) “The Trouble with Brand Valuation” Journal of 

Brand Management, 5, 6, pp. 367-377. 

Baker, C., Nancarrow, C., and Tinson, J. (2005) “The Mind Versus Market Share 

Guide to Brand Equity” International Journal of Market Research 47, 5, 523-540. 

Barwise, P. (1993) “Introduction to the Special Issue on Brand Equity?”, 

International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 1, pp. 3-8. 

Barwise, P., Higson, C., Likierman, A. and Marsh, P. (1989) Accounting for Brands. 

London Business School, London. 

Barwise, P., Higson, C., Likierman, A. and Marsh, P. (1990) “Brands as Separable 

Assets”, Business Strategy Review, 1, 2, pp. 43-59. 

Berry, L. (2000), “Cultivating Service Brand Equity” Journal of the Academy of 

Marketing Science, 28, 1, pp. 128-137. 

26 

 
Berthon, J.P., Capon, N., Hulbert, J., Murgolo-Poore, N.J., Pitt, L. and Keating, S. 

(2001) “Organizational and customer perspectives on brand equity: issues for 

managers and researchers”, ANZMAC, Massey University, Auckland. 

Blackston, M. (1992) “Building Brand Equity by Managing the Brand’s 

Relationships”, Journal of Advertising Research, 32, 3, pp. 79-83. 

Bottomley, P.A. and Doyle, J.R. (1996) “The Formation of Attitudes Towards Brand 

Extensions: Testing and Generalising Aaker and Keller’s Model.” International 

Journal of Research in Marketing, 13, 4, pp. 365-377.Brodie, R.J., Glynn, M.S. and 

Little, V. (2006) “The service brand and the service-dominant logic: missing 

fundamental premise or the need for stronger theory?” Marketing Theory, 6, 3, pp. 

363-379. 

Buil, I., de Chernatony, L. and Martinez E. (2008) “A Cross-National Validation of 

the Consumer-Based Brand Equity Scale” Journal of Product and Brand 

Management, 17, 6, pp.384-392. 

Burmann, C., Jost-Benz, M. and Riley, N. (2009) “Towards an Identity-Based Brand 

Equity Model” Journal of Business Research, 62, 390-397. 

Capron, L. and Hulland, J. (1999) “Redeployment of Brands, Sales Forces, and 

General Marketing Expertise Following Horizontal Acquisitions: A Resource-Based 

View”, Journal of Marketing, 63, 2, pp. 41-54. 

Christodoulides, G., de Chernatony, L., Furrer, O. and Abimbola, T. (2006) 

“Conceptualising and Measuring the Equity of Online Brands.” Journal of Marketing 

Management, 22, 7/8, pp. 799-825. 

Chu, S. and Keh, H.T. (2006) “Brand Value Creation: Analysis of the Interbrand-

Business Week Brand Value Rankings”, Marketing Letters, 17, 4, pp. 323-331. 

27 

 
Cobb-Walgren, C.J., Ruble, C.A. and Donthu N. (1995) “Brand Equity, Brand 

Preference, and Purchase Intent” Journal of Advertising, 24, 3, pp.25-40. 

Davis, S.M. (2000) Brand Asset Management, Jossey Bass, CA. 

Dawar, N. and Pillutla, M.M. (2000) “Impact of Product-Harm Crises on Brand 

Equity: The Moderating Role of Consumer Expectations.” Journal of Marketing 

Research, 37,2, pp. 215-226. 

de Chernatony, L., Harris, F.J. and Christodoulides, G. (2004) “Developing a brand 

performance measure for financial services brands.” Services Industries Journal, 24, 

2, pp.15-33. 

Dodds, W.B., Monroe, K.B. and Grewal D. (1991) “Effects of Price, Brand, and Store 

Information on Buyers’ Product Evaluations.” Journal of Marketing Research, 28, 3, 

pp. 307-319.Erdem, T. and Swait, J. (1998) “Brand Equity as a Signaling 

Phenomenon”, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7, 2, pp. 131-157. 

Erdem, T., Swait, J. and Louviere, J. (2002) “The Impact of Brand Credibility on 

Consumer Price Sensitivity.” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 19, 1, 

pp. 1-19.Erdem, T., Swait, J. and Valenzuela, A. (2006) “Brands as signals:  A cross 

country validation study” Journal of Marketing, 70, 1, pp.34-49. 

Falkenberg, A.W. (1996) “Marketing and the Wealth of Firms” Journal of 

Macromarketing, 16, 4, pp.4-24. 

Farquhar, P. (1989) “Managing Brand Equity” Journal of Advertising Research, 30, 4, 

pp. RC7-RC12. 

Farquhar, P.H., Han, J.Y. and Ijiri, Y. (1991) “Recognizing and Measuring Brand 

Assets”, Report # 91-119, Marketing Science Institute, MA. 

Feldwick, P. (1996) “What is brand equity anyway, and how do you measure it?” 

Journal of the Market Research Society, 38, 2, pp.85-104. 

28 

 
Fournier, S. (1998) “Consumers and their Brands: Developing Relationship Theory in 

Consumer Research” Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 4, pp. 343-373.  

Grassl, W. (1999) “The Reality of Brands: Towards an Ontology of Marketing”, 

American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 58, 2, pp.313-359. 

Haigh, D. (1999) Understanding the Financial Value of Brands, European 

Association of Advertising Agencies, Brussels. 

Hinkin, T. R. (1995) “A Review of Scale Development Practices in the Study of 

Organizations”, Journal of Management, 21, 5, pp. 967-988. 

Hunt, S.D. and Morgan, R.M.  (1995) “The Comparative Advantage Theory of 

Competition”, Journal of Marketing, 59, 2, pp. 1-15. 

James, W.L. and Sonner, B.S. (2001) “Just Say No to Traditional Student Samples”, 

Journal of Advertising Research, 41, 5, pp. 63-71. 

Jourdan, P. (2002) “Measuring Brand Equity: Proposal for Conceptual and 

Methodological Improvements”, Advances in Consumer Research, 29, 1, pp. 290-298. 

Kapferer, J-N. (2004) The New Strategic Brand Management, Kogan, London. 

Kamakura, W.A. and Russell, G.J. (1993) “Measuring Brand Value with Scanner 

Data”, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 1, pp. 9-22. 

Keller, K.L. (1993) “Conceptualizing, Measuring and Managing Customer-Based 

Brand Equity”, Journal of Marketing, 57, 1, pp. 1-22. 

Keller, K.L. and Lehmann, D.R. (2006) “Brands and Branding: Research Findings 

and Future Priorities”, Marketing Science, 25, 6, pp. 740-759. 

Keller, K.L. (2003) Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and 

Managing Brand Equity, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

Kerin, R.A. and Sethuraman, R. (1998) “Exploring the Brand Value-Shareholder 

Value Nexus for Consumer Goods Companies.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 

29 

 
Science, 26, 4, pp. 260-273.Koçak, A., Abimbola, T. and Ozer, A. (2007) “Consumer 

Brand Equity in a Cross-Cultural Replication: An Evaluation of a Scale”, Journal of 

Marketing Management, 23, 1/2, pp. 157-173. 

Knox, S. (2001) “Measuring and Managing Brand Loyalty” Journal of Strategic 

Marketing, 9, pp.111-128. 

Lassar, W., Mittal, B. and Sharma, A. (1995) “Measuring Customer-based Brand 

Equity”, Journal of Consumer Marketing 12, 4, pp. 11-19. 

Leuthesser, L., Kohli, C.S. and Harich, K.R. (1995) “Brand Equity: The Halo Effect 

Measure”, European Journal of Marketing, 29, 4, pp. 57-66. 

Martin, G.S. and Brown, T. J. (1990) “In Search of Brand Equity: The 

Conceptualization and Measurement of the Brand Impression Construct”, in Childers, 

MacKenzie, Leigh, Skinner, Lynch Jr, Heckler, Gatignon, Fisk and Graham (eds.) 

Marketing Theory and Applications, Vol. 2, American Marketing Association, 

Chicago, IL. pp. 431-8. 

Mizik, N. and Jacobson, R. (2008) “The Financial Value Impact of Perceptual Brand 

Atributes”, Journal of Marketing Research, 45, 1, pp. 15-32. 

Morgan, R.P. (2000) “A Consumer-Orientated Framework of Brand Equity and 

Loyalty” International Journal of Market Research, 42, 1, pp.65-78. 

Moutinho, L. and Santos J.P. (2009) “Neuroscience in Marketing: Empirical Evidence 

of Social and Emotional Meanings Conveyed by Brands” Presentation at the 5th 

Thought Leaders International Conference on Brand Management, Athens. 

MSI (2008), “Research Priorities: Guide to MSI Research Programs and Procedures”, 

Marketing Science Institute, MA, available at: www.msi.org/pdf/MSI_RP08-10.pdf  

(accessed 2 October 2008) 

30 

 
Netemeyer, R.G., Krishnan, B., Pullig, C., Wang, G., Yagci, M., Dean, D., Ricks, J. 

and Wirth, F. (2004) “Developing and Validating Measures of Facets of Customer-

Based Brand Equity”, Journal of Business Research, 57, l.2, pp. 209-224. 

O’Sullivan, D. and Abela, A.V. (2007) “Marketing Performance Measurement Ability 

and Firm Performance”, Journal of Marketing, 71, 2, pp. 79-93. 

Pappu, R., Quester, P.G. and Cooksey, R.W. (2005) “Consumer Based Brand Equity: 

Improving the Measurement - Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Product and Brand 

Management, 14,  3, pp. 143-154. 

Park, C.S. and Srinivasan, V. (1994) “A Survey-Based Method for Measuring and 

Understanding Brand Equity and its Extendibility”, Journal of Marketing Research, 

31, 2, pp. 271-288. 

Park, W.C., Jaworski, B.J. and MacInnis, D.J. (1986) “Strategic Brand Concept-

Image Management”, Journal of Marketing, 50,  4, pp. 135-145. 

Quartz, S. and Asp, A. (2005) “Brain Branding: Brands on the Brain” ESOMAR 

Annual Congress, Cannes. 

Rangaswamy, A., Burke, R.R. and Oliva, T.A. (1993) “Brand Equity and the 

Extendibility of Brand Names”, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 

1, pp. 61-75. 

Reynolds, T.J. and Phillips, C.B. (2005) “In Search of True Brand Equity Metrics: All 

Market Share Ain’t Created Equally”, Journal of Advertising Research, 45, .2, 

pp.171-186. 

Rust, R.T., Zeithaml, V.A. and Lemon, K.N. (2000) Driving Customer Equity, Free 

Press, NY.  

Rust, R.T., Zeithaml, V.A. and Lemon, K.N. (2004) “Customer-Centered Brand 

Management”, Harvard Business Review, 82, 9, pp.110- 118. 

31 

 
Shankar, V. Azar, P. and Fuller, M. (2008) “BRAN*EQT: A Multicategory Brand 

Equity Model and its Application at Allstate” Marketing Science, 27, 4, pp.567-584. 

Sharp, B. (1995) “Brand Equity and Market-Based Assets of Professional Service 

Firms”, Journal of Professional Services Marketing, 13, 1, pp. 3-13. 

Simon, C.J. and Sullivan, M.V. (1993) “The Measurement of Determinants of Brand 

Equity: A Financial Approach”, Marketing Science, 12, 1, pp. 28-52. 

Srinivasan, V. (1979) “Network Models for Estimating Brand-Specific Effects in 

Multi-Attribute Marketing Models”, Management Science, 25, 1, pp. 11-21. 

Srivastava, R.K., Shervani, T.A. and Fahey, L. (1998) “Market-Based Assets and 

Shareholder Value: A Framework for Analysis”, Journal of Marketing, 62, 1, pp. 2-

18. 

Swait, J., Erdem, T., Louvière, J. and Dubelaar, C. (1993) “The Equalization Price: A 

Measure of Consumer-Perceived Brand Equity”, International Journal of Research in 

Marketing, 10, 1, pp. 23-45. 

van Riel, A.C.R., Lemmink, J. and Ouwersloot, H. (2001) “Consumer evaluations of 

service brand extensions” Journal of Service Research, 3, 3, pp. 220-231. 

Vázquez, R., Del Rio, A.B. and Iglesias, V. (2002) “Consumer-Based Brand Equity: 

Development and Validation of a Measurement Instrument”, Journal of Marketing 

Management, 18, 1/2, pp. 27-48. 

Washburn, J.H. and Plank, R.E. (2002) “Measuring Brand Equity: An Evaluation of a 

Consumer-Based Brand Equity Scale”, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 10, 

1, pp. 46-61. 

Winters, L.C. (1991) “Brand Equity Measures: Some Recent Advances”, Marketing 

Research, 3, 4, pp.70-73. 

32 

 
Yoo, B. and Donthu, N. (2001) “Developing and Validating a Multidimensional 

Consumer-Based Brand Equity Scale”, Journal of Business Research, 52, 1, pp. 1-14. 

Yoo, B., Donthu, N. and Lee, S. (2000) “An Examination of Selected Marketing Mix 

Elements and Brand Equity”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28, 2, pp. 

195-211. 

33 

 
Table 1.1 Conceptual Research on CBBE 

Study 

Dimensions of CBBE 

Aaker (1991, 1996) 

brand awareness 
brand associations 
perceived quality 
brand loyalty 

Blackston (1992) 

brand relationship  
(trust, customer satisfaction with the brand) 

Keller (1993) 

Sharp (1995) 

brand knowledge 
(brand awareness, brand associations) 

company/brand awareness 
brand image 
relationships with customers/existing customer franchise 

Berry (2000) 

brand awareness 
brand meaning 

Burmann et al. 
(2009) 

Source: the authors 

brand benefit clarity 
perceived brand quality 
brand benefit uniqueness 
brand sympathy 
brand trust 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1.2 Research on CBBE measurement 

Measurement 

Dimensions 
of CBBE 

Measurement
level 

Context 

Product 
Category 

Park & Srinivasan (1994)  attribute based brand 

individual 

USA 

Direct approach 

Srinivasan (1979) 
Kamakura & Russell 
(1993) 

Swait et al. (1993) 

n.a. 
perceived quality 
brand intangible 
value 
n.a. 

Leuthesser et al. (1995) 

Shankar et al. (2008) 

equity 
non-attribute-based 
brand equity 
n.a. 

Offering value, 
relative brand 
importance 

Indirect approach via intermediate measures 

Lassar et al. (1995) 

Yoo & Donthu (2001) 

Vazquez et al. (2002) 

performance 
social image 
value 
trustworthiness 
attachment 

brand awareness 
brand associations 
perceived quality 
brand loyalty 

product functional 
utility 
product symbolic 
utility 
brand name 
functional utility 
brand name 
symbolic utility 

aggregate 
aggregate 

USA 
USA 

health care 
detergents 

individual 

USA 

deodorants, 
trainers, 
jeans 
toothpaste, 
mouthwash 

individual 

Austria  detergents 

aggregate 

USA 

insurance 

individual 

USA 

televisions 
watches 

individual 

USA,  
Korea 

individual 

Spain 

athletic 
shoes, film, 
colour 
television 
sets 
sports shoes 

Washburn & Plank (2002)  brand awareness 

individual 

USA 

brand associations 
perceived quality 
brand loyalty 

crisps 
paper towels

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
de Chernatony et al. 
(2004) 

Netemeyer et al. (2004) 

Pappu et al. (2005) 

Christodoulides et al. 
(2006) 

Kocak et al. (2007) 

Buil et al. (2008) 

individual 

UK 

financial 
services 

individual 

USA 

colas, 
toothpaste, 
athletic 
shoes, jeans 

individual 

Australia  cars, 

televisions 

individual 

UK 

e-tailers 

individual 

Turkey 

sports shoes 

individual 

UK, 
Spain 

soft drinks, 
sportswear, 
electronics, 
cars 

brand loyalty 
satisfaction 
reputation 

perceived quality 
perceived value for 
the cost 
uniqueness 
willingness to pay a 
premium 
brand awareness 
brand associations 
perceived quality 
brand loyalty 

emotional 
connection 
online experience 
responsive service 
nature 
trust 
fulfillment 

product functional 
utility 
product symbolic 
utility 
brand name 
functional utility 
brand name 
symbolic utility 
brand awareness 
perceived quality 
brand loyalty 
brand associations 
(perceived value, 
brand personality, 
organizational 
associations) 

Indirect approach via behavior based measures 

Ailawadi et al. (2003) 

n.a. 

aggregate 

USA 

Source: the authors

consumer 
packaged 
goods, 
groceries 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1.3 Consultancy Based Measures of CBBE 

Name 
Interbrand Brand Strength 

Y&R Brand Asset Valuator 

WPP Brand Dynamics 

Research International Equity Engine 

Source: the authors 

Measures of CBBE 
market 
stability 
brand leadership 
trend 
brand support 
diversification 
protection 
knowledge 
esteem 
relevance 
differentiation 
presence 
relevance 
performance 
advantage 
bonding 
affinity 
perceived functional performance  
the interaction between the brand’s equity 
and its price 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brand equity 

CBBE 

FBBE 

Direct 

Indirect 

Multiattribute 

Other 

Intermediate 

Outcome 

Figure 1:  Brand Equity Methodologies 

38