Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9
DOI 10.1186/s12966-015-0168-6

REVIEW

Open Access

Models accounting for intention-behavior
discordance in the physical activity domain: a
user’s guide, content overview, and review of
current evidence
Ryan E Rhodes* and Christopher A Yao

Abstract
There is a growing concern among researchers with the limited effectiveness and yet subsequent stagnation
of theories applied to physical activity (PA). One of the most highlighted areas of concern is the established gap
between intention and PA, yet the considerable use of models that assume intention is the proximal antecedent
of PA. The objective of this review was to: 1) provide a guide and thematic analysis of the available models that
include constructs that address intention-behavior discordance and 2) highlight the evidence for these structures
in the PA domain. A literature search was conducted among 13 major databases to locate relevant models and PA
studies published before August 2014. Sixteen models were identified and nine overall themes for post-intentional
constructs were created. Of the 16 models, eight were applied to 36 PA studies. Early evidence supported maintenance
self-efficacy, behavioral regulation strategies, affective judgments, perceived control/opportunity, habit, and extraversion
as reliable predictors of post-intention PA. Several intention-behavior discordance models exist within the literature, but
are not used frequently. Further efforts are needed to test these models, preferably with experimental designs.
Keywords: Theory, Intention-behavior gap, Volition, Post-intention, Exercise, Action control
One is hard-pressed to overstate the health benefits of
regular moderate to vigorous intensity physical activity
(PA). Benefits include a considerably reduced risk of
most major chronic diseases such as heart disease, type
2 diabetes, several cancers and musculoskeletal disorders
[1,2] as well as the prevention and rehabilitation of
psychological disorders such as depression and anxiety
[3,4]. Unfortunately, very few people in most developed
nations engage in enough PA to reap a considerable
effect on their health. For example, recent populationlevel assessments of PA using accelerometry suggest that
over 80% of North Americans do not meet the guidelines for public health [5,6]. Clearly, PA promotion efforts
are needed.
Theoretical understanding of the determinants behind
PA has been a line of research inquiry for over 30 years
[7]. The premise behind this research is that a sound
* Correspondence: rhodes@uvic.ca
Behavioural Medicine Laboratory, Faculty of Education, University of Victoria,
PO Box 3015 STN CSC, Victoria, BC V8W 3P1, Canada

understanding of PA determinants will aid in intervention
success and theories represent an organizing framework
to provide structure, function and common nomenclature
to critical variables under study [8,9]. Many of the most
researched theories applied to understanding PA include
intention as the most proximal antecedent to PA. These
include, but are not limited to, the theory of planned
behavior [10], theory of reasoned action [11], protection
motivation theory [12], social cognitive theory [13], variants of self-determination theory [14] and even stage
models such as the transtheoretical model, where stage of
change is an intention-behavior hybrid construct [15].
Tests of the intention construct and its relationship with
PA have solid validation. For example, the most recent
meta-analysis of the theory of planned behavior applied to
PA showed r = .48 [16], which places this relationship
within the medium-sized effect range [17]. Still, the finding
also suggests that 77% of the variance in PA is unexplained.
The relationship is also further attenuated when examining
change in PA (i.e., controlling for past PA), which is

© 2015 Rhodes and Yao; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

arguably far more accurate when attempting to understand
intention and its role in behavior change [8,18]; the relationship between PA and intention reduces to r = .22, which
suggests a borderline meaningful effect [17].
Examinations of the absolute, rather than relative, value
of intention-behavior relations have also shown considerable discordance. For example, experimental manipulations
that increase PA intention (d = .45) result in much lower,
and clinically less meaningful increases in PA (d = .15) [19].
Dichotomization of the intention and PA relationship
around public health guidelines also showed that 48% of
intenders failed to follow-through with PA [20]. Perhaps
most important, is the lowered practical value of theories
that place intention as the proximal antecedent of PA. It is
extremely common for participants in PA interventions to
report to the trial with high intentions at baseline (i.e., often
the driving reason for study participation), yet low PA. This
phenomenon poses a challenge to intention-based theories
because those intentions are considered the proximal
variable to behavioral enactment. Taken together, this line
of research has prompted researchers to call intentionbehavior discordance “the intention-behavior gap.”
The point here is not to doom intention-based theories or the intention construct. Indeed, research into
intention-PA discordance clearly shows that intention is
a necessary construct for behavioral enactment; almost
no one reports performing PA with low intention [20].
Still, almost half of intenders do not follow-through with
their intentions, which suggests that intention is a necessary, but insufficient construct for many when enacting
behavior. An understanding of the translation of intentions into behavior therefore seems paramount to improve
upon our theoretical frameworks in PA [21].
The separation of intention formation from intention
translation, or what is sometimes referred to as action
control [22], is not new. Indeed, conceptualizations of the
distinctions between these concepts can be traced to the
very early 20th century [23] and they were contemplated
carefully in the mid-20th century [24], but models of
intention formation have received the bulk of attention in
the research community since that time. Contemporary
research on the intention-behavior “gap,” however, has
begun to shift some researchers and theorists back to an
investigation of post-intentional constructs. In this relatively early phase of re-interest into intention-translation,
it would seem helpful to collect the models available to
PA researchers and practitioners that attempt to account
for intention-behavior discordance. Comprehensive reviews of theories related to PA have mentioned some of
these intention-translation models in passing commentary
e.g., [25,26] but we are unaware of a collective review of
these models. Thus, the purpose of this review was to 1)
provide a user’s guide to the available models, frameworks,
and theories1 that specifically include a post-intentional

Page 2 of 14

construct or constructs with a content analysis of the various constructs proposed to account for intention-behavior
discordance and 2) highlight the available evidence for
these structures when applied to the PA domain. The
review is meant to be more descriptive than evaluative of
these models at this phase and ultimately to raise awareness and empower PA researchers and practitioners with
options for models that attempt to account for intentionbehavior discordance.

Method
Eligibility criteria

Our literature search unfolded in a two-step process
based on the purposes of the paper. First, we needed to
identify what models offer a pre- and post-intentional
conceptualization. To achieve this aim, an appropriate
model for this review had to include the following
criteria: First, the model had to be identified by a title or
nomenclature to its identity. Thus, models tested as
mere one-off tests of intention-based models (e.g., does
personality mediate intention) were excluded. Second,
the model had to include the intention construct within
its frame in order to specifically demonstrate a postintentional mechanism and intention needed to be a
cognitive construct. Thus, models where intention formation may be implied, but not specifically articulated
such as control theory [27] or dynamic action theory
[28] were excluded. Further, models like the transtheoretical model [15], where the delineation between intent,
plans and behavior are not clear (e.g., the preparation
stage is marked by intent but also by some behavioral
action and organizational/preparatory behaviors) were
also excluded. Third, the model needed to have at least
one construct where the central mechanisms were theorized as post-intentional. This could take three forms: 1)
constructs proposed as mediators of intention-behavior
relations, 2) constructs proposed as moderators of
intention-behavior relations, and 3) constructs unrelated
to intention in the theory that directly determine behavior. The latter consideration above was the aspect that
needed the most careful scrutiny. Constructs in models
that are not specifically stated as independent from
intention formation did not meet our inclusion criteria,
such as theory of planned behavior’s perceived behavioral
control construct, where perceived behavioral control is
hypothesized as an antecedent to intention and a potential
direct determinant to behavior [10]. The second step in
our review was to identify the application of all models
found in step one to the PA domain. Eligible studies
included the following: 1) the use of the identified
intention-based model with post-intentional constructs
and 2) a measurement of PA as a primary outcome. Studies were delimited in both searches to published works
written (or translated) to English.

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Search strategy

A comprehensive literature search was conducted to
identify potential models that integrated post-intentional
constructs and have been previously applied to health
behaviors. Health behaviors of interest included PA/
exercise, healthy eating, smoking cessation, flossing,
sunscreen use, vaccination, HIV prevention, or cancer
screening. Major databases (Academic Search Complete,
Academic Search Premier, AgeLine, CINAHL, Health
Source, Medline, Alt HealthWatch, Health Technology
Assessment, PsychINFO, PubMed, Social Sciences, SPORTDiscus and Web of Science) were used to search for any
articles published prior to August 2014. A combination of
the following key words that were used included: model,
theory, framework, health behavior, physical activity, exercise, dieting, nutrition, healthy eating, smoking, flossing,
cancer screening, HIV prevention, condom use, vaccination, immunization, volition, action, behavior, intention,
post-intention, intention-behavior gap, mediator, and
moderator. One author conducted the search, and reference lists of included studies were manually crossreferenced. Previously identified models from the authors’
personal records were added to the search. To enhance
the comprehensiveness of our review, we also examined
all 83 theories outlined in Michie and colleagues’ book,
“ABC of Behavior Change Theories” [9]. This book has
amalgamated many theories published to date and
authored by experts in various fields.
The secondary search to identify the applications of
the identified models in PA utilized the aforementioned
databases. Keywords used in this search included the
specific name of the model (e.g., health action process
approach), exercise, and physical activity. All the reference
lists of the studies included were carefully inspected to
locate any additional studies.
Data abstraction and analysis

Each author evaluated the identified models separately
to determine its eligibility for the review. Once deemed
eligible and a consensus was reached, all constructs
relevant to intention-behavior discordance were themed.
Our thematic analysis approach followed an iterative
process. We first constructed a list and definition of the
properties of prototypical constructs present in the most
popular models in health and social behavior to use as a
frame of reference [13,29,30]. Constructs from the identified models were then compared to this list and subsequently scored as one of these constructs or added to the
list as an additional construct. Once an initial set of themes
had been created, analysis shifted toward identifying
broader patterns– that is, establishing the number of
themes deemed sufficient to capture the essence of the
main constructs in each model, followed by creating a label
and description of each. Through this process, themes

Page 3 of 14

deemed sufficiently similar to one another were combined.
All constructs were abstracted and categorized into themes
independently and then compared to reach consensus.
In our subsequent analysis, the abstracted information
included authors, country, sample (number, age, and
gender), study design, model/framework/theory used,
the use of the full model and post-intentional constructs,
and any significant post-intentional predictors. Evidence
was organized in observational and experimental categories
and significant and meaningful associations by construct
were tallied. Themes were created if three or more studies
were present based on the prior review methodology by
Rhodes and colleagues e.g., [31-33]. Based on Sallis et al.’s
[34] rubric for determining an association among studies, a
construct was considered to have a positive association (+)
if greater than 59% of studies supported prediction of PA
(or PA change); a negative association (−) if greater than
59% of studies supported a decrease in PA; inconclusive (?)
if 34-59% of studies found any association, and no association (0) if less than 34% of studies showed any association.
When analyzing the variables, both 1) statistical significance (p < .05) and a meaningful effect size [35,36] (d > .19;
r > .09; OR > 1.49) needed to be present in order for a predictor to have either a positive or negative association with
PA. Studies where effect size could not be determined were
scored on significance value alone.

Results
Details from the literature search for intention discordance models are described in a flow-diagram in Figure 1.
The initial search yielded 3,388 potentially relevant records. Most papers were excluded because the study
contained no indication of a specific model, or contained a
model that did not address intention-behavior discordance.
Twenty-six abstracts and full-text reports were obtained
and reviewed. A total of 16 sources passed the eligibility
criteria and were included in the initial part of the review.
All of these models were published in English between
1980 and 2014. The models originated from a range of
countries, which included Germany, United States, Canada,
Australia, Netherlands, Denmark and the United Kingdom.
Most of the theoretical models, namely the ecological
model for preventing type 2 diabetes in minority youth
[37], health action process approach (HAPA) [38], precaution adoption process model [39], and temporal selfregulation theory [40], have simultaneously focused their
initial efforts on a variety of health behaviors (e.g., diet and
nutrition, PA, smoking cessation). Whereas, the integrated
behavior change model [41], motivation-volition (MoVo)
process model [42], and the action control framework, now
referred to as the multi-process action control (M-PAC)
framework [43], have been solely focused on PA behavior.
Other models such as the integrated change (I-Change)
model [44], information-motivation-behavioral skills model

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Page 4 of 14

Figure 1 Initial search for models, frameworks, and theories that address intention-behavior discordance.

[45] and plans, responses, impulses, motives, and evaluations (PRIME) theory [46] have targeted health communication, HIV prevention and smoking cessation respectively.
The action theory model of consumption [47] and
motivation-ability-opportunity-behavior model [48] were
originally conceptualized with consumerism as the targeted
behavior. Finally, theories like the action control theory
[22], Rubicon model of action phases [49], volitional model
of goal-directed behaviors [50], and theory of interpersonal
behavior [51] were generated as generic behavior models.

Volitional regulation behaviors

Behaviors used to maintain or hone intentions
featured prominently in 11 of the models identified
[22,38,41-47,49,50]. These are described either broadly,
with examples such as self-monitoring, scheduling, enlisting support, prioritizing and problem-solving around
other behaviors as strategies an individual may use to
maintain intentions [22,42,43,45,49,50] and/or specifically
in terms of action plans or implementations intentions
[38,41,44] and coping plans used to problem solve around
difficulties in enacting the behavior [38].

Content analysis of intention-behavior discordance
constructs

The two reviewers identified nine overall themes through
content analysis of each theory (see Table 1). Each theme
is detailed below:

Affect

Affect-based constructs were present in four of the
reviewed models [22,43,46,50]. Affective judgments (e.g.,

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Page 5 of 14

Table 1 Identified theories, model, and frameworks and intention-behavior discordance constructs (n = 16)
Theory

Volitional
Affect Self-efficacy/ Outcome
Selective Endogenous External Habit Identity
regulation beh.
beh. skills
expectancies attention factors
factors

Action Control Theory
(Kuhl, 1984) [22]

√

√

√

HAPA (Schwarzer, 2008) [38]

√

Integrated Behavior-Change Model
(Hager & Chatzisarantis, 2014) [41]

√

I-Change Theory
(de Vries et al., 2005) [44]

√

√

Information-Motivation-Behavioral
Skills Model (Fisher & Fisher,
1992) [45]

√

√

√

Motivation-Ability-OpportunityBehavior Model (Öllander &
Thøgersen, 1995) [48]

√

√

M-PAC (Rhodes & de Bruijn,
2013) [20]

√

√

√

√

√

√
√

Rubicon Model of Action Phases
(Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987) [49]

√

Theory of Consumption
(Bagozzi, 2000) [47]

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

Precaution Adoption Process
Model (Weinstein, 1988) [39]
PRIME Theory (West, 2013) [46]

√

√

Knowledge-Attitude-Behavior
Model (Burnet et al., 2002) [37]

MoVo Process Model
(Göhner et al., 2009) [42]

√

√

√

√

√
√

√

√

Theory of Interpersonal
Behavior (Triandis, 1977) [51]

√

√

√

Temporal Self-Regulation
Theory (Hall & Fong, 2007) [40]

√

√

√

Volitional Model of Goal-Directed
Behavior (Bagozzi, 1992) [50]

√

√

√

√

Note. HAPA = Health Action Process Approach; M-PAC = Multi-Process Action Control Model.

enjoyment, pleasure) about the behavior itself and the
motivational influence these have to maintain or abandon
intentioned behavior were featured in action control theory [22], the volitional model of goal-directed behaviors
[50], M-PAC [43], and PRIME theory [46]. Affect control
in the form of shunting undesired general affective states
in order to maintain one’s intentions featured in action
control theory [22].
Self-efficacy/behavioral skills

Different types of self-efficacy variants are present in
eight of the models reviewed [37-39,43-45,47,48]. The
knowledge-attitude-behavior model [37], motivationability-opportunity-behavior model [48], and the precaution adoption process model [39] suggest that self-efficacy
is a moderator of intention translation, with high selfefficacy needed to translate intentions into action. M-PAC
suggests that control in the form of skills/ability, akin to

task self-efficacy [52], impacts intention-translation with a
threshold effect, where higher abilities may be needed
to translate an intention into behavior than form an
intention [43]. A similar construct of skills was proposed to
mediate and moderate the intention and behavior relationship in the I-Change model [44] and mediate motivationbehavior relations in the information-motivation-behavioral
skills model [45]. By contrast, the HAPA [38] suggests that
two types of self-efficacy aid in translating intentions into
behavior. Maintenance self-efficacy represents the confidence one can perform a behavior given various barriers.
Recovery self-efficacy represents an individual’s confidence
in performing the behavior under relapse or brief periods
of non-performance. Finally, the theory of consumption
positions perceived control as an antecedent of desire to
achieve an intention, implementation intentions, volitional
control strategies used in trying the behavior, and behavior
itself [47].

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Outcome expectations

Action control theory [22], PRIME theory [46], and precaution adoption process model [39] identified the use
of outcome expectations in the role of translating intentions into behavior. These models suggest that conscious
reminders of the expected outcomes from a behavioral
act can be used to help bolster motivation.
Selective attention

Two of the models identify selective attention processes
in maintaining intentions and following thorough with
behavior [22,42]. This concept features prominently in
action control theory [22] where selective processing of
new information and competing intentions, and inhibition
from over-processing information about the intended
behavior are hypothesized as critical in order to translate
intentions into behavior. Gӧhner et al.’s [42] MoVo
process model also considers selective processing as
crucial to moderating intention-behavior relations in
the form of intention-shielding properties.
Endogenous factors

Stable individual differences featured in five of the models
of intention-behavior discordance [22,40,43,46,51]. The
theory of interpersonal behavior [51] considers individual
arousal level as an independent system from intention that
may facilitate or impede behavior. Action control theory
[22] suggests that individuals have predispositions toward
being either action-oriented and following through on
intentions, or state oriented and maintaining the status
quo. M-PAC [43] suggests that PA intention translation is
affected by the personality traits of conscientiousness and
extraversion, where those higher in these personality traits
are more likely to follow-through with their intentions
due to dispositional drive systems of achievement/order
and energy-level respectively. Another unique consideration is Hall and Fong’s [40] construct of self-regulatory
capacity in their temporal self-regulation theory, a
biologically-based system of physiological energy and
executive function capacity, that is proposed to moderate intentions and exert its own independent effect on
behavior. Finally, West’s PRIME theory [46] suggest that
dispositions are characteristics of the motivational system
that govern its operation in stability and context sensitivity,
thus affecting how intention gets translated into action.
External factors

Environmental and other facilitating/inhibiting conditions feature in eight of the models reviewed
[39,40,43,44,46,48,50,51]. In Triandis’ [51] theory of
interpersonal behavior and Baggozi’s [50] volitional model
of goal-directed behaviors, facilitating (or inhibiting)
environmental conditions are proposed to determine
behavior as an independent system from intention. The

Page 6 of 14

M-PAC model suggests that opportunity to act (i.e., time
and access) impacts intention-translation with a threshold
effect, where greater opportunities to act are needed to
translate an intention into behavior than form the original
intention [43]. The precaution adoption process model
[39] highlights that time, resources, competing opportunities all impact translation of intention into behavior.
Finally, de Vries et al. [44] in their I-Change model, Öllander
and Thørgersen [48] in their motivation-ability-opportunitybehavior model, West’s [46] PRIME theory, and Hall and
Fong’s [40] temporal self-regulation theory suggest that
external barriers (e.g., environmental and social) will
moderate the intention-behavior relationship, with more
barriers resulting in an attenuation of the intentionbehavior link.
Habit

Six models suggest processes below conscious thinking
are critical [40,43,47,48,51,53]. The theory of interpersonal
behavior [51] proposes that habit, defined as automatic
responses to cues from a patterned and learned behavior
will determine behavior independent of intention. Bagozzi’s
[47] model of consumption suggests that frequency and
recency of behavior impact both the behavioral processes
employed to enact a behavior and the behavior itself. The
M-PAC [43] and motivation-ability-opportunity-behavior
model [48] suggest that habit helps bind intended behavior
to behavioral action. PRIME theory [46] highlights the
importance of routine to the translation of plans (i.e.,
intentions) into action. Finally, Hall and Fong’s [40]
temporal self-regulation theory proposes that behavioral
pre-potency, a construct almost identical in conception to
habit, will moderate the intention-behavior relationship
and exert its own influence on behavior.
Identity

Four models suggest that role identity formation with a
behavior is related to intention translation [43,47,50,53].
The M-PAC model [43] and Bagozzi’s volitional model of
goal-directed behaviors [50] and theory of consumption
[47] suggest that identity serves to preserve an intended
behavior through the process of reducing affective/cognitive dissonance in contexts that trigger an awareness of
one’s role identity (i.e. exerciser) with a discrepant action
(e.g., not exercising). PRIME theory [46] contends that
identity serves in a similar capacity for translating plans
into action. Specifically, identity is thought to be the
ultimate source of self-regulation.
Evaluation of the models of intention-behavior discordance
applied to physical activity

For the subsequent analysis, the literature search generated 181 relevant studies. Studies were predominantly
excluded due to no concentration on PA behavior, no

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

relevancy to intention-behavior discordance, or published in another language other than English. Overall, a
total of 41 full-text articles were reviewed and assessed
for eligibility. Of these, 36 studies were eligible for the
analysis. Further details are outlined in Figure 2.
Only eight of the 16 previously identified theories were
applied to PA (see Table 2 and Additional file 1: Table S1).
Most commonly used, the HAPA model was applied to 12
observational studies and three intervention-based
studies, while the M-PAC framework was used in 11
correlational studies and one experimental study. Less
commonly applied theoretical models were the theory
of interpersonal behavior [54], precaution adoption
process model [55,56], I-Change model [57], informationmotivation-behavioral skills model [58,59], MoVo process

Page 7 of 14

model [60,61], and temporal self-regulation theory [62].
Of these studies, five were observational and four were
experimental. Due to the limited applications of these
models, only the M-PAC model, and HAPA model will be
discussed in further detail.
Health action process approach

Schwarzer’s [38] HAPA model was developed with specific
aims to address intention-behavior discordance among
health behaviors. The model differentiates between a preintentional phase of motivation and a post-intentional
phase of volition for behavioral enactment. Action selfefficacy (perceived capability to perform the behavior), perception of risk from inaction, and outcome expectancies
(expected consequences) are considered the determinants

Figure 2 Search for individual studies that utilize models, frameworks with post-intentional constructs.

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Page 8 of 14

Table 2 Descriptive summary of the individual studies included in the analysis (n = 36)
Model, framework, or theory

Total number of studies Design

Use of all post-intentional constructs

Observational Experimental
Action Control Theory

0

-

-

-

HAPA

15

12

3

5/15

Integrated Behavior-Change Model

0

-

-

-

I-Change Theory

1

0

1

0/1

Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skills Model

2

1

1

1/2

Knowledge-Attitude-Behavior Model

0

-

-

-

Motivation-Ability-Opportunity-Behaviour Model 0

-

-

-

MoVo Process Model

2

0

2

1/2

M-PAC

12

11

1

0/12

Precaution Adoption Process Model

2

2

0

1/2

PRIME Theory

0

-

-

-

Rubicon Model of Action Phases

0

-

-

-

Theory of Consumption

0

-

-

-

Theory of Interpersonal Behavior

1

1

-

1/1

Temporal Self-Regulation Theory

1

1

0

0/1

Volitional Model of Goal-Directed Behavior

0

-

-

-

Note. HAPA = Health Action Process Approach; M-PAC = Multi-Process Action Control Model.

of intention, while coping-self-efficacy (confidence to handle barriers), action planning (detailed instructions of the
behavioral enactment), coping planning (plans to handle
barriers), and recovery self-efficacy (confidence to handle
resume the behavior after set-backs) are considered the
post-intentional determinants of behavior. The HAPA
model also suggests a process of initiation to maintenance,
where recovery self-efficacy is critical during behavioral
maintenance.
Table 3 details the findings by HAPA constructs of
the 12 studies, yet 14 independent samples that have
formally applied the model to predict PA [63-74]. Three
studies have tested the entire original model suggested
by Schwarzer [38] in a single study i.e., [67,71,74], and
enough studies are available to evaluate preliminary
findings for the utility of each construct.
Eight of nine studies have supported the predictive
path of action self-efficacy on intention [63-70,74], most
with large effect sizes (i.e., β > .50), demonstrating this as
a reliable finding. Nine [63,64,67-69,71,73,74] and two
[65,68] of 13 samples have shown support for the path
of outcome expectations and risk perceptions on
intention, respectively. The results suggest that outcome
expectations may be useful in understanding PA intention,
while risk perceptions may not.
Of the key constructs accounting for intention-behavior
discordance, maintenance self-efficacy has had relatively
strong support with eight [63,65,66,68,69,73,74] significant
tests of 12 possible samples [64,67,71,72] (see Table 3). By
contrast, recovery self-efficacy has shown a significant

path in two [67,72] of six samples [70 samples 1 and 2, 71,
74]. Action planning was measured in eight samples
[63,64,66,67,69,70,73], yet only two of these showed a
significant path [66,73]. Only three samples have specifically
applied coping planning and two supported a significant
path to PA [70 samples 1 and 2] while the other was
not significant or of meaningful magnitude (β < .10) [67].
Finally, of the five samples that employed an aggregate
of coping and action planning [65,68,71,74], only one
sample indicated this as a significant predictor of PA
[71]. The results support maintenance self-efficacy as a
post-intentional predictor of PA and suggest that coping planning may have utility, but action planning and
an aggregate of action planning and coping planning
does not appear to be useful to predict for intentionbehavior discordance as proposed by the HAPA model.
Three intervention studies have applied the HAPA to
promote PA [75-77]. All three have intervened upon the
action and coping planning constructs and not the
maintenance and recovery self-efficacy constructs. These
studies have varied in participants from pregnant women
[77] to obese patients [75] and a general population
sample [76]. Two of the three studies have shown both
statistically significant and meaningful (d > .20) increases
in PA compared to control groups [76,77], yet only Gaston and Prapravessis [77] were able to demonstrate that
the changes in PA were from changes in planning. The
study by Ströbl and colleagues did not show meaningful
effect-sized changes in PA, yet the difference in this
study may be attributable to the six and 12 month post-

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

Page 9 of 14

Table 3 Summary of the post-intentional predictors in physical activity
Predictor

# of studies

Association

HAPA

Maintenance SE-PA

8/12

+

*Two studies with two independent samples

Maintenance SE-Action Planning

2/6

0

Maintenance SE-Coping Planning

1/2

n/a

Maintenance SE-Planning

3/3

+

Recovery SE-PA

2/6

0

Model/framework/theory – observational studies

Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skills Model
Precaution Adoption Process Model

M-PAC

Action Planning-PA

2/8

0

Coping Planning-PA

2/3

+

Planning-PA

1/5

0

Cognitive Behavioral Skills-PA

1//1

?

Health Motivation-PA

1/1

n/a

Knowledge-PA

1/1

n/a

Affective Attitude-PA

7/8

+

Conscientiousness-PA

1/3

0

Extraversion-PA

2/3

+

Habit-PA

3/3

+

Instrumental Attitude-PA

1/10

0

Perceived Behavioral Control-PA

8/10

+

Self-Regulation-PA

4/5

+

Theory of Interpersonal Behavior

Habit-PA

1/1

0

Temporal Self-Regulation Theory

-

n/a

n/a

HAPA

Planning-PA

2/3

+

I-Change Model

Action Planning-PA

0/1

n/a

Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skills Model

Behavioral Skills-PA

0/1

n/a

MoVo Process Model

Implementation Intentions-PA

2/2

n/a

Model/framework/theory – experimental studies

M-PAC

Volitional Shielding-PA

2/2

n/a

Situational Cues-PA

1/2

n/a

Action Planning-PA

1/1

n/a

Note. At least three studies were required for a theme. + = positive association (>59% of studies), − = negative association (>59% of studies), ? = indeterminate
(34-59% of studies showing an association) and 0 = no association (<34% of studies showing any association). PA = physical activity; n/a = not applicable;
SE = self-efficacy.

intervention assessment compared to both Lippke et al.
[76] and Gaston and Prapravessis [77], who examined
planning effectiveness on PA over a one month period.
Taken together, the results support HAPA’s potential
effectiveness of action and coping planning, at least over
a short duration, in order to increase PA.
Multi-process action control model

The M-PAC conceptual model proposed around the action
control framework by Rhodes and de Bruijn [43] defines
intention as a binary decisional choice variable and not
the intention strength (and breadth of the motivational
spectrum) definition taken in many intention-based theories [78]. Intention choice is formed by instrumental attitude
(or outcome expectations), affective attitude (or experiential

expectations) and perceived control constructs of ability
(physical skill/movement without injury) and opportunity
(time/access). Subsequent translation of intention choice
into PA, called action control, is thought to be determined
by regulatory behaviors (e.g., coping planning, enlisting
support, self-monitoring), particularly during the initial
adoption of the behavior. Continuation of the behavior is
thought to include the addition of more reflexive means of
action control via habit (responses to cues) and identity
(responses due to role activation) development as one
maintains a behavioral pattern. Furthermore, affective
attitude and perceived control constructs are considered
non-linear during the intention-formation to action
control process, where much higher values are considered necessary for successful action control than mere

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

intention formation. Personality traits of conscientiousness
and extraversion are considered potential endogenous
antecedents of action control, where those higher in
these personality traits are more likely to follow-through
with their intentions due to dispositional drive systems
of achievement/order and energy-level respectively. Environmental and social context are considered subsumed
(i.e., mediated) by affective attitude and perceived control constructs during the action control process which
may facilitate or inhibit behavior.
Table 3 details the aggregate results for 11 prior
prediction-based tests of the action control framework
[79-89] and one experimental test [90]. No single study
to date, however, has examined the entire conceptual
model suggested by Rhodes and de Bruijn [43].
Tests have supported the nonlinear effects of affective
attitude and perceived control in 7/8 and 8/10 tests
respectively [see 43 for the full review]. Further, instrumental attitude failed to predict action control in nine of
10 samples, supporting its absence in the conceptual model
after the initial formation of the intention. Self-regulatory
constructs were assessed in five tests to evaluate action
control. Four of the five studies showed significant prediction including the behavioral processes of change [86,87]
(i.e., strategies such as rewards, self-monitoring, enlisting
support, and creating stimulus control), regulation over
other leisure behaviors [85] and coping planning [90] but
not action planning [79]. Three studies employed a habit
construct (i.e., enacting PA from external cues, starting PA
without deliberation) to predict action control and found
support for the construct [79,85,88]. Finally, three studies
employed personality trait measures of extraversion (i.e.,
sociability, positive affect, assertiveness, preference for
lively activity) and conscientiousness (i.e., industriousness, orderliness, self-discipline) to predict action control
framework and found two in support of extraversion
[84,89] but only one test in support of conscientiousness
[80]. Results examining the identity construct and the
difference among constructs between adoption and maintenance have not been evaluated sufficiently to produce
an outcome theme at present.

Discussion
There is a growing concern among theoretical researchers
with the limited effectiveness and yet subsequent stagnation of theories applied to health behaviors like PA
[21,91-95]. At the top of this list are theories that position
intention as the proximal predictor of behavior due to the
well-established intention-behavior gap [19,20,78,96].
In the spirit of trying to move forward in theory development and application, the purpose of this review was
to 1) provide a user’s guide and thematic analysis to the
available models that specifically include a construct to
explain intention-behavior discordance and 2) highlight

Page 10 of 14

the available evidence for these structures when applied
to the PA domain.
Our review yielded 16 models that have positioned
constructs in pre-intentional and post-intentional positions. When taken into context of the gamut of possible
health behavior theories [9], this represents approximately
19% of known theoretical frameworks. Thus, a sizeable
proportion of models are available for researchers attempting to account for the intention-behavior gap. Many
of these models are relatively new – eight have been proposed within the last 10 years. Nevertheless, some have
been available since the 1980s [22,39,49,51] or early 1990s
[45,48,50]. Researchers have had the opportunity to test
these theories in the PA domain for quite some time.
Despite 16 different models for researchers to choose
from, our content analysis of constructs suggested considerable overlap in the kinds of factors that are being
proposed to account for intention-behavior discordance
and some redundancies with general intention models.
The hallmark of many post-intentional models is the
inclusion of volitional regulatory behaviors used to maintain or hone intentions. Theorists suggest that people
who form intentions, need to then become strategic in
order to implement their intentions across the backdrop
of competing forces for their attention, motivation, and
time. Eleven of these models included these behavioral
regulation constructs, yet they differed from very specific
concepts such as action plans or implementations intentions to a more general array of behaviors such as selfmonitoring, scheduling, enlisting support, prioritizing and
problem-solving. Volitional behaviors used to maintain or
hone intentions have sound empirical evidence in the PA
domain generally [97-101] and within a stage-based model
such as the transtheoretical model of behavior change
[102]. They also have high face validity, as participants
who report for PA intervention trials often already have
high intentions and seek strategic advice for the translation of these intentions into behavior [43].
Two post-intentional elements that were suggested in
nearly half of the models included external conditions
and/or endogenous factors. While these are at opposite
ends of the spectrum in terms of individual vs. environment, they both share more immutable qualities that
may either facilitate or thwart intention translation. For
example, external conditions represent the opportunities
an individual may have to enact PA as represented by
the social and physical environment. This concept takes
social ecology into consideration within post-intentional
models, where its omission in several intention-based
models has often been a criticism [103]. The concept also
has support in the PA domain outside of these models,
where a factor such as proximity to recreation facilities
has been shown to moderate intention-behavior relations [104-106]. Endogenous factors represent individual

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

differences in organizational/executive function, cravings
and energy/arousal that may thwart or facilitate intention
translation or enactment of behavior. Endogenous factors
as constructs used to explain health behavior are not
unique to post-intentional models, but the operation of
these constructs take neuroscience, broadly construed,
into consideration as a factor explaining the intentionbehavior gap. Disposition has been shown to moderate
the PA intention-behavior gap in several tests outside of
these theories see [107] for a review, but application tests
of several of the constructs proposed in these theories are
needed.
More reflexive constructs such as habit (responses to
cues) and identity (responses from role activation) were
featured in about a third of the models. These are
interesting concepts, not traditionally employed in many
popular intention theories. These constructs suggest that
intention translation may be tied to less reasoned or
pre-meditated processes [108]. Both have had some evidence in the PA domain outside of these post-intentional
models [109,110] but require sustained research attention.
Finally, specific motivational concepts such as specific
types of self-efficacy, outcome expectations and affective
judgments were also identified in many of the models.
These do not represent particularly new concepts from
prior intention-based models but the implication for these
types of constructs is that intention translation requires
either different forms of motivation than intention formation or a higher threshold of these motivational constructs.
The presence/absence of these factors underscored some
of the differences among these models in terms of how
intention was operationalized. For example, some theories
considered intention as the definitive motivational variable
(intention strength), akin to the definition put forth by
Fishbein and Ajzen [11]; thus, post-intentional constructs
needed to represent concepts outside the motivational
domain e.g., [40,42,49]. By contrast, other theorists
positioned intention more within the dictionary meaning
of an aim toward a behavior (intention choice) [111], thus
allowing for motivational variables to affect that aim
during intention translation [22,43,46,47,50]. Applied
researchers will need to carefully consider how they
view intention in order to select a theoretical frame.
The definition of behavior, the application of the theory
for intervention, and the specific mechanisms accounting
for intention-behavior discordance were also somewhat
different across the various models. For example, HAPA
[38], temporal self-regulation theory [40], and M-PAC
[43] give some explicit consideration of adoption vs. maintenance behavior and how different constructs may affect
behavior across time. Temporal self-regulation theory [40]
appears to be an explanative model of behavior first and
foremost, while information-motivation-behavioral skills
model [45] is a simplified model for interventionists.

Page 11 of 14

Most of the other models were positioned somewhere
in between these approaches. Finally, some models
position their post-intention constructs as moderators
of intention-behavior relations e.g., [37,41,48], others
position them as direct mediators e.g., [38], while some
position these constructs as separate systems impacting
behavior independent of intention e.g.,[51]. Indeed, our
content analysis suggested that Temporal self-regulation
theory [40] and the theory of interpersonal behavior [51]
contained relatively similar post-intentional constructs
overall, but their proposed mechanisms were markedly
different. Thus, applied researchers need to give attention
to the specific suggestions of how to model each theory.
Our second purpose of the paper was to review and
highlight the available evidence for these 16 models when
applied to the PA domain. Perhaps the most important
finding from this second purpose was a demonstration of
how little these models have been applied to understand
PA. Our application of theory in PA tends to extend to
only a handful of approaches [112], none of which are
among these models. We had anticipated this outcome,
and it formed one of the central reasons for writing the
paper as a user’s guide.
Thirty-six studies were identified for the 16 models,
but 27 of these were from two of the models (HAPA
and M-PAC). Eleven of the models had either one or
zero applications in the PA domain making any kind of
assessment too preliminary. There was enough research
available to evaluate the early evidence for both M-PAC
[43] and HAPA [38] in the PA domain. M-PAC is more
of a methodological framework than a theory at this
juncture and the results herein were actually used to create the proposed conceptual model post-hoc, as opposed
to validating the model. Future tests and the use of its
complete set of constructs are definitely warranted. Thus
far, there is evidence that affective judgments, perceived
control/opportunity, habit, and extraversion can reliably
predict PA intention translation but there is not enough
evidence to evaluate the adoption to maintenance transition proposed in the conceptual model or the role of identity. There is also not enough experimental work with the
model to warrant an appraisal. Unlike M-PAC, HAPA has
had much better independent assessment outside of the
original studies used to create the model, but application
of the full model was also limited. Interestingly, nearly half
of the samples employing HAPA included clinical populations, suggesting good heterogeneity of its application
although no marked difference in findings was present between clinical and nonclinical samples at this time. Of the
key constructs accounting for intention-behavior discordance, maintenance self-efficacy has had relatively strong
support as a predictor PA independent of intention. This
suggests that how people cope with PA barriers may
be essential to successful behavioral enactment. Action

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

planning, on the other hand, has shown generally weak to
negligible effects. Coping planning has fared better as a
mediator of intention than action planning but its application has been limited. Experimental work with the model
has also supported HAPA’s planning constructs (at least
action planning and coping planning in tandem) for shortterm PA change, but no studies were present to evaluate
the maintenance and recovery self-efficacy constructs.
Taken together, intention-based theories have dominated the PA research landscape, and there has been a
sluggishness to embrace models that attempt to account
for intention-behavior discordance. Clearly, there are
several models that attempt to account for this discordance within the literature, but they have not been used
and validated. The reasons for the dominance of a few
select theories in PA research may be from tradition
(researchers trained from a similar set of supervisors),
convenience (easier to test and publish with models of
high use), lack of awareness, or general lack of innovation.
Whatever the case, the models identified in this review
propose several variables such as volitional strategies,
social and environmental conditions, disposition, habit,
identity, as well as affect, PA skill and selective attention
processes that are not as well-defined in our traditional
intention theories. Whether these models will serve to
improve our interventions and/or explain PA better
than the current state of research is unknown, yet early
work with HAPA has shown some promise. At a minimum, many of these models may serve to better integrate
extant interventions that already focus on volitional strategies, environmental change, social processes/dynamics
and individual differences, etc. [100]. The results of this
paper suggest there are certainly models that warrant testing, preferably with experimental designs, in the future.
Footnote 1: To simplify, we refer to models, theories,
approaches or frameworks as “models” generically from
this point forward.

Additional file
Additional file 1: Table S1. Characteristics of physical activity studies
that utilized models/frameworks/theories (n = 36).

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contribution
RER and CAY both carried out the literature search and participated in the
coding and theming. RER wrote the main body of the paper while CAY
wrote the Methods section and provided editorial feedback on the entire
paper. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 4 August 2014 Accepted: 13 January 2015

Page 12 of 14

References
1. Warburton DER, Charlesworth S, Ivey A, Nettlefold L, Bredin SSD. A
systematic review of the evidence for Canada's physical activity guidelines
for adults. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2010;7:39.
2. Warburton DER, Nicol CW, Bredin SS. Health benefits of physical activity: the
evidence. Can Med Assoc J. 2006;174:801–9.
3. Asmundson GJG, Fetzner MG, DeBoer LB, Powers MB, Otto MW, Smits JAJ.
Let's get physical: A contemporary review of the anxiolytic effects of
exercise for anxiety and its disorders. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30:362–73.
4. Mammen G, Faulkner G. Physical activity and the prevention of depression:
a systematic review of prospective studies. Am J Prev Med. 2013;45:649–57.
5. Colley RC, Garriguet D, Janssen I, Craig CL, Clarke J, Tremblay MS. Physical
activity of Canadian adults: accelerometer results from the 2007 to 2009
Canadian health measures survey. Health reports. Statistics Can. 2011;22
(21):21–8.
6. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Masse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical
activity in the United States measured by accelerometer. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2008;40:181–8.
7. Dishman RK. Exercise adherence: its impact on public health. Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics; 1988.
8. Rhodes RE, Nigg CR. Advancing physical activity theory: A review and future
directions. Exerc Sports Sci Rev. 2011;39:113–9.
9. Michie S, West R, Campbell R, Brown J, Gainforth H. ABC of Theories of
Behaviour Change; in press.
10. Ajzen I. The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process.
1991;50:179–211.
11. Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior. Don Mills, NY:
Addison-Wesley; 1975.
12. Rogers RW. Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude
change: A revised theory of protection motivation. In: Cacioppo JT, Petty RE,
editors. Social Psychophysiology. New York: Guilford Press; 1983. p. 153–76.
13. Bandura A. Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive
theory. Psychol Health. 1998;13:623–49.
14. Hagger M, Chatzisarantis NLD. Integrating the theory of planned behaviour
and self-determination theory in health behaviour: A meta-analysis. Br J
Health Psychol. 2009;14:275–302.
15. Prochaska JO, Velicer WF. The transtheoretical model of health behavior
change. Am J Health Promot. 1997;12:38–48.
16. McEachan RRC, Conner M, Taylor NJ, Lawton RJ. Prospective prediction of
health-related behaviors with the theory of planned behavior: A metaanalysis. Health Psychol Rev. 2011;5:97–144.
17. Ferguson CJ. An effect size primer: A guide for clinicians and researchers.
Proffesional Psychol Res Practice. 2009;40:532–8.
18. Weinstein ND. Misleading tests of health behavior theories. Ann Behav Med.
2007;33(1):1–10.
19. Rhodes RE, Dickau L. Meta-analysis of experimental evidence for the
intention-behavior relationship in the physical activity domain. Health
Psychol. 2012;31(6):724–7.
20. Rhodes RE, de Bruijn GJ. How big is the physical activity intention-behaviour
Gap? a meta-analysis using the action control framework. Br J Health Psychol.
2013;18:296–309.
21. Sniehotta FF, Presseau J, Araújo-Soares V. Time to retire the theory of
planned behavior. Health Psychol Rev. 2014;8:1–7.
22. Kuhl J. Motivational aspects of achievement motivation and learned
helplessness: Towards a comprehensive theory of action control. In: Maher
BA, Maher WB, editors. Progress in Experimental Personality Research.
Volume 13. New York: Academic Press; 1984. p. 99–171.
23. Ach N. Uber die Willenstatigkeit und das Denken. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht; 1905.
24. Lewin K. Intention, Will, and Need. In: Rapaport D, editor. Organization and
Pathology of Human Thought. New York: Columbia University Press; 1951.
p. 95–153.
25. Armitage CJ, Conner M. Social cognition models and health behaviour: A
structured review. Psychol Health. 2000;15:173–89.
26. Biddle SJH, Fuchs R. Exercise psychology: A view from Europe. Psychol Sport
Exercise. 2009;10:410–9.
27. Carver CS, Scheier MF. Control theory: A useful conceptual framework for
personality–social, clinical, and health psychology. Psychol Bull. 1982;92:111–35.
28. Atkinson JW, Birch DA. A Dynamic Theory of Action. New York: Wiley; 1970.
29. Fishbein M, Triandis HC, Kanfer FH, Becker M, Middlestadt SE, Eichler A.
Factors influencing behavior and behavior change. In: Baum A, Revenson

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.

39.
40.
41.
42.

43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

TA, editors. Handbook of Health Psychology. Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 2001. p. 3–17.
Rhodes RE, Mark R. Social Cognitive Theories. In: Acevedo EO, editor. The
Oxford Handbook of Exercise Psychology. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2012. p. 273–94.
Gustafson S, Rhodes RE. Parental correlates of child and early adolescent
physical activity: A review. Sports Med. 2006;36:79–97.
Kirk M, Rhodes RE. Occupation correlates of adults’participation in leisuretime physical activity: A systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40:476–85.
Rhodes RE, Temmel C, Mark R. Correlates of adult sedentary behaviour: A
systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 2012;42:e3–28.
Sallis JF, Prochaska JJ, Taylor WC. A review of correlates of physical activity
of children and adolescents. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32:963–75.
Chen H, Cohen P, Chen S. How big is a big odds ratio? Interpreting the
magnitudes of odds ratios in epidemiological studies. Commun Statistics
Simul Comput. 2010;39:860–4.
Cohen J. A power primer. Psychol Bull. 1992;112:155–9.
Burnet D, Plaut A, Courtney R, Chin MH. A practical model for preventing
type 2 diabetes in minority youth. Diab Educator. 2002;28:779–95.
Schwarzer R. Modeling health behavior change: How to predict and modify
the adoption and maintenance of health behaviors. Appl Psychol.
2008;57:1–29.
Weinstein ND. The precaution adoption process. Health Psychol.
1988;7:355–86.
Hall PA, Fong GT. Temporal self-regulation theory: A model for individual
health behavior. Health Psychol Rev. 2007;1:6–52.
Hagger M, Chatzisarantis NLD. An integrated behavior-change model for
physical activity. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2014;42:62–9.
Gӧhner W, Seelig H, Fuchs R. Intervention effects on cognitive antecedents of
physical exercise: a 1-year follow-Up study. Applied Psychol Health Well-Being.
2009;1:233–56.
Rhodes RE, de Bruijn GJ. What predicts intention-behavior discordance? A
review of the action control framework. Exerc Sports Sci Rev. 2013;41(4):201–7.
de Vries H, Mesters I, van de Steeg H, Honing C. The general public's
information needs and perceptions regarding hereditary cancer: An
application of the Integrated Change Model. Patient Educ Couns.
2005;56:154–65.
Fisher JD, Fisher WA. Changing AIDS risk behavior. Psychol Bull.
1992;111:455–74.
West R, Brown J. Theory of Addiction. 2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2013.
Baggozi RP. The poverty of economic explanations of consumption and an
action theory alternative. Manag Decis Econ. 2000;21:95–109.
Olander F, Thogersen J. Understanding of consumer behaviour as a
prerequisite for environmental protection. J Consum Policy. 1995;18:345–85.
Heckhausen H, Gollwitzer PM. Thought contents and cognitive functioning
in motivational and volitional states of mind. Motiv Emot. 1987;11:101–20.
Bagozzi RP. The self-regulation of attitudes, intentions, and behavior.
Soc Psychol Q. 1992;55:178–204.
Triandis HC. Interpersonal Behavior. Monterey: CABrooks/Cole; 1977.
McAuley E, Courneya KS, Lettunich J. Effects of acute and long-term exercise
on self-efficacy responses in sedentary, middle-aged males and females. The
Gerontologist. 1991;31:534–42.
West R. The multiple facets of cigarette addiction and what the mean for
encouraging and helping smokers to stop. J Chronic Obsructive Pulm Dis.
2009;6:277–83.
Valois P, Desharnai R, Godin G. A comparison of Fishbein and Ajzen and the
Triandis attitudinal models for the prediction of exercise intention and
behavior. J Behav Med. 1988;11:459–72.
Blalock SJ, DeVellis RF, Giorgino KB, De Vellis BM, Gold DT, Dooley MA, et al.
Osteoporosis prevention in premenopausal women: Using a stage model
approach to examine the predictors of behavior. Health Psychol. 1996;15
(2):84–93.
Elliott JO, Seals BF, Jacobson MP. Use of the Precaution Adoption Process
Model to examine predictors of osteoprotective behavior in epilepsy.
Seizure. 2007;16:424–37.
de Vries H, Kremers SPJ, Smeets T, Brug J, Eijmael K. The effectiveness of
tailored feedback and action plans in an intervention addressing multiple
behaviors. Am J Health Promot. 2008;22(6):417–25.
Kelly S, Melnyk BM, Belyea M. Predicting physical activity and fruit and
vegetable intake in adolescents: A test of information, motivation,
behavioral skills model. Res Nurs Health. 2012;35:146–63.

Page 13 of 14

59. Osborn CY, Amico KR, Cruz N, O’Connell AA, Perez-Escamilla R, Kalichman
SC, et al. A brief culturally tailored intervetion for Puerto Ricans with type 2
diabetes. Health Educ Behav. 2010;37:849–62.
60. Gӧhner W, Schlatterer M, Seelig H, Frey I, Berg A, Fuchs R. Two-year follow-up
of an interdisciplinary cognitive-behavioral intervention program for obese
adults. J Psychol. 2012;146:371–91.
61. Fuchs R, Seelig H, Gӧhner W, Burton NW, Brown WJ. Cognitive mediation of
intervention effects on physical exercise: Causal models for the adoption
and maintenance stage. Psychol Health. 2012;27:1480–99.
62. Li K. Domain dimensionality and temporality of outcome expectancy for
physical activity among middle-aged and older Chinese adults: A latent
profile analysis. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2013;14:682–91.
63. Barg CJ, Latimer AE, Pomery EA, Rivers SE, Rench TA, Prapavessis H, et al.
Examining predictors of physical activity among inactive middle-aged
women: An application of the health action process approach. Psychol
Health. 2012;27:829–45.
64. Berli C, Lorentini P, Radtke T, Hornung R, Scholz U. Predicting physical
activity in adolescents: The role of compensatory health beliefs within the
Health Action Process Approach. Psychol Health. 2014;29:458–74.
65. Caudroit J, Stephan Y, Le Scanff C. Social cognitive determinants of physical
activity among retired older individuals: An application of the health action
process approach. Br J Health Psychol. 2011;16:404–17.
66. Duan Y, Lippke S, Wagner P, Brehm W. Testing two stage assessments in a
Chinese college student sample: Correspondences and discontinuity
patterns across stages. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2011;12:306–13.
67. Parschau L, Barz M, Richert J, Knoll N, Lippke S, Schwarzer R. Physical activity
among adults with obesity: Testing the health action process approach.
Rehabil Psychol. 2014;59:42–9.
68. Renner B, Spivak Y, Kwon S, Schwarzer R. Does Age make a difference?
predicting physical activity of south Koreans. Psychol Aging. 2007;22:482–93.
69. Scholz U, Keller R, Perren S. Predicting behavioral intentions and physical
exercise: A test of the health action process approach at the intrapersonal
level. Health Psychol. 2009;28:702–8.
70. Ziegelmann JP, Lippke S. Planning and strategy use in health behavior
change: a life span view. Int J Behav Med. 2007;14:30–9.
71. Chiu CY, Lynch RT, Berven NL. The health action process approach as a
motivational model for physical activity self-management for people with
multiple sclerosis: a path analysis. Rehabil Psychol. 2011;56:171–81.
72. Kassavou A, Hamborg T, Turner A, French DP. Predicting maintenance of
attendance of walking groups: Testing constructs from three leading
maintenance theories. Health Psychol. 2014;33:752–6.
73. Lippke S, Plotnikoff RC. Testing two principles of the health action process
approach in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Health Psychol. 2014;33:77–84.
74. Perrier MJ, Sweet SN, Strachan SM, Latimer-Cheung AE. I act, therefore I am:
Athletic identity and the health action process approach predict sport
participation among individuals with acquired physical disabilities. Psychol
Sport Exerc. 2012;13:713–20.
75. Ströbl V, Knisel W, Landgraf U, Faller H. A combined planning and
telephone aftercare intervention for obese patients: Effects on physical
activity and body weight after one year. J Rehabil Med. 2012;45:198–205.
76. Lippke S, Schwarzer R, Ziegelmann JP, Scholz U, Schuz B. Testing stagespecific effects of a stage-matched intervention: A randomized controlled
trial targeting physical exercise and its predictors. Health Educ Behav.
2010;37:533–46.
77. Gaston A, Prapavessis H. Using a combined protection motivation theory
and health action process approach intervention to promote exercise
during pregnancy. J Behav Med. 2014;37:173–84.
78. Sheeran P. Intention-behaviour relations: A conceptual and empirical review.
In: Hewstone M, Stroebe W, editors. European Review of Social Psychology.
Volume 12. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons; 2002. p. 1–36.
79. de Bruijn GJ. Exercise habit strength, planning and the theory of planned
behaviour: An action control approach. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2011;12:106–14.
80. de Bruijn GJ, de Groot R, van den Putte B, Rhodes RE. Conscientiousness,
extroversion, and action control: comparing moderate and vigorous
physical activity. J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2009;31:724–42.
81. de Bruijn GJ, Verkooijen K, de Vries NK, van den Putte B. Antecedents of self
identity and consequences for action control: An application of the theory
of planned behaviour in the exercise domain. Psychol Sport Exerc.
2012;13:771–8.
82. Fiala B, Rhodes RE. Understanding Exercise Action Control: Moderation of
Intensity on Physical Activity Intentions and Behavior in a Canadian

Rhodes and Yao International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity (2015) 12:9

University Sample. Planned Behavior: Theory, Applications and Perspectives.
Ch.5. Nova Publications. 2014;73.
83. Godin G, Shephard RJ, Colantonio A. The cognitive profile of those who
intend to exercise but do not. Public Health Rep. 1986;101:521–6.
84. Rhodes RE, Courneya KS, Jones LW. Translating exercise intentions into
behavior: Personality and social cognitive correlates. J Health Psychol.
2003;8:447–58.
85. Rhodes RE, Nasuti G, Fiala B. Action control of exercise behaviour: Evaluation
of social cognition, cross-behavioural regulation and automaticity. Behav
Med. 2012;38:121–8.
86. Rhodes RE, Plotnikoff RC. Understanding action control: Predicting physical
activity intention-behavior profiles across six months in a Canadian sample.
Health Psychol. 2006;25:292–9.
87. Rhodes RE, Plotnikoff RC, Courneya KS. Predicting the physical activity
intention-behaviour profiles of adopters and maintainers using three social
cognition models. Ann Behav Med. 2008;36:244–52.
88. Rhodes RE, de Bruijn GJ, Matheson DH. Habit in the physical activity
domain: Integration with intention temporal stability and action control.
J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2010;32(1):84–98.
89. Kaushal N, Rhodes RE. Exploring personality and physical environment as
predictors of exercise action control. In: Psychology of Extraversion
Perspectives in Psychology Research. New York, NY: Nova Science
Publishers; 2014. p. 91–105.
90. Rhodes RE, Naylor PJ, McKay HA. Pilot study of a family physical activity
planning intervention among parents and their children. J Behav Med.
2010;33:91–100.
91. Head KJ, Noar SM. Facilitating progress in health behaviour theory
development and modification: the reasoned action approach as a case
study. Health Psychol Rev. 2014;8:34–52.
92. Schwarzer R. Life and death of health behaviour theories. Health Psychology
Review 2013.
93. Rhodes RE. Improving translational research in building theory: a
commentary on Head and Noar. Health Psychol Rev. 2014;8(1):57–60.
94. Prestwich A, Sniehotta FF, Whittington C, Dombrowski SU, Rogers L, Michie
S. Does theory influence the effectiveness of health behavior interventions?
Meta-analysis. Health Psychol. 2014;33(5):465–74.
95. Noar SM, Head KJ. Mind the gap: bringing our theories in line with the empirical
data - a response to commentaries. Health Psychol Rev. 2013;8(1):65–9.
96. Webb TL, Sheeran P. Does changing behavioral intentions engender
behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol
Bull. 2006;132:249–68.
97. Carraro N, Gaudreau P. Spontaneous and experimentally induced action
planning and coping planning for physical activity: A meta-analysis. Psychol
Sport Exerc. 2013;14:228–48.
98. Rhodes RE, Pfaeffli LA. Mediators of physical activity behaviour change
among adult non-clinical populations: A review update. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act. 2010;7:37.
99. Kwasnicka D, Presseau J, White M, Sniehotta FF. Does planning how to
cope with anticipated barriers facilitate health-related behaviour change? A
systematic review. Health Psychology Review 2013, doi:10.1080/
17437199.2013.766832.
100. Conn VS, Hafdahl AR, Mehr DR. Interventions to increase physical activity
among healthy adults: Meta-analysis of outcomes. Am J Public Health.
2011;101:751–8.
101. Bélanger-Gravel A, Godin G, Amireault S. A meta-analytic review of the effect
of implementation intentions on physical activity. Health Psychology Review.
2013;7(1):1–32.
102. Nigg CR, Geller KS, Motl RW, Horwath CC, Wertin KK, Dishman RK. A research
agenda to examine the efficacy and relevance of theTranstheoretical Model for
physical activity behavior. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2011;12:7–12.
103. Sallis JF, Owen N. Ecological models. In: Glanz K, Lewis FM, Rimer BK,
editors. Health Behavior and Health Education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass;
1997. p. 403–24.
104. Prins RG, van Empelen P, te Velde SJ, Timperio A, van Lenthe FJ, Tak NI, et al.
Availability of sports facilities as moderator of the intention–sports participation
relationship among adolescents. Health Educ Res. 2010;25:489–97.
105. Rhodes RE, Brown SG, McIntyre CA. Integrating the perceived
neighbourhood environment and the theory of planned behaviour when
predicting walking in Canadian adult sample. Am J Health Promot.
2006;21:110–8.

Page 14 of 14

106. Rhodes RE, Courneya KS, Blanchard CM, Plotnikoff RC. Prediction of leisuretime walking: An integration of social cognitive, perceived environmental,
and personality factors. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2007;4:51.
107. Rhodes RE, Dickau L. Moderators of the intention-behavior relationship in
physical activity: A systematic review. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(4):215–25.
108. Sheeran P, Gollwitzer PM, Bargh JA. Nonconscious processes and health.
Health Psychol. 2013;32:460–73.
109. Gardner B, de Bruijn GJ, Lally P. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
applications of the Self-Report Habit Index to nutrition and physical activity
behaviors. Ann Behav Med. 2011;42:174–87.
110. Berry T, Strachan SM. Implicit and explicit exercise and sedentary identity.
Res Q Exerc Sport. 2012;83:479–84.
111. Oxford Dictionary. (2014). Oxford University Press. http://www.
oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/intention.
112. Rhodes RE, Nasuti G. Trends and changes in research on the psychology of
physical activity across 20 years: A quantitative analysis of 10 journals. Prev
Med. 2011;53(1–2):17–23.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

