Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371 – 380

Brand equity in the business-to-business market

Mike Bendixena, Kalala A. Bukasaa, Russell Abrattb,*

aGraduate School of Business Administration, University of the Witwatersrand, P.O. Box 98, Wits, South Africa
bHuizenga Graduate School of Business and Entrepreneurship, Nova Southeastern University, 3100 S.W., 9th Avenue, Fort Lauderdale, FL 33315, USA

Received 2 January 2003; received in revised form 2 August 2003; accepted 12 October 2003

Available online 26 November 2003

Abstract

Brands have been developed by consumer companies but have been slow to develop in business-to-business marketing. This article
explains the concept of brand equity in a specific industrial marketing setting. In addition, the sources of brand equity are investigated as well
as the appropriate communications strategy and the relative importance of brand relative to other purchase criteria. The research method used
was a conjoint analysis experiment. The subjects were decision-making unit (DMU) members of industrial companies in South Africa that
purchase medium-voltage electrical equipment. Research results suggest that while brand equity has a role to play, price and delivery were
more important. However, a price premium can be obtained when a company has high brand equity. Implications for managers are discussed.
D 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Business-to-business market; Brand equity; South Africa

1. Introduction

While brands and their management have dominated the
marketing of goods and services to consumers, the idea has
been slow to take hold in business-to-business marketing.
This problem rests partly in the belief that because brands
are irrational, they have little significance when dealing with
a corporate entity that makes buyers’ decisions on a rational
basis (Rosenbroijer, 2001).

Most discussions of marketing in technical fields focus on
the performance characteristics of the product or on the needs
of buyers addressed by tangible features of the product
(Shaw, Giglierano, & Kallis, 1989). However, studies do
point out cases where price and the hard tangible factors of the
physical product do not fully explain the purchase decision.
Intangible aspects such as overall supplier reputation matter
even in rational and systematic decision making (Mudambi,
Doyle, & Wong, 1997).

The question that arises is whether the industrial buyers
who are rational trained professionals and who normally
operate within buying centers can be influenced by brand
images that are based on nonfunctional and subjective attrib-

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-954-262-5123.
E-mail address: abratt@huizenga.nova.edu (R. Abratt).

0019-8501/$ – see front matter D 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2003.10.001

utes. According to Gordon, Calantone, and di Benedetto
(1993), business-to-business product and service providers
stand to gain sustainable competitive advantages through the
development and strategic use of brand equity, particularly
when competing in today’s global economy.

The objectives of this study are to explore the existence of
brand equity in a specific business-to-business product set-
ting and to investigate the sources of brand equity and its
appropriate communication channels and the relative impor-
tance of brand relative to other purchase decision criteria.

2. Theoretical background

2.1. Brand equity

Brand equity is derived from the overall brand image
created by the totality of brand associations, perceived by
customers (Michell, King, & Reast, 2001). Therefore, the
attainment of a positive image on core values and any other
values that differentiate it should be of the highest priority
to any company (Hague & Jackson, 1994). Aaker (1996)
identified four major sources of brand equity as brand
loyalty, brand awareness, perceived quality, and brand
associations, while Keller (1998) combines the sources of
brand equity into brand awareness and brand image.

372

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

The competitive advantage of firms that have brands with
high equity include the following: a price premium can be
attained; increased demand by customers; brands can be
extended easily; communications will be more readily ac-
cepted; there will be better trade leverage; larger margins
could be obtained; and the company will be less vulnerable
to competitive marketing actions (Aaker, 1996; Hague &
Jackson, 1994; Keller, 1998; Quelch & Harding, 1996;
Wood, 2000).

Brands tended to be associated with products but there
has been a refocus on corporate brands (Mottram, 1998).
A strong and favorable corporate brand is seen as an
in an increasingly competitive
important discriminator
(Balmer, 1995). According to Ackerman
environment
(1998),
the corporate brand offers managers a compre-
hensive discipline for clarifying, humanizing, organizing,
and communicating how the company creates value. In
industrial markets, the company itself is often the brand;
but in consumers markets, the emphasis is usually on the
products or a limited group of them (Hague & Jackson,
1994). It would be expensive for industrial companies to
brand every item in their wide product range. For many
industrial companies, there is scope for only one brand
and that is the company name (Hague & Jackson, 1994).
According to De Chernatony and McDonald (1998),
industrial buyers are primarily concerned with the com-
pany’s overall brand identity rather than with the specific
product they want to buy. For a recent literature review of
branding in B2B marketing, see Mudambi (2002).

Studies on industrial branding show mixed results. Saun-
ders and Watt (1979) studied the attempts made by the man-
made fibers industry to overcome the problem of loss of
identity by branding at the ultimate consumer level. The
study concluded that due to the large numbers of brands
available, consumers were confused and really did not know
what to expect from the different types of fiber. Sinclair and
Seward (1988) reported on a survey of established producers
of wood and plywood panels who decided to brand their
products. This study concluded that the emphasis on price
and availability at the retail level tended to suggest that these
products were still being produced on a commodity basis.
The high dependence on price suggested a low effectiveness
of manufacturers’ branding strategies.

More recent studies found that branding in the business-
to-business sectors were successful. Shipley and Howard
(1993) attempted to gain insights into the use of brand
the nature of brand-name strategy, and the per-
names,
ceived importance among industrial companies. They con-
cluded that
industrial companies perceived benefit from
using brand names and that large firms valued the benefits
of brand names more highly than small firms. Firth (1997)
studied the pricing of accounting services in New Zealand.
He found that the use of names of the big name accounting
firms resulted in a 4% price premium. In a study published
in 2001, Michell et al. (2001) found that industrial com-
panies believed branding to be important and provided

competitive benefits and increased brand equity. Hutton
(1997) studied professional buyers in the personal com-
puter, copies, fax machines, and computers floppy disks
industries. This study concluded that
there was brand
equity in industrial markets and there was a brand equity
‘‘halo effect’’ in which brand evaluations transferred from
one category to another and that buyers were prepared to
pay a premium for their favorite brand.

In 1993, Gordon et al. studied the U.S. electrical circuit
breakers market. The setting used for this empirical study
was the electrical products and components markets. This
study provided conclusive evidence that brand equity was
alive and well in the business-to-business sector.

2.2. Intangible attributes

The literature that deals with the topic of organizational
buying has identified and measured nonproduct character-
istics and intangible elements of the buying decision in a
number of ways (Mudambi et al., 1997).

Levitt (1995) found that the company’s overall repu-
than the sales
tation was generally more influential
presentation, and that
in high-risk
situations relied more heavily on company reputation than
on the presentation.

technical personnel

Lehmann and O’Shaughnesssy, (1974) examined, across
product types, how U.S. and U.K. purchasing agents rated
attributes in choosing a supplier. The 17 attributes rated
included basic brand factors such as technical specification,
tangible examples of brand augmentation such as training,
and even more intangible factors such as overall reputation.
Their finding that supplier reputation is one of the most
highly rated attributes is particularly interesting since
reputation lies at the heart of branding strategy (Mudambi
et al., 1997).

Abratt (1986) analyzed the industrial buying process for
high-technology products to identify the relative importance
of the factors influencing supplier selection. Intangible
attributes such as supplier’s reputation and perceived product
reliability were judged more important than a tangible
attribute such as price. Shaw et al. (1989) found that a
‘‘sizeable portion of the population of buyers report that
vendor-related intangible attributes are more important than
product performance attributes.’’ They concluded that pro-
motional activities should reflect this concern.

Tangible aspects are quantifiable by measures such as the
the
number of defects,
number of late deliveries, the technical support, the financial
services, and the supplier financial stability.

the lead time,

the product

life,

Intangible aspects include factors such as perceived
the
incomplete or conflicting information about
quality,
product, ease of ordering, general reliability, willingness of
the company to respond in an emergency, service quality,
degree of rapport between customers and service providers,
understanding between service providers and customers,
company reputation, country of origin, pleasantness, and

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

373

trustworthiness of company personnel (Mudambi et al.,
1997).

2.3. Proposition development

The key research question that needs to be answered: is
there a benefit for suppliers of industrial products to engage
in branding their products or company? In order to answer
this question, five propositions have been developed from
the literature review.

P1: Brand equity exists in business-to-business markets in the
form of buyers’ willingness to pay a price premium for their
preferred brand (Hutton, 1997).

P2: Benefits from brand-loyal
industrial buyers include their
willingness to recommend the brand to peers and to give special
consideration to another product with the same brand name
(Hutton, 1997).

P3: Perceived quality is the primary brand-equity-generating
variable (Michell et al., 2001).

P4: The primary source of
awareness are exhibitions and trade shows (Abratt, 1986).

information for building brand

P5: Different groups of decision-making unit role players attach
importance to brands and prefer different
different
communication channels (Ghinghold & Wilson, 1998).

levels of

3. Methodology

The method used to gather information for this study
was a conjoint analysis experiment supplemented with a
self-administered questionnaire. In conjoint analysis,
the
for
judgments,
is asked to make trade-off
respondent
example to decide whether one feature is desired enough
to sacrifice another (Aaker, Kumar, & Day, 1995). Cards
(containing a profile) were made up according to a
fractional – factorial design principle. The analytical objec-
tive is to find a set of part worths for the separate factor
levels so that when these are appropriately added, one can
find the total utility for each combination (Green & Tull,
total utility
1978). The combination with the highest
should be the one that originally was most preferred,
and the combination with the lowest total utility should
have been the one least preferred (Aaker et al., 1995).
Conjoint analysis establishes the importance of features,
the utility of each level of each feature, and the preferred
option for each respondent.

3.1. Selection of the field of experiment

The objective of the first part of the study was to
explore empirically the existence of brand equity in a
specific business-to-business product setting. The setting
used for the empirical study was the market for the

medium-voltage indoor circuit-breaker panels. This equip-
ment is used in industrial premises to distribute electricity
at medium-voltage levels. It is likely to be found in all
industrial sites where electricity demand is substantial,
such as in heavy manufacturing plants, chemical plants,
mines, and utilities’ substations.

This market can be categorized as being in the mature
stage of the product life cycle. Because the market is mature,
gains in the share by one manufacturer come at the expense
of another (Gordon et al., 1993).

This product was chosen for the following reasons:

(cid:1)

It
is not purchased by consumers.
exclusively limited to industrial buyers.

Its purchase is

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1) The equipment is of a capital nature and is of such value
that its purchase will require more consideration than the
purchase of a cheap consumable.
It is widely used by various types of industries.
It
is readily understood and widely used, a key
requirement for the survey because of the broad cross
section of
It can be
respondents (Hutton, 1997).
unambiguously defined so as to allow comparison
among competing brands.

(cid:1) There are many competing brands in the market. This is
important since ‘‘price premium measure is defined with
respect to a set of competitors’’ (Aaker, 1996).

3.2. Derivation of variables

Owing to its exploratory nature, the research was con-
ducted in two separate stages: the first stage was qualitative.
It aimed at deriving the variables needed for use in the
second stage of data collection.

To achieve this, the researchers conducted in-depth inter-
views with six experts in the field of manufacturing, mar-
keting, and sales of medium-voltage circuit-breaker indoor
panels. These interviews were undertaken in order to identify
the factors or attributes that these experts considered as
important in the procurement process for the equipment
concerned.

The important attributes identified were to be used as
dimensions for trade-offs in conjoint analysis. The atributes
were brands, prices, delivery, technology used, and spare
parts lead times. The alternative brands were ABB, Relay
Setting, Reyrolle, and Tamco. There were four price levels,
R40,000 (US$4000); R46,500 (US$4650); R53,500
(US$5350), and R60,000 (US$6000). Delivery alternatives
were 3, 4, or 5 months. The two types of technologies used
were vacuum or SF6. Spare parts’ lead times were 1, 2, or 3
weeks. Sixteen cards were generated to collect data that
illustrate the multiple-factor approach to conjoint analysis.
Each of the 16 cards involves a combination of five
attributes identified that is used to describe an offer of a
circuit-breaker panel. Note that a full factorial design would
have entailed 4 (cid:2) 4 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 2 (cid:2) 3 = 288 combinations (Green
& Tull, 1978). Thanks to the special factorial design used,

374

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

only 16 cards were needed to collect
preferences.

the respondents’

30) and for Kruskall– Wallis (at least five in each DMU
role).

3.3. Conjoint analysis experiment

3.7. Questionnaire construction

Data for conjoint analysis were collected during face-to-
face interviews. Respondents were given the 16 cards each
describing a complete product configuration. Respondents
were asked to rank-order the profiles in order of preference
or intention to buy (Aaker et al., 1995). Respondents were
left alone since no further guidance was required. Each
respondent spent between 7 and 45 minutes completing the
experiment. After the experiment, the order of rankings was
recorded.

3.4. Methodology for the ‘‘halo effect’’

One of the issues that this research investigated was
whether the goodwill that certain brands enjoy in their
current product lines could be extended to new product
lines. The treatments considered for this study measured
the consideration that respondents were willing to accord to
new product lines introduced by the various brands (Prop-
osition 2). The Kruskall – Wallis test was used to test this
proposition.

3.5. Population

The population consisted of decision-making unit
(DMU) members of industrial companies in South Africa
that purchase medium-voltage electrical equipment. Com-
panies that form part of this population belong to a wide
range of industries. They were mines, chemical plants,
heavy-manufacturing plants, or suppliers of electricity.
The only criterion was that they are heavy users of electric-
ity as consumers or as suppliers.

Because the decision making in the buying center is a
joint process, the population includes all categories of role
players: buyers, users, influencers, deciders, and gatekeep-
ers (Hutt & Speh, 1998).

During the process of in-depth interviews with specialists,
a comprehensive database of companies belonging to the
population was accessed. The interviews also provided an
indication of companies that had purchased medium-voltage
circuit-breaker panels during the last 3 years. Three years
was chosen as it was assumed that the buying would still be
fresh in the respondents’ memories.

3.6. Sample

The questionnaire was divided into five parts. The first
part was designed to record the results of the conjoint analysis
experiment. It is a record of the sequence of profile prefer-
ences. The conjoint design was based on five features (brand,
price, delivery time, technology, and leadtime for parts). The
following levels were used: brand = four levels (ABB, Relay
Setting, Reyrolle, and Tamco); price = four levels (R40,000,
R46,500, R53,500, and R60,000); delivery time = four levels
(3, 4, 5, and 6 months); technology = two levels (Vacuum,
SF6); spares leadtime = three levels (1, 2, and 3 weeks).

This design resulted in 16 cards that respondents were

asked to rank in order of preference.

The second part consists of four questions designed to
determine the respondent’s demographic characteristics.
These questions allowed the categorization of respondents
into specific groups based on their role played in the buying
center (or DMU), their educational backgrounds, and their
professional experience.

The remaining parts of the questionnaire were made of
statements to be evaluated according to a Likert scale
graded from 1 to 5, where 5 = strongly agree and
1 = strongly disagree.

The third part of the questionnaire was designed to
investigate the possibility of extension into a new product
line where none of the brands was active in the South
African market. It requested the respondent to state their
consideration of the new product line if it was introduced by
each of the brands (companies).

The fourth part investigated the source of brand equity,
and the last part of the questionnaire investigated the means
of creating brand awareness and the willingness of respond-
ents to recommend their preferred brands.

3.8. Data collection details

Data collection took place during the same face-to-face
session as the conjoint analysis. Together with the conjoint

Table 1
Demographic profile of respondents

Position in
the DMU

Experience
(years)

Total Education

Total

3 to 5 6 to 9 >9

Commercial/
financial

Technical

A list of companies that had purchased medium-voltage
circuit-breaker panels during the last 3 years was drawn up.
Letters of introduction were sent to a convenience sample of
companies in South Africa.

The minimum sample size to be chosen took into
least
the requirement for conjoint analysis (at

account

Buyer
1
Gatekeeper 2
3
User
Technical
2
Decision
maker

Total

1
2
4
1
1

5
5

3

6
5
5
11
10

8
9
12
14
11

54

3
4
12
14
8

8
9
12
14
11

54

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

375

Table 3
Utility ranges, total utility, and relative importance of attributes

Utility

Attributes

Utility

Table 2
Estimated utilities

Feature

Brand

Price

Delivery time

Technology

Spares lead time

Level

ABB
Relay Setting
Reyrolle
Tamco
R40,000
R46,500
R53,500
R60,000
3 months
4 months
5 months
6 months
Vacuum
SF6
1 week
2 weeks
3 weeks

+ 0.528
(cid:3) 0.542
+ 0.292
(cid:3) 0.278
+ 0.704
+ 0.690
(cid:3) 0.458
(cid:3) 0.935
+ 1.116
(cid:3) 0.194
(cid:3) 0.199
(cid:3) 0.722
+ 0.634
(cid:3) 0.634
+ 0.586
(cid:3) 0.182
(cid:3) 0.404

analysis cards, each respondent was given a copy of the
questionnaire and one envelope in which to seal the answers.
Respondents were told before hand to seal the envelope as
soon as they had finished answering the questions. Data
collected were captured on a spreadsheet.

4. Results

Table 1 shows the profile of respondent.
Sixty executives were approached to participate in this
study but three could not because of time constraints. There
were 57 respondents that participated in the conjoint anal-
ysis experiment and the questionnaire. Three respondents
were disregarded due to errors they made in recording their
conjoint analysis experiment. The 54 remaining respondents
were used in the analysis.

All the respondents had more than 3 years of professional
experience. Sixty-eight percent had nine or more years
experience. All the respondents had a technical or commer-

Fig. 1. Relative importance of attributes.

(cid:3) 0.94, + 0.704
(cid:3) 0.72, + 1.116

(cid:3) 0.63, + 0.634
(cid:3) 0.54, + 0.528
(cid:3) 0.4, + 0.586

Price
Delivery
period
Technology
Brand
Availability
of spare
parts

Total

Range
of utility

1.644
1.836

1.264
1.068
0.986

Relative
importance
(%)

24
27

19
16
14

6.798

100

cial and/or a financial background. People from technical
backgrounds were also in the majority among decision
makers while the others were mainly buyers and gatekeepers.

4.1. Importance of attributes

MONANOVA was used to calculate the utilities of the
various levels of the different features. These are presented
in Table 2.

The relative importance of features was calculated from

these utilities. These are illustrated in Fig. 1.

Overall, the delivery period was found to be the most
desired attribute, followed by price and technology. Brand
has a relative importance of 16%, the availability of spare
parts is least at 14%.

Table 3 shows the utility ranges, total utility, and relative

importance of attributes.

Table 4 shows the relative importance of attributes per

role player category.

Despite the asymmetry of input in favor of ‘delivery
period,’ all role players with the exception of decision
makers rated the ‘price’ as more important than the ‘delivery
period.’ But the aversion shown by decision makers for a
delivery period, twice as long as the shortest delivery
offered, tilted the balance in favor of short delivery periods.
Technical specialists were the only respondents to rank the
‘brand name’ as the most important attribute, equally placed
with the ‘price.’ They were the only ones to rank the
‘delivery period’ as the least important attribute. Users

Table 4
Relative importance of attributes per role player category

Attributes

Relative importance for different role players (%)

Buyers Users

Technical
specialists

Gate
keepers

Decision
makers

Total

Price
Delivery
period

36
20

Technology 16
16
Brand
12
Availability
of spare
parts

42
17

7
28
6

24
14

18
24
20

23
22

28
7
20

26
43

5
19
7

24
27

19
16
14

376

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

Table 5
Consideration given to other product lines of same brand

Table 7
Most effective source of information for brand-awareness creation

Brand
utility

0.528

0.292

(cid:3) 0.278

Consideration
given to new
productsa

Consideration
given to new
productsb

234

217

174

5

4

3

Brand 1
(ABB)
Brand 2

(Reyrolle)

Brand 3

(Tamco)

252

(cid:3) 0.542

Brand 4
(Relay
Setting)
a This column represents the sum of scores collected by each brand.
b This column represents the median value of scores.

3

awarded the highest relative importance achieved by ‘brand
name’ at 28%, just after the price. Overall, ‘technology’ was
ranked third at 19%. ‘Technology’ ranked better than brand
name and ‘availability of spare parts.’

Respondents were asked to rank the consideration that
they would give to new product
lines (for example, a
medium-voltage electric cable) bearing each one of the four
brand names, as considered previously. Table 5 contrasts the
utility enjoyed by each of the brands with the willingness to
consider new products bearing the same brand name. The
willingness is measured both in terms of total scores and the
median values. The median values were calculated using the
Kruskall– Wallis test.

The brand with the highest utility is given the highest
consideration. The consideration given to new product lines
of existing brands decreases steadily as the brand’s utility
decreases.

4.2. Criteria for selection of preferred brand

The third research proposition deals with the selection
criteria for one’s preferred brand. Respondents were asked
to rate the importance of nine attributes on a Likert scale
from 1 to 5, where 5 = very important and 1 = not important.

Table 6
Criteria for selection of preferred brand

Criteria

Total scorea

Medianb

Quality
Reliability
Performance
After-sales service
Ease of operation
Ease of maintenance
Price
Supplier’s reputation
Relationship with Supplier’s personnel

260
259
257
232
228
227
220
216
196

5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
4

Total Median
score

Users Buyers Technical
specialists

Gatekeepers Decision

makers

Technical

consultants

Sales

representatives

Professional/
technical
conferences

Exhibitions
Journal/

professional
magazines
Word of mouth
Direct mail
Mass media

228

221

218

197

177
171
157

4

4

4

4
3.5

2.5
3
3

4.5

4

4.5

5
4

3.5
4
4

4

4

4

4
4

3
3
2.5

5

4

4

5
4

4
4
3

4

4

4

4
3

4
3
3

Table 6 shows the raw scores for the selection of one’s

preferred brand.

Quality, reliability, and performance are listed as the top
criteria. Price is third last ahead of supplier’s reputation and
relationship with supplier’s personnel.

4.3. Method of brand awareness creation

The method of brand awareness creation is shown in

Table 7.

Results in Table 7 rank the use of technical specialists as
the most effective means of promoting a new brand. The
next
in line consists of visits by sales representatives,
professional/technical conferences, and exhibitions.

The use of mass media is ranked last, followed by direct
mail, word of mouth, and journal/professional magazines.
The second column in Table 7 (total score) indicates the sum
of scores collected by each medium of communication.
Columns 3 to 7 represent
the median value of scores
collected by each medium of communication.

4.4. Willingness to recommend one’s preferred brand

All the members of the buying center indicated their
willingness to recommend their preferred brand. Decision
makers and gatekeepers give a rating of 5, buyers 4.5, and
users and technical specialists gave a 4 on the five-point
scale.

5. Discussion

5.1. Importance of price and delivery

a This column represents the sum of scores collected by each brand or

company attribute.

b This column represents the median value of scores awarded to each

brand or company attribute.

Price and delivery are very important. Together, they
explain 51% of the decisions made. Literature that stresses
the importance of price and delivery for the industrial

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

377

markets abounds (Hague & Jackson, 1994), so much so that
a higher score (more than 51%) might have been expected.
Delivery period came out as a more important attribute
than price because of the wider range of variation specified
for this attribute. It should be kept in mind that ‘‘the
magnitude of the difference in utilities is strongly influenced
by the choices of extreme levels’’ (Aaker et al., 1995). The
extreme attribute levels are 50% for price (R40,000 to
R60,000) and 100% for delivery period (3 to 6 months).

The high score achieved by price and delivery must
stress that despite the value that is expected from the brand
name, price and delivery deserved to be carefully consid-
ered. ‘‘Responsive pricing strategies must be developed’’
(Hutt & Speh, 1998).

5.2. Importance of brand name

Brand is said to indicate 16% of the decision. Comparing
this with the scores achieved by price and delivery period, it
suggests that the difference in preferences across the four
brand names is more than half the difference in perception of
prices varying by 50% or delivery period doubling. This is a
high score. Some industrial projects are won or lost on very
tight margins, often below 5%. If a brand name can command
a lead of 16% over its competitors, the lead is considerable.

5.3. Price premium for certain brands

Conjoint analysis results indicated clearly that the brand
name was not the most important attribute (save for the
technical specialists). Delivery time, price, and technology
surpassed it. Well-known brand names have positive utility
of + 0.528 and + 0.292, respectively, while lesser known
brands have a negative utility of (cid:3) 0.278 and (cid:3) 0.542,

respectively. Price utility ranges from + 0.704 to (cid:3) 0.935
for price levels of R40,000 and R60,000, respectively. The
higher the price, the lower the utility.

Using linear interpolation, a price of R50,707 would
have a utility of zero. The most favored brand (ABB) has a
utility of 0.528. Again using linear interpolation and assum-
ing all other things being equal, a utility of (cid:3) 0.528 on price
would represent R54,453. Thus, setting the ‘‘brand –price’’
dyad at zero, the most preferred brand could command a
price premium of R3746 or 7.4% relative to an ‘‘average’’
price of R50,707. Using similar logic, the least preferred
brand (Relay Setting) with a utility of (cid:3) 0.542 would have
to discount its price by R3305 to R47,402 or 6.5% relative
to the ‘‘average’’ price.

Thus, in this study, the brand leader could afford a price
premium of nearly 14% over relatively unknown brands on
the market. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.

5.4. Impact of technical specialists on price premiums

A study by Abratt (1986) on industrial buying in high-
technology markets demonstrated that ‘‘technical personnel
dominated the buying process and that the involvement of
the buying department was primarily administrative.’’

If one were to consider only the opinion of technical
specialists, the price premium would have been calculated
as follows:

For this group of people, the better known brand has a
utility of + 1.230, while the least known brand has a utility
of (cid:3) 0.928.

To get to neutral utility, the better known brand can
increase its price up to R64,020 (utility (cid:3) 1.23). This means
that the technical specialists are prepared to grant a price
premium of 26% to the leading brand name.

Fig. 2. Brand – price dyad.

378

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

5.5. Differences in perception of brand-name importance
among DMU role players

ations that will be helpful to the new product (Hague &
Jackson, 1994).

Overall, the brand name is said to explain 16% of the
choice made. But the perceptions across the DMU role
players vary a lot. The users of the product and the technical
specialists credit the brand name with higher importance
(28% and 24%, respectively).

On the other extreme, the gatekeepers allocate a very low
importance to the brand name. This indicates that gate-
keepers have difficulty making the distinction between
different brand names of specialized technical equipment.
This should have been expected because technical brands
are outside the area of interest of gatekeepers. The buyers
seem to have the same problem but to a lesser degree. The
decision makers are somewhere between these extremes.

It is not surprising that users attach so much importance
to the brand name. They are the ones who will work with
the product in the future. Their previous experience with
various brand names will make them more judgmental than
others. The same can be said of the technical specialists but
to a lesser extent.

5.6. The halo effect: possibility of brand extension into new
product lines

The halo effect is the fact of drawing a general impres-
sion about an individual on the basis of a single character-
istic (Robbins, 1998). In the context of brand, the halo is
exploited for brand extensions.

Respondents were asked to say how much consideration
they would give to a new product line (medium-voltage
electrical cables) in case the four brands decided to enter
that market. At the time of the survey, none of the four
brands was marketing that line of products.

Responses were given on a scale from 1 to 5. Results
indicated that the brand that received the highest score is
the same brand with the highest utility and also has the
highest median value of consideration. The second ranked
brand on sum of consideration is also second on utility
and median value. The same applies to the third and
fourth brand. The ranking of brands according to consid-
eration received is the exactly the same as the ranking
according to brand utility.

Furthermore, the values received by brands were sub-
jected to the Kruskall – Wallis test. The null hypothesis
‘Ho = all medians are equal’ states that cables from all four
brand names will receive equal consideration. The null
hypothesis was rejected at the .05 significance level. Some
brands enjoy better prospects of product line extensions than
others. Brands with better renowned names have a positive
halo effect than lesser known brands.

If a brand has a value, it should be possible to transfer
those values to additional products, thus enabling a compa-
ny to broaden its range. A strong brand can make it easier to
launch new products. The original brand will have associ-

5.7. Perceived quality as a brand-generating variable

Quality emerged as the leading criterion for selection of a
brand. Other surveys carried out revealed that quality was
the most
important criteria of selection (Aaker, 1991).
Quality ranked also very high (in second position) in the
survey conducted by Abratt (1986). Quality, reliability, and
performance occupy the same first, second, and third
positions, respectively, as they did in the research by
Michell et al. (2001).

Consistently, perceived quality is mentioned as the im-
portant criterion. That is certainly one of the reasons why it
is a brand association that has been elevated to the status of
a brand asset (Aaker, 1996).

Aaker (1991) suggests that perceived quality can be
defined as the ‘‘customer’s perception of the overall quality
or superiority of a product or service with respect to its
intended purpose, relative to alternatives.’’ Perceived quality
is, first, a perception by customers. It thus differs from
several related concepts, such as

(cid:1) actual or objective quality;
(cid:1) product-based quality; and
(cid:1) manufacturing quality.

Perceived quality cannot necessarily be objectively de-
termined, partly because it is a perception and also because
judgments about what is important to customers are in-
volved (Aaker, 1991).

Perceived quality is an intangible, overall feeling about a
brand. However, it will usually be based on underlying
dimensions, which include characteristics of the products to
which the brand is attached such as reliability and perfor-
mance (Aaker, 1991).

The results of this research ranked reliability and perfor-
mance second and third, just after the quality. The two
attributes are underlying dimensions of quality (Abratt,
1986).

5.8. Price

Abratt (1986) showed that for high-technology products,
price was not the most important criterion. The reliance on
price as criteria for sales is a characteristic of commodity
products (Sinclair & Seward, 1988). The low ranking given
to price indicates that industrial equipment is sufficiently
differentiated to be discriminated using factors other than
price. It has been acknowledged that pricing is a critical
element in marketing and competitive strategy. According to
Shipley and Jobber (2001), pricing decisions should be
based on a comprehensive systematic multistage process
that examines and integrates the full range of forces that
impacts pricing effectiveness. Although pricing is not the

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

379

most important criterion for high-technology products, it
should not be ignored. A systematic approach or framework
for pricing enhances the quality of price decision making by
managers.

5.9. Promotion of a new brand

Respondents were asked to suggest the more effective
ways of creating awareness around a new brand. The use of
technical consultants was chosen as the preferred way of
introducing a new industrial brand. Companies rely on
consultants to provide the knowledge that the companies
do not always have. According to Mudambi (2002), brand-
ing plays a more important role in B2B decision making
than has generally been recognized. Understanding how
customers perceive the company brand will be key to future
management decisions. The specific communications mix
needed will depend on the situational factors but will
include product catalogues, web sites, advertising, trade
shows and exhibitions, and personal selling. To make a
new brand attractive in this market, communications will
have to highlight product quality and augmented services, as
well as the company’s reputation. This will reduce the
perceived risk and uncertainty faced by buyers.

One lesson to be learned from this finding is that when
devising their marketing communications strategy, the mar-
keter should consider all stakeholders who might influence
the customer’s perceptions. The technical consultants appear
to exert a particularly strong influence.

The top three means of promotion for brand awareness
are the use of sales representatives, professional and tech-
nical conferences, and exhibitions.

6. Conclusions and implications for management

Overall, the leading industrial brand name could com-
mand a price premium of 6.8% over the average industrial
brand and 14% over a new, unknown brand. The technical
specialists were willing to pay a price premium of up to
26%. Technical specialists must be specifically targeted
because of their propensity to reward more generously the
strong brand and the fact that they are sometimes the ones
who make the final brand choice decision.

Proposition 1 is supported: Brand equity exists in the
business-to-business markets, in the form of buyers’ will-
ingness to pay a price premium for their favorite brand.

The other benefits of brand equity were the willingness
to extend the brand’s halo to other product
lines and
recommend the brand to others. It was found that all
respondents were willing to recommend their preferred
brand. Using the Kruskall –Wallis test, it was shown that
the consideration given to new products was biased in favor
of well-known brands.

Thus, there is support for Proposition 2: Other benefits
from brand-loyal industrial buyers include their willingness

to recommend that brand to peers and give special consid-
eration to another product with the same name.

Proposition 3 investigated the principal brand-equity-
generating variable. Respondents were asked to choose
among nine variables. Quality was chosen as the first
variable and Proposition 3 was supported: Perceived quality
is the main brand-equity-generating variable.

Proposition 4 examined the best means to create brand
awareness among potential customers. Respondents be-
lieved that the most effective way was to get technical
consultants to talk to them about the new brand. Overall,
visits by sales representatives were chosen from the remain-
ing methods. As far as buyers are concerned, exhibitions
remained the preferred channel to generate brand awareness.
Other groups preferred various other means of communica-
tion. Proposition 4 was supported but was limited to buyers:
The primary source of information to industrial buyers for
industrial brand awareness is exhibitions/trade shows.

Proposition 5 was concerned about differences across
role players in the DMU in relation to perceptions of brand
importance and preferred channel of communications. Even
though the different role players showed different prefer-
ences, the results of the Kruskall– Wallis test indicated that
the value of medians across the roles were significantly
different. There is no significant difference among the role
player groups. Proposition 5 is not supported: Different
groups of DMU role players attach different relative impor-
tance to brands.

The research has shown that even for a standard and
the DMU members develop a
interchangeable product,
sentimental relationship for which they are prepared to
pay a price premium. They are willing to extend that
goodwill to other products of the same brand name.

This study shows that in B2B marketing,

(cid:1)

Industrial marketers have something to gain by investing
into building a likeable, strong, and positive brand image
among all stakeholders. It will allow the company to reap
(albeit to a lesser degree) the same benefits that consumer
marketers enjoy.

(cid:1) Quality is the main brand-equity-generating variable.
Two lessons derive from this finding. The one is that a
quality claim may be effective only if there is substance
to the claim. Industrial marketers have to make sure their
efforts to build a positive brand image are not torn down
by poor quality. The second lesson is that to create a
quality product is not enough. Industrial marketers have
to translate quality into perceived quality.
Industrial customers deliberately make it difficult for
suppliers to determine who is actually making the buying
decision. Therefore, industrial marketers must create a
positive image to all stakeholders that come into contact
with the company. To achieve this, the supplier company
must look beyond marketing communication and devel-
op a total corporate communication program to build up
the corporate brand.

(cid:1)

380

References

M. Bendixen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 33 (2004) 371–380

Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing brand equity, capitalizing on the value of a

brand name. New York: Free Press.

Aaker, D. A. (1996). Building strong brands. New York: Free Press.
Aaker, D. A., Kumar, V., & Day, G. S. (1995). Marketing research. New

York: Wiley.

Abratt, R. (1986). Industrial buying in high tech markets. Industrial Mar-

keting Management, 15, 293 – 298.

Ackerman, L. (1998). Secrets of the corporate brand. Across the Board, 35,

33 – 37.

Balmer, J. M. T. (1995). Corporate branding and connoisseurship. Journal

of General Management, 21, 22 – 46.

De Chernatony, L., & McDonald, M. (1998). Creating powerful brands
in consumer, service and industrial markets. (2nd ed., pp. 1 – 365).
Woburn, MA: Butterworths-Heinemann.

Firth, M. (1997). Price setting and the value of a strong brand name.

International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 381 – 386.

Ghinghold, M., & Wilson, D. T. (1998). Buying center research and busi-
ness marketing practice: Meeting the challenge of dynamic marketing.
Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 13, 96 – 108.

Gordon, G. L., Calantone, R. J., & di Benedetto, C. A. (1993). Brand equity
in the business-to-business sector. Journal of Product and Brand Man-
agement, 2, 4 – 16.

Green, P. E., & Tull, D. S. (1978). Research for marketing decisions.

(4th ed., pp. 1 – 673). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Hague, P., & Jackson, P. (1994). The power of industrial brands, an effec-

tive route to competitive advantage. London: McGraw-Hill.

Hutt, M. D., & Speh, T. W. (1998). Business marketing management.

(6th ed., pp. 1 – 716). Orlando: Dryden Press.

Hutton, J. G. (1997). A study of brand equity in an organizational-buying
context. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 6, 428 – 439.
Keller, K. L. (1998). Strategic brand management, building, measuring,

and managing brand equity. Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall.

markets three buyer clusters. Industrial Marketing Management, 31,
525 – 533.

Mudambi, S. M., Doyle, P., & Wong, V. (2002). An exploration of branding
in industrial markets. Industrial Marketing Management, 26, 433 – 446.
Quelch, J. A., & Harding, D. (1996, January – February). Brands versus
private labels: Fighting to win ( pp. 99 – 109). Boston: Harvard Business
Review.

Robbins, S. P. (1998). Organizational behavior. (8th ed., pp. 1 – 675).

Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall.

Rosenbroijer, C. J. (2001). Industrial brand management: A distributor’s
perspective in the UK fine-paper industry. Journal of Product and
Brand management, 10, 7 – 24.

Saunders, J. A., & Watt, F. A. W. (1979). Do brand names differentiate
identical industrial products? Industrial Marketing Management, 8,
114 – 123.

Shaw, J., Giglierano, J., & Kallis, J. (1989). Marketing complex technical
products: The importance of intangible attributes. Industrial Marketing
Management, 18, 45 – 53.

Shipley, D., & Howard, P. (1993). Brand naming industrial products. In-

dustrial Marketing Management, 22, 59 – 66.

Shipley, D., & Jobber, D. (2001). Intergrative pricing via the pricing wheel.

Industrial Marketing Management, 3, 301 – 314.

Sinclair, S. A., & Seward, K. E. (1998). Effectiveness of branding a com-

modity product. Industrial Marketing Management, 17, 23 – 33.

Wood, L. (2000). Brand and brand equity: Definition and management.

Management Decision, 38, 662 – 669.

Mike Bendixen is assistant dean (Research) of the Faculty of Commerce
Law and Management at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.
He teaches research methodology and quantitative methods, particularly
multivariate analysis, at the Graduate School of Business Administration.
He has published widely including in the Journal of Business Research,
European Journal of Marketing, and Journal of Marketing Management.

Lehmann, D. R., & O’Shaughnessy, J. (1974). Difference in attribute im-
portance for different products. Journal of Marketing, 38, 36 – 42.
Levitt, T. (1995). Industrial purchasing behavior: A study of communica-

Kalala Bukasa is an engineer with ABB and a graduate researcher at the
Graduate School of Business Administration, University of the Witwaters-
rand, South Africa.

tion effects. Boston, MA: Harvard University.

Michell, P., King, J., & Reast, J. B. (2001). Values related to industrial

products. Industrial Marketing Management, 30, 415 – 425.

Mottram, S. (1998). Branding the corporation. In S. Hart, & J. Murphy
(Eds.), Brands the new wealth creators ( pp. 63 – 71). London: MacMil-
lan Press.

Mudambi, S. M. (2002). Branding importance in business-to-business

Russell Abratt is a professor of marketing at the Huizenga School of
Business and Entrepreneurship at Nova Southeastern University. His
interests are in marketing strategy and marketing communications in a
B2B context. He has published in Industrial Marketing Management,
Business Horizons, Journal of Advertising Research, and the European
Journal of Marketing among others.