British Journal of Management, Vol. 14, 207–222 (2003)

Towards a Methodology for Developing
Evidence-Informed Management
Knowledge by Means of Systematic
Review*
David Tranﬁeld, David Denyer and Palminder Smart
Advanced Management Research Centre (AMRC), Cranﬁeld School of Management,
Cranﬁeld University, Cranﬁeld, MK43 OA1, UK
Corresponding author email: D. Tranﬁeld@cranﬁeld.ac.uk
Undertaking a review of the literature is an important part of any research project. The
researcher both maps and assesses the relevant intellectual territory in order to specify a
research question which will further develop the knowledge base. However, traditional
‘narrative’ reviews frequently lack thoroughness, and in many cases are not undertaken
as genuine pieces of investigatory science. Consequently they can lack a means for
making sense of what the collection of studies is saying. These reviews can be biased by
the researcher and often lack rigour. Furthermore, the use of reviews of the available
evidence to provide insights and guidance for intervention into operational needs of
practitioners and policymakers has largely been of secondary importance. For
practitioners, making sense of a mass of often-contradictory evidence has become
progressively harder. The quality of evidence underpinning decision-making and action
has been questioned, for inadequate or incomplete evidence seriously impedes policy
formulation and implementation. In exploring ways in which evidence-informed
management reviews might be achieved, the authors evaluate the process of systematic
review used in the medical sciences. Over the last ﬁfteen years, medical science has
attempted to improve the review process by synthesizing research in a systematic,
transparent, and reproducible manner with the twin aims of enhancing the knowledge base
and informing policymaking and practice. This paper evaluates the extent to which the
process of systematic review can be applied to the management ﬁeld in order to produce a
reliable knowledge stock and enhanced practice by developing context-sensitive research.
The paper highlights the challenges in developing an appropriate methodology.

Introduction: the need for an evidenceinformed approach
Undertaking a review of the literature to provide
the best evidence for informing policy and

*This paper results from research undertaken in Cran-

ﬁeld IMRC (EPSRC) grant no IMRC19, ‘Developing a
methodology for evidence-informed management
knowledge using systematic review’, Professor David
Tranﬁeld and Dr David Denyer.
r 2003 British Academy of Management

practice in any discipline, is a key research
objective for the respective academic and practitioner communities.
The post-World-War-II era witnessed a sharp
focus of attention by academics and practitioners
on the discipline and profession of management
(Blake and Mouton, 1976; Tisdall, 1982). The
pace of knowledge production in this ﬁeld has
been accelerating ever since and has resulted in a
body of knowledge that is increasingly fragmented and transdisciplinary as well as being interdependent from advancements in the social

sciences (Friedman, Durkin, Phillips and Voltsinger, 2000).
In management research, the literature review
process is a key tool, used to manage the diversity
of knowledge for a speciﬁc academic inquiry. The
aim of conducting a literature review is often to
enable the researcher both to map and to assess
the existing intellectual territory, and to specify a
research question to develop the existing body of
knowledge further. Management reviews are
usually narrative and have been widely criticized
for being singular descriptive accounts of the
contributions made by writers in the ﬁeld, often
selected for inclusion on the implicit biases of the
researcher (Fink, 1998; Hart, 1998). Not surprisingly they have also been condemned for lacking
critical assessment. The management-research
community perpetuates this type of practice by
not actively commissioning infrastructural arrangements to ensure previous investments in
literature reviews are not lost. This tolerance to
loss of knowledge forms a high-risk strategy that
will inevitably become unsustainable as organizations endeavour further into the networked and
knowledge-based economy.
Reviews of the available evidence in management to assimilate ‘best evidence’ to provide
insights and guidance for intervention into the
operational needs of practitioners and policymakers have largely become a secondary consideration.
Suﬃcient momentum from academics, practitioners, and government has stirred an urgent
need to re-evaluate the process by which management researchers conduct literature reviews. Over
the last ﬁfteen years, medical science has attempted to improve the quality of the review
process. This paper proposes the view that
applying speciﬁc principles of the systematic
review methodology used in the medical sciences
to management research will help in counteracting
bias by making explicit the values and assumptions underpinning a review. By enhancing the
legitimacy and authority of the resultant evidence,
systematic reviews could provide practitioners and
policy-makers with a reliable basis to formulate
decisions and take action. This is particularly
sobering if one considers the growing pressures
upon practitioners in today’s global trading
environments to do this in shorter cycle times.
This paper will begin by discussing the
evidence-based approach in medical sciences

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
through the eﬀective use of systematic reviews.
The following sections will compare and contrast
the nature of reviews in medical science and
management research and evaluate the extent to
which the systematic review process can be
applied to the management ﬁeld. Finally this
paper will present the challenges in designing an
appropriate methodology for management research.

The origins of the evidence-based
approach
Since the 1980s, the British central government
has placed increasing emphasis on ensuring that
policy and practice are informed through a more
rigorous and challenging evidence base. The
‘three E’ initiatives (economy, eﬃciency and
eﬀectiveness) have focused attention on the
delivery of public services and have led to the
development of detailed guidance and bestpractice manuals in many disciplines. Eﬀectiveness in this context is concerned both with
appropriateness and the validity of the methods
used by professionals in their day-to-day work to
achieve their basic aims and also with the overall
ability of agencies to deliver the services they are
required to provide (Davies, Nutley and Smith,
2000). The concern for eﬀective service delivery
has attracted considerable attention, and has
focused interest on basing policy and practice on
the best evidence available. Consequently, an
evidence-based movement has developed under
New Labour, and in May 1997 Tony Blair
announced that ‘what counts is what works’, the
intention being to signal a new ‘post-ideological’
approach to public policy where evidence would
take centre stage in the decision-making process
(Davies, Nutley and Smith, 2000).

The evidence-based approach in medical
science and healthcare
The evidence-based movement has had a major
impact in certain disciplines. Pre-eminent have
been applications in medical science, where the
pace of knowledge production has meant that
making sense of an often-contradictory mass of
evidence has become increasingly diﬃcult (Ohlsson, 1994). Speciﬁcally in the late 1980s, attention

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

208

was drawn to the comparative lack of rigour in
secondary research (Mulrow, 1987). Critics argued that the preparation of reviews of secondary
sources were dependent on implicit, idiosyncratic
methods of data collection and interpretation
(Cook, Mulrow and Haynes, 1997; Greenhalgh,
1997). In addition, practice based on poor-quality
evaluations of the literature sometimes had led to
inappropriate recommendations (Cook, Greengold, Ellrodt and Weingarten, 1997). In 1991,
Smith questioned the overall wisdom of much of
medical science, arguing that only 15–20% of
medical interventions were supported by solid
medical evidence (Smith, 1991). The result, it was
argued, was that patients were being regularly
subjected to ineﬀective treatments and interventions, and for many practices there was little or
no understanding of whether or not the beneﬁts
outweighed the potential harm (Davies, Nutley
and Smith, 1999).
The National Health Service (NHS) Research
and Development Strategy identiﬁed that too
little research was being carried out in the
important clinical areas and that much of the
existing research was ad hoc, piecemeal and
poorly conducted (Peckham, 1991). The report
also argued that researchers rather than practitioners, managers or policymakers drove the
research agenda.
Furthermore, there was little dissemination, let
alone diﬀusion, of research ﬁndings. The Strategy
not only argued for an increase in the level of
research conducted but also for systematic reviews of existing research on important clinical or
operational questions, assessing the best evidence
available, collating the ﬁndings and presenting
them in a way that was accessible and relevant to
decision-makers (Peckham, 1991).

Systematic review – a key tool in
developing the evidence base
Over the last decade medical science has made
signiﬁcant strides in attempting to improve the
quality of the review process by synthesizing
research in a systematic, transparent and reproducible manner to inform policy and decisionmaking about the organization and delivery of
health and social care (Cook, Greengold, Ellrodt
and Weingarten, 1997; Cook, Mulrow and
Haynes, 1997; Wolf, Shea and Albanese, 2001).

209

Systematic reviews diﬀer from traditional
narrative reviews by adopting a replicable,
scientiﬁc and transparent process, in other words
a detailed technology, that aims to minimize bias
through exhaustive literature searches of published and unpublished studies and by providing
an audit trail of the reviewers decisions, procedures and conclusions (Cook, Mulrow and
Haynes, 1997). The process of systematic review
and its associated procedure, meta-analysis, has
been developed over the last decade and now
plays a major role in evidence-based practices.
Whereas systematic review identiﬁes key scientiﬁc contributions to a ﬁeld or question, metaanalysis oﬀers a statistical procedure for synthesizing ﬁndings in order to obtain overall reliability unavailable from any single study alone.
Indeed, undertaking systematic review is now
regarded as a ‘fundamental scientiﬁc activity’
(Mulrow, 1994, p. 597). The 1990s saw several
organizations formed with the aim of establishing
agreed and formalized procedures for systematic
review and to undertake systematic reviews to
synthesize and disseminate evidence across all
areas of healthcare. These organizations included
the Cochrane Collaboration (2001), the National
Health Science Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (2001) and the National Institute for
Clinical Excellence (2001).

Evidence-based approaches in other
disciplines
The movement to base practice on the best
available evidence has migrated from medicine
to other disciplines. In the UK, the Department
for Education and Skills (DfES) has established a
Centre for Evidence Informed Policy and Practice in Education. Furthermore, a ‘What Works?
Programme’ was introduced in the probation
service following the Crime Reduction Strategy
published by the Home Oﬃce in July 1998. The
aim of the programme was to develop successful
intervention programmes based on hard evidence
so that they could be used as models for day-today probation practice (HM Inspectorate of
Probation, 1998; Home Oﬃce, 1998). An Eﬀective Practice Initiative also has sought to address
the diﬃcult problem of ensuring that oﬀender
supervision changes in line with research evidence
on what works (Furniss and Nutley, 2000). The

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart

Department for the Environment, Transport, and
the Regions (DETR) commissioned a review of
the evidence base as it relates to regeneration
policy and practice (Dabinett, Lawless, Rhodes
and Tyler, 2001). Other disciplines such as
nursing (Evans and Pearson, 2001), housing
policy (Davies and Nutley, 1999; Maclennan
and More, 1999), social care (Macdonald, 1999)
and criminal justice (Laycock, 2000) have also
adjusted the approach with varying degrees of
success. In 2001, the Economic and Social
Research Council (ESRC) funded the establishment of a network (the Evidence Network) of
multi-disciplinary centres dedicated to the improvement of the evidence base for policy and
practice in social sciences. The Evidence Network
aims to use systematic review to inform and
improve decision-making in government, business and the voluntary sector.
Internationally, in February 2000 the Campbell Collaboration was launched in Philadelphia
by about 150 pioneering social scientists. This
equivalent of the Cochrane collaboration aims:
‘to help people make well-informed decisions about
the eﬀects of interventions in the social, behavioural
and educational arenas’ (Campbell Collaboration,
2001).

Within the approach taken by the Campbell
Collaboration, delegates considered questions
such as how practitioners might engage the
review process, what makes research useful and
useable and what standards and quality criteria
distinguished reliable from unreliable research?
In this sense, discussions addressed the need for

research to be both well founded and socially
robust. This emphasis on producing a science
base, which is both rigorous in formulation and
relevant to practice, is a key characteristic of an
evidence-based approach.
The quality of information accepted as evidence in a discipline is dependent on a number of
criteria. These include the broad intellectual
approach, the value system adopted by researchers and commissioning bodies and the usual
research methods employed (Davies and Nutley,
1999). Medical science has traditionally adopted
a ‘normal science’ approach within which doubleblinded randomized controlled trials have been
widely accepted as the most rigorous method for
testing interventions before use. So far, systematic reviews have tended to be applied in, and to
emanate from, ﬁelds and disciplines privileging a
positivist tradition, attempting to do for research
synthesis what randomized controlled trials
aspire to do for single studies (Macdonald,
1999). Systematic reviews entail a series of techniques for minimizing bias and error, and as such
systematic review and meta-analysis are widely
regarded as providing ‘high-quality’ evidence.
Figure 1 highlights the hierarchy of evidence in
the medical sciences (Davies and Nutley, 1999).
In other disciplines such as education, social
services and criminal justice there is often both
less consensus regarding the appropriate methodology to be used for evaluating the evidence
base, and little agreement as to how use research
evidence to inform policy and practice (Davies and
Nutley, 1999; Laycock, 2000; Macdonald, 1999;
Maclennan and More, 1999). Furthermore, policy

Hierarchy of evidence
I-I Systematic review and meta-analysis of two or more double blind randomized controlled trials.
I-2 One or more large double-blind randomized controlled trials.
II-1 One or more well-conducted cohort studies.
II-2 One or more well-conducted case-control studies.
II-3 A dramatic uncontrolled experiment.
III Expert committee sitting in review; peer leader opinion.
IV Personal experience.
Figure 1. Hierarchies of evidence. Source: reproduced by kind permission of the publisher from Davies, H. T. O. and S. M. Nutley
(1999). ‘The Rise and Rise of Evidence in Health Care’, Public Money & Management, 19 (1), pp. 9–16. r 1999 Blackwell Publishing.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

210

questions are rarely addressed by the use of
randomized controlled trials. For example, in
social care the nature of evidence is often hotly
disputed and there exists strong resistance to
privileging one research method over another.
Indeed, postmodern perspectives generally mistrust any notion of objective evidence.
Divergences such as these are deeply rooted in
the ontological and epistemological assumptions
of speciﬁc ﬁelds. Despite these diﬃculties, Davies,
Nutley and Smith argue optimistically:

Pettigrew (1997, p. 291), in much the same vein
as Whitley, emphasized the signiﬁcance of the
social production of knowledge in viewing
management research, emphasizing stakeholder
perspectives. His inﬂuential view was that management research faces a series of challenges:
‘best captured in a series of concurrent double
hurdles, which together raise a wide spectrum of
cognitive, social and political demands on [the]
skills and knowledge of [management] researchers.’

He argued for a thematic approach:
‘The diﬀerent ontological and epistemological starting points in diﬀerent professional traditions undoubtedly colour the methods and enthusiasm with
which professionals engage with evidence. However,
what is clear is that there remains in all of the areas
examined great potential for research evidence to be
vastly more inﬂuential than hitherto’. (2000, p. 4)

The nature of management research
The nature of the ﬁeld of management research
has been subject, over the years, to considerable
analysis and discussion. Much of this discussion
and debate has focused upon the ontological
status of the ﬁeld, particularly its fragmented and
divergent nature. For example, Whitley (1984a,
1984b), in two inﬂuential articles, investigated the
scientiﬁc status of management research as a
‘practically oriented social science’. He identiﬁed
its fragmented state and argued that the consequence of this is a:
‘low degree of reputational control over signiﬁcance
standards y (which) means that the signiﬁcance of
problems and preferred ways of formulating them
are unstable, subject to disputes, and are assessed
by diﬀused and diverse standards.’ (Whitley, 1984a,
p. 343)

Whitley (2000) further reﬁned this position,
suggesting that the continued fragmentation of
the management ﬁeld may displace academics as
key stakeholders in the research process. In
comparing management research with industrial,
work and organizational psychology, Hodgkinson, Herriot and Anderson (2001, s45) also
conclude that there is a considerable and widening divide between academics and other stakeholder groups and that ‘this divergence is likely to
further proliferate irrelevant theory and untheorized and invalid practice’.

‘to meet the double hurdle of embeddedness in the
social sciences and the worlds of policy and
practice’ (Pettigrew, 1997, p. 292).

Berry (1995) oﬀered a Gallic perspective,
arguing strongly the case for the importance of
qualitative work. Several writers (Aram and
Salipante, 2000; Pfeﬀer and Sutton, 1999; Van
de Ven, 1998; Wind and Nueno, 1998) have
argued convincingly for the applied nature of
management research. Likewise, Hambrick
(1994) and Huﬀ (2000) both used their addresses
as President of the Academy of Management to
address the ontological status of the ﬁeld. More
recently, Wilcoxson and Fitzgerald (2001) have
focused on the nature of management as a
discipline and the consequences of this for
researchers and practitioners in an Australasian
context and Van Aken (2001) has developed a
view of management research based as a design
science, rather than as a formal or explanatory
science. By conceptualizing management research
in this way, he identiﬁes the need for a ﬁeld of
study to deliver output not only of high academic
quality but also which is practitioner and
context-sensitive. He argues that the mission of
design sciences is to develop valid and reliable
knowledge in the form of ‘ﬁeld tested and
grounded technological rules’ to be used in
designing, conﬁguring and implementing solutions to speciﬁc problems.
The 1990s saw an extensive debate concerning
the nature of management research within the
British Academy of Management, which focused
on the ontological status of the ﬁeld, and
particularly the extent to which academic–practitioner relations were to be privileged. The work
of Gibbons et al. (1994) on modes of knowledge
production has become increasingly inﬂuential in
such debates. In particular, their notion of mode

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

211

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

2 knowledge production, where there is ‘a constant
ﬂow back and forth between the theoretical and
the practical’ and where ‘knowledge is produced in
the context of application’ has been argued to be
central to debates about the future of management
research (Tranﬁeld and Starkey, 1998). Creating a
management research which is both theoretically
sound and methodologically rigorous as well as
relevant to the practitioner community has been a
theme explored by both the British Academy of
Management and the Foundation for Management Education (Starkey and Madan, 2001).
This discussion was developed further in a special
issue of the British Journal of Management
(Hodgkinson, 2001).

Comparing the management and
medical ﬁelds
Tranﬁeld and Starkey (1998), in an article which
both reﬂected and drove the debate in the British
Academy of Management, used Becher’s (1989)
dimensions drawn from the sociology of knowledge to characterize management research as
‘soft’ rather than ‘hard’ ‘applied’ rather than
‘pure’, rural’ rather than ‘urban’, and ‘divergent’
rather than ‘convergent’. The creation of such a
proﬁle, with the use of dimensions drawn from
the sociology of knowledge, enabled contrasts to
be made with other disciplines, particularly
medical science, where systematic review has
been applied to considerable eﬀect. Comparison
can be made in both epistemological and
ontological realms.
Whereas medical research enjoys considerable
and extensive epistemological consensus, this is
untrue of management research, in general. The
consequential diﬃculties of establishing agreed
thresholds for high-quality work result from this
lack of consensus.
Key ontological diﬀerences between management research and medical science concern the
dimension ‘convergent–divergent’. The extent to
which a discipline resides at one end of this
dimension or another is purported to depend
upon similarities in research ideologies, values
and quality judgements which create a shared
sense of nationhood amongst researchers within
the ﬁeld (Becher, 1989). Agreements concerning
key research questions to be addressed lead to a
relatively low tolerance of deviance, but have the

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
advantage of deﬁning disciplinary boundaries,
making them easy to defend. Thus, the extent to
which disciplines are opening up research questions, or addressing a previously deﬁned and
agreed agenda, dictates positioning on this
dimension.
Management research is a relatively young
ﬁeld, far less well developed in terms of agenda
and question formulation than much of medical
science. As a result there tends to be low
consensus concerning key research questions in
management research. Studies in the ﬁeld rarely
address identical problems and share a research
agenda or, more importantly, ask the same
questions. Therefore, it is unlikely that aggregative approaches to research synthesis, such as
meta-analysis will be appropriate in management
research as the heterogeneity of studies prevents
the pooling of results and the measurement of the
net eﬀectiveness of interventions.
Table 1 outlines the similarities and diﬀerences
between medical science as an applied ﬁeld of
study stemming from the biological sciences, and
management research as an applied ﬁeld with
strong connections to the social sciences.
The main question here is to what extent
review processes developed in ﬁelds that are
striving to become evidence based, such as the
more convergent ﬁeld of medicine, can inform the
review process in the management ﬁeld to help
create rigorous and relevant reviews. As management research questions need to be clearly
speciﬁed, either as replication of an existing
study, as further development of an existing
study, or as a new study to meet a deﬁned ‘gap’ in
the literature, a more systematic literature review
process can help to justify/qualify the near/ﬁnal
research question which is posed. Furthermore,
the process described/proposed in this paper
values and takes steps to encourage participation,
by both academics and by managers/policymakers, and is pragmatic in intent.
Systematic reviews have traditionally been
applied in ﬁelds and disciplines privileging a
positivist and quantitative tradition:
‘Positivists seek cause-and-eﬀect laws that are
suﬃciently generalizable to ensure that a knowledge
of prior events enables a reasonable predication of
subsequent event y Because positivists see knowledge as accumulating, they have been more interested in developing approaches to research

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

212

Table 1. Diﬀerences between medical research and management research
Medicine
Nature of the discipline
Research culture

Convergent
Subjected to rigorous scientiﬁc evaluation.

Research questions
Interventions
Research designs
Theory

High consensus over research questions.
Can be measured through experiments.
Based upon a hierarchy of evidence.
Concerned with what works–did the intervention
oﬀer overall beneﬁts.
Generally reducing illness and death, and
improving health.
Scientiﬁc evidence.
Predominantly quantitative.
Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Reviews of eﬀectiveness are used by clinical
practitioners.
A review panel (including practitioners) guides
the process.
A brief scoping study is conducted to delimit the
subject area.
A plan prior to the review states the criterion for
including and excluding studies, the search
strategy, description of the methods to be used,
coding strategies and the statistical procedures to
the employed.
Protocols are made available by international
bodies to enhance networking the exchange of
knowledge.
A comprehensive, structured search is conducted
using predetermined keywords and search strings.

Aims of policy
Weight of inputs into policy
Methods
Literature reviews
The need for a review
Preparation of the review

Review protocol

Identifying research

Selection of studies

Inclusion and exclusion criteria are expressed in
the protocol to ensure a review of the best
available evidence.
Draw upon ‘raw data’ from ‘whole studies’ for
analysis to create a study in its own right.

Study quality assessment

Studies are assessed against predetermined
criteria. The internal validity of the study is
judged Assessing and including qualitative
studies is problematic.

Data extraction

Data extraction forms are used which act as a
historical record for the decisions made during
the process and provides the basis on which to
conduct data synthesis.
A qualitative synthesis provides a tabulation of
key characteristics and results. Meta-analysis
pools the data across studies to increase the
power of statistical analysis. Aims to generate
‘best’ evidence.

Data synthesis

Reporting and
Dissemination

Standardized reporting structures used Nonexplanatory style adopted. Short scripts recorded
and made widely avail able through
internationally recognized institutions.
Comprehensible by practitioners.

Evidence into practice

Collaborative process and practice-oriented.

Management
Divergent.
Split between positivist and phenomenological
perspectives.
Low consensus over research questions.
Experimentation may or may not be feasible.
Triangulation is recommended.
Concerned with why something works or does
not work and the context in which this occurs.
Multiple and competing and the balance between
them may change over time.
Many extraneous factors.
Quantitative and qualitative.
Largely narrative reviews.
To develop a research question and inform
empirical research practice.
Usually an informal/ad hoc process involving the
researcher, peers and supervisor.

Level of formality and standardisation in
designing/adopting protocols is usually low.
Unacceptable to ‘tightly’ plan literature review,
as this may inhibit the researchers capacity to
explore, discover and develop ideas.

Identifying a ﬁeld/sub- ﬁelds of study generally
occurs through informal consultation. Implicit
idiosyncratic methods of data collection are used.
Based on studies that appear relevant or
interesting. Researchers bias disables critical
appraisal. Decisions regarding choice are not
recorded precluding any audit trails ‘Raw data’ is
often not available in academic articles, which
usually represent ‘partial studies’. Precise
inclusion/exclusion criteria are often not formally
agreed, applied recorded or monitored.
Poor evaluating of the ﬁt between research
methodology and research questions.
Researchers tend to rely on the quality rating of a
particular journal, rather than applying quality
assessment criteria to individual articles.
Data extraction is not formally guided by
explicitly stated inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Data extracted is not comprehensively recorded
and monitored.
Generally narrative and qualitative. Higher levels
of subjectivity associated with what is taken from
an article for analysis and synthesis. Lack explicit
descriptive and thematic analysis. Speciﬁc tools
and techniques from the ﬁeld of qualitative data
analysis are increasingly applied.
Non-standardized reporting structures.
Interpretive long scripts. The explanatory power
improved through the use of analogy, metaphor
and homology. Process of knowledge production,
omitted. Sometimes incomprehensible by
practitioners lack links between diﬀerent
literature.
Implementation of evidence is often an
afterthought.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

213

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

synthesis than have interpretivists.’ (Noblit and
Hare, 1988, p. 12)

Indeed researchers from an interpretivist or
phenomenological position may suggest that
systematic reviews, with their positivist leanings,
should not be adopted in the social sciences. Even
within medical research, not everybody accepts
that systematic reviews are necessary or desirable
(Petticrew, 2001). Petticrew (2001, p. 98) argues
that the concern over systematic review has been
fuelled by the fact that they are often presented as
synonymous with a numerical aggregation of the
results of individual studies through a process of
meta-analysis and ‘that they are incapable of
dealing with other forms of evidence, such as
from non-randomized studies or qualitative research’. However, meta-analysis ‘is simply one of
the tools, albeit a particularly important one, that
is used in preparing systematic reviews’ (Mulrow,
Cook and Davidoﬀ, 1997, p. 290). In most
systematic reviews the heterogeneity of study data
prevents the use of meta-analysis. In these cases,
synthesis is achieved through summarizing the
ﬁndings of a group of studies. Alternative
methods of research synthesis such as realist
synthesis, meta-synthesis and meta-ethnography
have also been developed to draw comparisons
and conclusions from a collection of studies
through interpretative and inductive methods.
Whilst there are fundamental diﬀerences between
meta-analysis and qualitative research synthesis
(Campbell, Pound, Pope, Bitten, Pill, Mogan, and
Donovan, 2003), both are concerned with ‘putting
together’ (Noblit and Hare, 1988, p. 7) ﬁndings
from a number of empirical studies in some
coherent way (Dingwall, Murphy, Watson,
Greatbatch and Parker, 1998).
The following section of the paper reports the
systematic review methodology used in medical
science, seeks to tease out the key characteristics
of the approach, highlights the key challenges in
transferring the model to the management ﬁeld
and presents a number of recommendations on
how these may be addressed.

Conducting a systematic review
Despite the relative infancy of systematic review,
a reasonable consensus has emerged as to its
desirable methodological characteristics (Davies

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
and Crombie, 1998). The Cochrane Collaboration’s Cochrane Reviewers’ Handbook (Clarke and
Oxman, 2001) and the National Health Service
Dissemination (2001) provide a list of stages in
conducting systematic review (see Figure 2).
Stage I: planning the review
Prior to beginning the review a review panel is
formed encompassing a range of experts in the
areas of both methodology and theory. Eﬀorts
should be made to include practitioners working
in the ﬁeld on the panel. The review panel should
help direct the process through regular meetings
and resolve any disputes over the inclusion and
exclusion of studies. The initial stages of
systematic reviews may be an iterative process
of deﬁnition, clariﬁcation, and reﬁnement
(Clarke and Oxman, 2001). Within management
it will be necessary to conduct scoping studies to
assess the relevance and size of the literature and
to delimit the subject area or topic. Such studies
need to consider cross-disciplinary perspectives
and alternative ways in which a research topic
has previously been tackled. The scoping study
may also include a brief overview of the
theoretical, practical and methodological history
debates surrounding the ﬁeld and sub-ﬁelds of

Stage I−Planning the review
Phase 0 - Identification for the need for a review
Phase 1 - Preparation of a proposal for a review
Phase 2 - Development of a review protocol

Stage II−Conducting a review
Phase 3 - Identification of research
Phase 4 - Selection of studies
Phase 5 - Study quality assessment
Phase 6 - Data extraction and monitoring progress
Phase 7 - Data synthesis

Stage III−Reporting and dissemination
Phase 8 - The report and recommendations
Phase 9 - Getting evidence into practice
Figure 2. Stages of a systematic review (Source: adapted by kind
permission of the publisher from NHS Centre for Reviews and
Dissemination (2001). Undertaking Systematic Reviews of
Research on Eﬀectiveness. CRD’s Guidance for those Carrying
Out or Commissioning Reviews. CRD Report Number 4 (2nd
Edition) r 2001 NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination,
University of York.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

214

study. Where ﬁelds comprise of semi-independent
and autonomous sub-ﬁelds, then this process
may prove diﬃcult and the researcher is likely to
struggle with the volume of information and the
creation of transdisciplinary understanding.
Within medical science the researcher will also
arrive at a deﬁnitive review question. The review
question is critical to systematic review as other
aspects of the process ﬂow from it. In systematic
review the outcome of these decisions is captured
through a formal document called a review
protocol. The protocol is a plan that helps to
protect objectivity by providing explicit descriptions of the steps to be taken. The protocol
contains information on the speciﬁc questions
addressed by the study, the population (or
sample) that is the focus of the study, the search
strategy for identiﬁcation of relevant studies, and
the criteria for inclusion and exclusion of studies
in the review (Davies and Crombie, 1998). Once
protocols are complete they are registered with
the appropriate review-group editors, such as the
Cochrane Collaboration. If satisfactory, the
review is published to encourage interested
parties to contact the reviewers and to avoid
duplication of studies.
Any management review protocol may contain
a conceptual discussion of the research problem
and a statement of the problem’s signiﬁcance
rather than a deﬁned research question. Furthermore management reviews are often regarded as a
process of exploration, discovery and development. Therefore, it is generally considered unacceptable to plan the literature-review activities
closely. A more ﬂexible approach may make
explicit what the researcher intends to do a priori
but can be modiﬁed through the course of the
study. The researcher needs to state explicitly what
changes have been made and the rationale for
doing so. The aim is to produce a protocol that
does not compromise the researcher’s ability to be
creative in the literature review process, whilst also
ensuring reviews be less open to researcher bias
than are the more traditional narrative reviews.
Stage II: conducting the review
A comprehensive, unbiased search is one of the
fundamental diﬀerences between a traditional
narrative review and a systematic review.
Although sometimes taking considerable time,

215

and almost always requiring perseverance and
attention to detail, systematic review has been
argued to provide the most eﬃcient and highquality method for identifying and evaluating
extensive literatures (Mulrow, 1994). A systematic search begins with the identiﬁcation of
keywords and search terms, which are built from
the scoping study, the literature and discussions
within the review team. The reviewer should then
decide on the search strings that are most
appropriate for the study. The search strategy
should be reported in detail suﬃcient to ensure
that the search could be replicated. Searches
should not only be conducted in published
journals and listed in bibliographic databases,
but also comprise unpublished studies, conference proceedings, industry trials, the Internet
and even personal requests to known investigators. The output of the information search should
be a full listing of articles and papers (core
contributions) on which the review will be based.
Only studies that meet all the inclusion criteria
speciﬁed in the review protocol and which
manifest none of the exclusion criteria need be
incorporated into the review. The strict criteria
used in systematic review are linked to the desire
to base reviews on the best-quality evidence. As
decisions regarding inclusion and exclusion remain relatively subjective, this stage of the
systematic review might be conducted by more
than one reviewer. Disagreements can be resolved
within the review panel. The process of selecting
studies in systematic review involves several
stages. The reviewer will initially conduct a
review of all potentially relevant citations identiﬁed in the search. Relevant sources will be
retrieved for a more detailed evaluation of the
full text and from these some will be chosen for
the systematic review. The number of sources
included and excluded at each stage of the review
is documented with the reasons for exclusions.
Within the medical domain there is a tension
between the statistical beneﬁts of including a
large number of primary studies and conducting
high-quality reviews of fewer studies with the use
of more selective methodological criteria of
inclusion and exclusion (Davies, 2000). Quality
assessment refers to the appraisal of a study’s
internal validity and the degree to which its
design, conduct and analysis have minimized
biases or errors. Individual studies in systematic
review are judged against a set of predetermined

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

criteria and checklists to assist the process (Oxman, 1994). The relevance of a study to the
review depends on the relevance of its research
questions and the quality of its methodology. The
reviewer should avoid including:
‘all studies that meet broad standards in terms of
independent and dependent variables, avoiding any
judgement of quality.’ (Slavin, 1986, p. 6)

Systematic reviews, due to their positivistic
origins, sit comfortably with studies that use
quantitative methods such as randomized controlled trials, quasi-experimental designs, and
cost-beneﬁt and cost-eﬀectiveness studies, therefore, establishing criteria for ascertaining what is
‘relevant’ or ‘good quality’ in qualitative research
provides a further challenge (Engel and Kuzel,
1992). With qualitative studies there is no possibility of testing statistically the signiﬁcance of the
results. Qualitative research, by its very nature:
‘is non-standard, unconﬁned, and dependent on the
subjective experience of both the researcher and the
researched y it is debatable, therefore, whether an
all-encompassing critical appraisal checklist along
the lines of the User’s Guides to the Medical
Literature could ever be developed’ (Greenhalgh
and Taylor, 1997, p. 741).

Several authors have presented a range of
criteria that might be used to appraise and
evaluate qualitative studies (Blaxter, 1996;
Greenhalgh and Taylor, 1997; Mays and Pope,
2000; Popay, Rogers and Williams, 1998). Popay,
Rogers and Williams (1998) suggest that a quality
assessment would include the following:
 a primary marker: is the research aiming to explore
the subjective meanings that people give to particular
experiences and interventions?;
 context sensitive: has the research been designed in
such a way as to enable it to be sensitive/ﬂexible to
changes occurring during the study?;
 sampling strategy: has the study sample been selected
in a purposeful way shaped by theory and/or
attention given to the diverse contexts and meanings
that the study is aiming to explore?;
 data quality: are diﬀerent sources of knowledge/understanding about the issues being explored or compared?;
 theoretical adequacy: do researchers make explicit the
process by which they move from data to interpretation?;
 generalizability: if claims are made to generalizability
do these follow logically and/or theoretically from the
data?

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
Sandelowski, Docherty and Emden (1997)
claim that checklists, when applied to qualitative
studies, should be used with caution if they are
used as a basis on which to exclude studies from a
review. They go on to argue that any decisions
regarding exclusion must be supported by a
detailed explanation of the reviewer’s conception
of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ studies and the reasons for
exclusion.
Whereas systematic reviews draw upon ‘raw
data’, in management research these data are
often not made available in articles by authors. In
many cases the articles only represent the results
of part studies that satisfy the orientation of the
editors of a particular journal. Therefore, the
decisions regarding the selection of studies
actually become decisions about the selection of
‘articles’ based on the more subjective ﬁndings
and conclusions of the author rather than on the
‘raw’ data:
‘It is highly unlikely that such a synthesis will
involve a re-analysis of primary data which may be
in the form of transcripts from interviews, for ﬁeldnotes from studies involving participant observation. Rather, the data to be analysed are most likely
to be the ﬁndings of the studies involved. These
might take the form of substantive themes arising,
for example, from in-depth interviews. Within
qualitative research (and arguably all research)
theory plays a pivotal role in informing the
interpretation of data. Whilst few authors appear
to have considered the role for theory-led synthesis
of ﬁndings across studies an argument can be made
for exploring the potential for this approach.’
(Clarke and Oxman, 2001, section 4, p. 20)

Systematic reviews expose studies to rigorous
methodological scrutiny. Within the management
ﬁeld it may be possible to conduct a quality
assessment of the research articles by evaluating
the ﬁt between research methodology and research questions. However, management researchers usually rely on the implicit quality
rating of a particular journal, rather than
formally applying any quality assessment criteria
to the articles they include in their reviews (i.e.
refereed journals are ‘better’ than practitioner
journals). The diﬃculty in specifying and conducting quality assessments of studies is a major
challenge in developing a systematic review
methodology for management research.
To reduce human error and bias, systematic
reviews employ data-extraction forms. These

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

216

often contain general information (title, author,
publication details), study features and speciﬁc
information (details and methods) and notes on
emerging themes coupled with details of synthesis. The Cochrane Collaboration states that
data-extraction forms serve at least three important functions. First, the form is directly
linked to the formulated review question and
the planned assessment of the incorporated
studies, providing a visual representation of
these. Second, the extraction form acts as a
historical record of the decisions made during the
process. Third, the data-extraction form is the
data-repository from which the analysis will
emerge (Clarke and Oxman, 2001).
The data-extraction process requires a documentation of all steps taken. In many cases
double extraction processes are employed, where
two independent assessors analyse a study and
their ﬁndings are compared and reconciled if
required. Data-extraction can be paper based or
computer based. The development of the dataextraction sheets is ﬂexible and may depend upon
the nature of the study. When devising the form,
reviewers should consider the information that
will be needed to construct summary tables and
to perform data synthesis. Data-extraction forms
should include details of the information source
(title, authors, journal, publication details) and
any other features of the study such as population characteristics, context of the study and an
evaluation of the study’s methodological quality.
Links to other concepts, identiﬁcation of emergent themes, and key results and additional notes
also need to be included on the data-extraction
form.
Research synthesis is the collective term for a
family of methods for summarizing, integrating,
and, where possible, cumulating the ﬁndings of
diﬀerent studies on a topic or research question
(Mulrow, 1994). The simplest and best-known
form of research synthesis is a narrative review
that attempts to identify what has been written
on a subject or topic. Such reviews make no
attempt to seek generalization or cumulative
knowledge from what is reviewed (Greenhalgh,
1997). Meta-analysis is an alternative approach
to synthesis, which enables the pooling of data
from individual studies to allow for an increase in
statistical power and a more precise estimate of
eﬀect size (Glass, 1976). Within management
research, few studies address the same research

217

question and measure the phenomenon in the
same way. Furthermore, researchers are less
concerned with the eﬀectiveness of certain classes
of intervention, and rather more concerned with
understanding organizations and management
processes. Therefore, it is unlikely that metaanalysis will be appropriate in management
research.
A number of authors have oﬀered interpretive
and inductive approaches to research synthesis,
which are more likely to provide a means of
drawing insight from studies and for addressing
issues pertinent to management research. Some
authors contend that there are a number of
philosophical and practical problems associated
with ‘summing up’ qualitative studies, whilst
others argue that attempts to ‘synthesize existing
studies are seen as essential to reaching higher
analytic goals and also enhancing the generalizability of qualitative research’ (Sandelowski,
Docherty and Emden, 1997, p.367). Two interpretive and inductive methods, realist synthesis
and meta-synthesis, have been developed to ﬁll
the gap between narrative reviews and metaanalysis.
For Pawson (2001), realist synthesis oﬀers one
technique for producing a synthesis of a range of
study types. He argues that in medical research,
programmes (such as medical treatments) carry
the potential for change. The aim of a systematic
review is to classify these programmes and to
conduct a meta-analysis to provide a reliable
measure of net eﬀect. The practitioner is invited
to replicate the treatment that has worked to
maximum eﬀect. In contrast, narrative reviews
tend to explain the combination of attributes in a
programme and generally identify exemplars of
best practice. The practitioner is invited to
imitate the programmes that are successful.
According to Pawson, it is not programmes that
work; rather it is the underlying reasons or
resources that they oﬀer subjects that generate
change. Whether change occurs is also dependent
on the nature of the actors and the circumstances
of the programme. Realist synthesis captures a
list of vital ingredients or mechanisms (positive or
negative) that underpin each individual programme. The researcher then builds theory by
accumulating understanding across a range of
programmes. Whilst some scholars would question whether contingency statements could ever
be developed, Pawson (2001) argues that a realist

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

synthesis can provide a transferable programme
theory in the form of ‘what works for whom in
what circumstances’.
Meta-synthesis also oﬀers an interpretative
approach to research synthesis which can be used
to identify the:
‘theories, grand narratives, generalizations, or
interpretative translations produced from the integration or comparison of ﬁndings from qualitative studies.’ (Sandelowski, Docherty and Emden,
1997, p. 366)

Unlike meta-analysis, meta-synthesis is not limited to synthesizing strictly comparable studies by
constructing ‘interpretations, not analyses, and
by revealing the analogies between accounts’(Noblit and Hare, 1988, p. 8). Meta-synthesis
provides a means of taking into account:
‘all important similarities and diﬀerences in language, concepts, images, and other ideas around a
target experience.’ (Sandelowski, Docherty and
Emden, 1997, p.669)

Meta-ethnography is a method of meta-synthesis
that oﬀers three alternative techniques for
synthesising studies. ‘Refutational synthesis’ can
be used when reports give conﬂicting representations of the same phenomenon, ‘reciprocal
translations’ can be used where reports address
similar issues and ‘lines of argument synthesis’
can be used if diﬀerent reports examine diﬀerent
aspects of the same phenomenon. A metaethnography is analogous with a grounded
theory approach for open coding and identifying
categories emerging from the data and by making
constant comparisons between individual accounts (Beck, 2001). The categories are then
linked interpretively to provide a holistic account
of the whole phenomenon (Suri, 1999).
Many of the techniques of meta-synthesis
remain ‘either relatively untried and undeveloped, and/or diﬃcult to codify and understand’
(Sandelowski, Docherty and Emden, 1997, p.
369). However, both realist synthesis and metasynthesis challenge the positivistic orthodoxy that
surrounds contemporary approaches to research
reviews, demonstrating that a synthesis can be an
interpretive, inductive, hermeneutic and eclectic
process (Jensen and Alien, 1996). Whilst metasynthesis and realist synthesis approaches are
fundamentally diﬀerent to systematic reviews and
in particular meta-analysis, they both share a

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
desire to improve upon traditional narrative
reviews by adopting explicit and rigorous processes and by:
‘the bringing together of ﬁndings on a chosen
theme, the results of which should be to achieve a
greater level of understanding and attain a level of
conceptual or theoretical development beyond that
achieved in any individual empirical study. (Campbell et al., 2002, p. 2)

As in systematic reviews, the aim of realist
syntheses and meta-syntheses is to ‘have impact’
by being ‘presented in an accessible and usable
form in the real world of practice and policy
making’ (Sandelowski, Docherty and Emden,
1971, p. 365).
Stage III: reporting and dissemination
A good systematic review should make it easier
for the practitioner to understand the research by
synthesizing extensive primary research papers
from which it was derived. Within management
research a two-stage report might be produced.
The ﬁrst would provide full (rough-cut and
detailed) ‘descriptive analysis’ of the ﬁeld. This
is achieved using a very simple set of categories
with the use of the extraction forms. For
example, who are the authors, how many of the
core contributions are from the USA, how many
are European? What is the age proﬁle of the
articles? Can the ﬁelds be divided into epochs in
terms of volume of orientation of study? Do
simple categories divide up the ﬁeld? For
example, can the ﬁeld be divided sectorally? By
gender? Or simple categories ‘borrowed’ from
associated cognate disciplines such as psychology
or sociology (interpretivist versus positivistic or
behavioural versus cognitive studies, for example). The researcher should be able to provide a
broad ranging descriptive account of the ﬁeld
with speciﬁc exemplars and an audit trail,
justifying his/her conclusions.
Researchers also need to report the ﬁndings of
a ‘thematic analysis’, whether or not the results
were derived through an aggregative or interpretative approach, outlining that which is
known and established already from dataextraction forms of the core contributions. They
may wish to focus on the extent to which
consensus is shared across various themes. They
may also want to identify key emerging themes

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

218

Conclusions
This paper began by arguing that reviews of
existing research evidence in the management
ﬁeld lack both rigour and relevance. Anderson,
Herriot and Hodgkinson (2001) oﬀer a four-fold
characterization of applied social science. They
term research that is low on rigour but high on
relevance ‘Popularist Science’. In contrast, ‘Pedantic Science’ is high on rigour but low on
relevance, whereas ‘puerile Science’ is neither
rigorous nor relevant. Only ‘Pragmatic Science’
balances both rigour and relevance (see Figure 3).
They acknowledge that the pursuit of ‘pragmatic’ research:
‘that genuinely bears the hallmarks of scientiﬁc
rigour (irrespective of whether it be quantitative
and/or qualitative in nature), but which also
engages a wider body of stakeholders in the
knowledge production process, presents a set of
formidable challenges for the management research
community at this juncture.’ (Hodgkinson, Herriot
and Anderson, 2001, p. S46)

This paper has outlined the opportunities and
challenges in applying ideas and methods develTheoretical and
methodological
rigour
High
Quadrant 2:

Popularist
Science ,

Quadrant 3:

Quadrant 4:

,

,

Practical
relevance

Low
Quadrant 1:
,

High

,

and research questions. Whatever overarching
categories are chosen for the tabulation, researchers should again provide a detailed audit trail
back to the core contributions to justify and
ground their conclusions. Linking themes across
the various core contributions wherever possible
and highlighting such links is an important part
of the reporting process.
Systematic review provides a means for practitioners to use the evidence provided by research to
inform their decisions. However, turning the
conclusions from systematic reviews into guidelines
for practice has been a challenge in medicine
(Macdonald, 1999), as ‘clinicians reason about
individual patients on the basis of analogy,
experience, heuristics, and theory, as well as
evidence’ (Cook, Mulrow and Haynes, 1997, p.
380). Decision-makers are likely, and should be
encouraged, to use personal experience and problem-solving skills rather than relying solely on the
results of systematic reviews (Bero and Rennie,
1995; Rosenberg and Donald, 1995). Within
management there is a need to recognize that
evidence alone is often insuﬃcient and incomplete,
only informing decision-making by bounding
available options. Therefore, the terms ‘evidence
informed’ or even ‘evidence aware’, rather than
‘evidence based’ (Nutley, Davies and Walter, 2002;
Nutley and Davies, 2002), may be more appropriate in the management ﬁeld, and the former has
inﬂuenced our choice of title for this paper.
Improving the translation of research evidence
into practice is not unproblematic as the ‘relationships between research, knowledge, policy
and practice are always likely to remain loose,
shifting and contingent’ (Nutley and Davies,
2002, p. 11). For evidence-informed practice to
be achieved, strategies need to be developed
which encourage the uptake and utilization of
evidence that move beyond the simple construction and dissemination of the research base
(Nutley and Davies, 2000). Encouraging practitioners to set speciﬁc questions for reviews and to
engage in the process may help in developing a
‘context sensitive’ science (Nowotny, Scott and
Gibbons, 2001) which may help to blur the
boundaries between science, policy and practice.
Increasing the precision of a reliable evidence
base in order that policymakers and practitioners
can make more sensitive judgements is the
ultimate aim of the application of systematic
review procedures to management research.

Puerile
Science ,

Pragmatic
Science ,

Pedantic
Science ,

Low
Figure 3. A four-fold typology of research in industrial, work and
organizational psychology. Source: adapted by G. P. Hodgkinson, P. Herriot and N. Anderson (2001), British Journal of
Management, 12 (Special Issue), page S42, from N. Anderson,
P. Herriot and G. P. Hodgkinson, ‘The practitioner-researcher
divide in industrial, work and organizational (IWO) psychology:
where are we now, and where do we go from here?’, Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74, pp. 391–411.
r 2001 The British Psychological Society and the British
Academy of Management. Reproduced by kind permission of
both publishers.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

219

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

oped in medical science to the ﬁeld of management, with the aim of further developing and
enhancing the quality of management reviews
and ensuring that they are practitioner and
context sensitive. The aim of systematic review
is to provide collective insights through theoretical synthesis into ﬁelds and sub-ﬁelds. For
academics, the reviewing process increases methodological rigour. For practitioners/managers,
systematic review helps develop a reliable knowledge base by accumulating knowledge from a
range of studies. In so doing the researcher may
be able to develop a set of ‘ﬁeld tested and
grounded technological rules’ (Van Aken, 2001,
p. 1). In this sense, systematic review can be
argued to lie at the heart of a ‘pragmatic’
management research, which aims to serve both
academic and practitioner communities.

References
Anderson, N., P. Herriot and G. P. Hodgkinson (2001). ‘The
Practitioner-Researcher Divide in Industrial, Work and
Organizational (IWO) Psychology: Where Are We Now,
and Where Do We Go From Here?’, Journal of Occupational
and Organizational Psychology, 74 (4), pp. 391–411.
Aram, J. D. and J. P. F. Salipante (2000), ‘Applied Research in
Management: Criteria for Management Educators and for
Practitioner-Scholars’, US Academy of Management ConferenceFMultiple Perspectives on Learning in Management
Education, Toronto.
Becher, A. (1989). Academic Tribes and Territories: Intellectual
Enquiry and the Cultures of Disciplines, The Society for
Research into Higher Education and the Open University
Press, Milton Keynes.
Beck, C. T. (2001). ‘Caring with nursing education: A metasynthesis’. Journal of Nursing Education, 40 (3), pp. 101–110.
Bero, L. and D. Rennie (1995). ‘The Cochrane Collaboration:
Preparing, Maintaining and Disseminating Systematic Reviews of the Eﬀects of Health Care’, Journal of the American
Medical Association, 274 (1), pp. 1935–1938.
Berry, M. (1995). ‘Research and the Practice of Management: A
French View’, Organizational Science, 6 (2), pp. 104–116.
Blake, R. R. and J. S. Mouton (1976). Consultation. AddisonWesley Publishing, Reading, MA.
Blaxter, M. (1996). ‘Criteria for the Evaluation of Qualitative
Research Papers’, Medical Sociology News, 22 (1), pp. 68–71.
Campbell, R., P. Pound, C. Pope, N. Britten, R. Pill, M. Morgan,
and J. Donovan (2003). ‘Evaluating meta-ethnography:
a synthesis of qualitative research on lay experiences of
diabetes and diabetes care’. Social Science and Medicine,
56 (4), pp. 671–684.
Campbell Collaboration (2001). http://campbell.gse.upenn.edu/
about.htm.
Clarke, M. and A. D. Oxman (Eds) (2001). Cochrane Reviewers’
Handbook 4.1.4 [updated October 2001], The Cochrane
Library, Oxford.

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
Cochrane Collaboration (2001), The Cochrane Brochure, http://
www.cochrane.org/cochrane/cc-broch.htm#BDL
Cook, D. J., N. L. Greengold, A. G. Ellrodt, and S. R.
Weingarten (1997). ‘The Relation Between Systematic Reviews and Practice Guidelines’, Annals of Internal Medicine,
127 (3) August, pp. 210–216.
Cook, D. J., C. D. Mulrow, and R. B. Haynes (1997).
‘Systematic Reviews: Synthesis of Best Evidence for Clinical
Decisions’, Annals of Internal Medicine, 126 (5) March, pp.
376–380.
Dabinett, G., P. Lawless, J. Rhodes, and P. Tyler (2001). A
Review of the Evidence Base for Regeneration Policy and
Practice, Department of the Environment Transport and the
Regions.
Davies, H. T. O. and I. K. Crombie (1998). ‘Getting to Grips
with Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses’, Hospital
Medicine, 59 (12), pp. 955–958.
Davies, H. T. O. and S. M. Nutley (1999). ‘The Rise and Rise of
Evidence in Health Care’, Public Money & Management, 19
(1), pp. 9–16.
Davies, H. T. O., S. M. Nutley and P. C. Smith (2000).
‘Editorial: What Works? The Role of Evidence in Public
Sector Policy and Practice’, Public Money & Management, 19
(1), pp. 3–5.
Davies, H. T. O., S. M. Nutley and N, Tilley (1999). ‘Editorial:
Getting Research into Practice, Public Money & Management, 20(4), pp. 17–22.
Davies, P. (2000). The Relevance of Systematic Reviews to
Educational Policy and Practice, http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/
ﬁles/BEME/oxreview.htm.
Dingwall R., E. A. Murphy, P. Watson, D. Greatbatch and S.
Parker (1998). ‘Catching Goldﬁsh: Quality in Qualitative
Research’, Journal of Health Services Research and Policy, 3
(3), pp. 167–172.
Economic and Social Research Council (1999). A History of the
EPSRC UK Centre for Evidence Based Policy and Practice,
http://www.evidencenetwork.org/home.asp.
Engel, J. D. and A. J. Kuzel (1992). ‘On the idea of what
constitutes good qualitative inquiry’, Qualitative Health
Research, 2, pp. 504–510.
Estabrooks, C. A., P. A. Field, and J. M. Morse (1994).
‘Aggregating qualitative ﬁndings: An approach to theory
development’, Qualitative Health Research, 4, pp. 503–511.
Evans, D. and A. Pearson (2001). ‘Systematic Reviews:
Gatekeepers of Nursing Knowledge’, Journal of Clinical
Nursing, 10 (5), pp. 593–599.
Fink, A. (1998). Conducting Research Literature Reviews: From
Paper to the Internet, Sage Publications, London.
Friedman A., C. Durkin, M. Phillips, and E. Voltsinger (2000).
The Future of UK Professional Associations, Proceedings for
5th Annual Professional Association Research Network
Conference.
Furniss, J. S. and M. Nutley (2000). ‘Implementing
What Works with OﬀendersFThe Eﬀective Practice
Initiative’, Public Money & Management, 20 (4), pp.
23–28.
Gibbons, M., C. Limoges, H. Nowotny, S. Schwartzman, P.
Scott and M. Trow (1994). The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary
Societies, Sage Publications, London.
Glass, G. V. (1976). ‘Primary, Secondary, and Meta-analysis of
Research’, Educational Researcher, 5 (2), pp. 3–8.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

220

Greenhalgh, T. (1997), ‘Papers that Summarise Other Papers
(Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses)’, British Medical
Journal, 315 (7109), pp. 672–675.
Greenhalgh, T. and R. Taylor (1997). ‘Papers that go Beyond
Numbers (Qualitative Research)’, British Medical Journal,
315 (7110), pp. 740–743.
Halladay, M. and L. Bero (2000). ‘Implementing Evidencebased Practice in Health Care’, Public Money & Management,
20 (4), pp. 43–50.
Hambrick, D. C. (1994). ‘What if the Academy Actually
Mattered?’, Academy of Management Review, 19 (1), pp. 11.
Hart, C. (1998). Doing a Literature Review: Releasing the Social
Science Research Imagination, Sage Publications, London.
HM Inspectorate of Probation (1998). Strategies for Eﬀective
Oﬀended Supervision. Report of the HMIP What Works
Project, Home Oﬃce, London.
Hodgkinson, G. P. (Ed.) (2001). Facing the future: the nature
and purpose of management research re-assessed, British
Journal of Management, 12 (Special Issue), pp. S1–S80.
Hodgkinson, G. P., P. Herriot and N. Anderson (2001). ‘Realigning the Stakeholders in Management Research: Lessons
from Industrial, Work and Organizational Psychology’,
British Journal of Management, 12 (Special Issue), pp.
S41–S48.
Home Oﬃce (1998), Reducing Oﬀending: An Assessment of
Research Evidence on Ways of Dealing with Oﬀending
Behaviour, Home Oﬃce Research and Statistics Directorate,
London.
Huﬀ, A. S. (2000). ‘Changes in Organizational Knowledge
Production’, Academy of Management Review, 25 (2), pp.
288–293.
Jensen, L. A., and M. N. Alien (1996). ‘Meta-synthesis of
qualitative ﬁndings’. Qualitative Health Research, 6 (4), pp.
553–60.
Laycock, G. (2000), ‘From Central Research to Local Practice:
Identifying and Addressing Repeat Victimization’, Public
Money & Management, 19 (1) pp. 17–22.
Macdonald, G. (1999), ‘Evidence-based Social Care: Wheels oﬀ
the Runway?’, Public Money & Management, 19 (1), pp.
25–32.
Maclennan, D. and A. More (1999). ‘Evidence, What Evidence?
The Foundations for Housing Policy’, Public Money &
Management, 19 (1), pp. 17–24.
Mays, N. and C. Pope (2000). ‘Assessing Quality in Qualitative Research’, British Medical Journal, 320 (January), pp.
50–52.
Mulrow, C. D. (1987). ‘The Medical Review Article: State of
the Science’, Annual International Medicine, 106, pp. 485–488.
Mulrow, C. D. (1994). ‘Systematic Reviews–Rationale for
Systematic Reviews’, British Medical Journal, 309 (6954), pp.
597–599.
Mulrow, C. D., D. J. Cook, and F. Davidoﬀ (1997). ‘Systematic
reviews: Critical links in the great chain of evidence’. Annals
of Internal Medicine, 126, pp. 389–391.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2001), http://
www.nice.org.uk/.
NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (2001), Undertaking Systematic Reviews of Research on Eﬀectiveness.
CRD’s Guidance for those Carrying Out or Commissioning
Reviews. CRD Report Number 4 (2nd Edition). York.
Noblit, G. W. and R. D. Hare (1988). Meta-ethnography:
Synthesizing Qualitative Studies, Sage Publications, London.

221

Nowotny, H., P. Scott and M. Gibbons (2001), Rethinking
Science: Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty.
Blackwell Publishers, Maiden, MA.
Nutley, S. M. and H. T. O. Davies (2000). ‘Making a Reality
of Evidence Based Practice: Some Lessons from the Diﬀusion
of Innovations’, Public Money & Management, 20 (4), pp.
35–42.
Nutley S. M., H. T. O. Davies and I. Walter (2002). From
Knowing to Doing: A Framework for Understanding the
Evidence-into-practice Agenda, Discussion Paper 1, Research
Unit for Research Utilisation. http://www.st-and.ac.uk/
Bcppm/KnowDo%20paper.pdf.
Nutley, S. M. and H. T. O. Davies (2002). Evidence-based Policy
& Practice: Moving from Rhetoric to Reality, Discussion Paper
2, Research Unit for Research Utilisation, http://www.stand.ac.uk/Bcppm/Rhetoric%20to%20reality%20NF.pdf.
Ohlsson, A. (1994). ‘Systematic ReviewsFTheory and Practice’, Scandinavian Journal of Clinical & Laboratory Investigation, 54 (219), pp. 25–32.
Oxman, A. D, (1994). ‘Systematic ReviewsFChecklists for
Review Articles’, British Medical Journal, 309 (6955), pp.
648–651.
Pawson, R. (2001). The Promise of a Realist Synthesis, Working
Paper No.4, ESRC Evidence Network, Centre for Evidence
Based Policy and Practice. http://www.evidencenetwork.org/
Documents/wp4.pdf
Peckham, M. (1991). ‘Research and Development for the
National Health Service’, Lancet, 338, pp. 367–371.
Petticrew, M. (2001). ‘Systematic reviews from astronomy to
zoology: myths and misconceptions’, British Medical Journal
322 (13) January, pp. 98–101.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1997). The Double Hurdles for Management
Research, Advancement in Organizational Behaviour, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Pfeﬀer, J. and R. I. Sutton (1999). ‘Knowing ‘‘What’’ to Do is
Not Enough: Turning Knowledge into Action’, California
Management Review, 42 (1), pp. 83–108.
Popay, J., A. Rogers and G. Williams (1998). ’Rationale and
Standards for the Systematic Review of Qualitative Literature in Health Services Research’, Qualitative Health
Research, 8 (3), pp. 341–351.
Rosenberg, W. and W. Donald (1995). ‘Evidence Based
Medicine: An Approach to Clinical Problem-Solving’, British
Medical Journal, 310 (6987), pp. 1122–1126.
Sandelowski, M., S. Docherty, and C. Emden (1997). ‘Qualitative Metasynthesis: Issues and Techniques’. Research in
Nursing and Health, 20 (4), pp. 365–371.
Smith, R. (1991), ‘Where is the Wisdom.? The poverty of
medical evidence’ [editorial], British Medical Journal, 303, pp.
789–799.
Slavin, R. E. (1986). ’Best-evidence Synthesis: An Alternative to
Meta-analytic and Traditional Reviews’, Educational Researcher, 15 (9), pp. 5–11.
Starkey, K. and P. Madan (2001). ‘Bridging the Relevance Gap:
Aligning Stakeholders in the Future of Management
Research’, British Journal of Management, 12 (S1), pp. 3–26.
Suri, H. (1999). ‘The process of synthesising qualitative
research: A case study’, Annual Conference of the Association
for Qualitative Research, Melbourne, http://www.latrobe.edu.au/aqr/oﬀer/papers/HSuri.htm
Tisdall, P. (1982). Agents of Change; The Development and
Practice of Management Consultancy, Heinemann, London

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Developing Evidence-Informed Management Knowledge

Tranﬁeld, D. and K. Starkey (1998). ‘The Nature, Social
Organization and Promotion of Management Research:
Towards Policy’ British Journal of Management, 9 (4), pp.
341–353.
Van de Ven, A. H. (1998). Professional Science for a
Professional School, Breaking the Code of Change Conference, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.
Van Aken, J. (2001). Management Research Based on the
Paradigm of the Design Sciences: The Quest for Field Tested
and Grounded Technological Rules, Working Paper 01.1,
Eindhoven Centre for Innovation Studies, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven.
Whitley, R. (1984a), ‘The Fragmented State of Management
Studies: Reasons and Consequences’, Journal of Management
Studies, 21 (3), pp. 331–348.
Whitley, R. (1984b), ‘The Scientiﬁc Status of Management
Research as a Practically-oriented Social Science’, Journal of
Management Studies, 21 (4), pp. 369–390.

D. Tranﬁeld, D. Denyer and P. Smart
Whitely, R. (2000), The Intellectual and Social Organization of
the Sciences, Second Edition, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Wilcoxson, L. and E. P. Fitzgerald (2001). The Nature and Role
of Management Research in Australia and New Zealand,
Australian and New Zealand Academy Of Management
Conference.
Wind, J. and P. Nueno (1998). The Impact Imperative: Closing
the Relevance Gap of Academic Management Research,
International Academy of Management North America
Meeting, New York.
Wolf, F. M., J. A. Shea and M. A. Albanese (2001), ‘Toward
Setting a Research Agenda for Systematic Reviews of
Evidence of the Eﬀects of Medical Education’, Teaching
and Learning in Medicine, 13 (1), pp. 54–60.

14678551, 2003, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

222

