The Value of Brand
Equity
David A. Aaker

T

hrough the 1960s and early 1970s,
Schlitz beer was a strong numbertwo beer brand supported by the
well regarded gusto campaigns, such as the
"You only go around once in life—so grab
all the gusto you can." In the mid-1970s,
Schlitz converted to a fermentation process
that took four days instead of 12 and substituted corn syrup for barley malt to gain a
strategic cost advantage. The result was a
beer that became flat or cloudy after time on
the store shelf; Schlitz developed an image
of being a "green" beer with "cheap" ingredients.
The image problem was compounded
when Schlitz began promoting heavily and a
competitor, Anheuser-Busch, announced
that it would retain premium ingredients. A
series of advertising campaigns, including
five live taste tests in 1980, could not undo
the damage even after company executives
decided to return to the original product formula.
The destruction of the perceived quality
of Schlitz resulted in sales falling steadily
from over 17.8 million barrels in 1974 to 1.8
million in 1984 and a decrease in stock value
(linked to the Schlitz beer business) of $1
billion from 1975 to 1980.
WordPerfect Corp., which entered the
word processing arena in 1983, became the
industry leader in part by building brand loyalty in two ways. First, it offered customers

an unlimited access, toll-free phone-in user
support service, which became one of their
points of differentiation. Second, it featured
regular product improvements that were
always backward compatible.
In contrast, WordStar Corp.—the industry pioneer that dominated word processing
as late as 1984—lost its position by turning
its back on a loyal customer base. As late as
1987, WordStar was deservedly known as
being indifferent to its customers. Clients
who called WordStar at their own expense
often could not get through or were placed
on hold. Perhaps worse, a key follow-on
product, WordStar 2000, shipped in late
1984, was incompatible with the original
program. Users who were comfortable with
WordStar had to learn a new program, and
they could as easily switch to WordPerfect.
While WordStar stock was worth under $10
million in 1990, WordPerfect was estimated
to be worth well over $1 billion.

Many companies jealously guard the equity
in their brands and
continually burnish
their brand images.
Yet an equal number
virtually ignore the
power in their brands.
The author maintains
that brand equity generates considerable
value for a company
and

suggests

an

approach to determine
this value.

In the late 1970s, the H.J. Heinz Co.
bought the Weight Watchers program and
the Weight Watchers frozen dinner business
for approximately $120 million. In 1989,
Weight Watchers had revenues of $1.3 billion and its operating income was over $100
million. The key was the Weight Watchers
name—its associations with professional
weight control.
Heinz first improved the quality in its frozen food entree area, upgraded its packag-

DAVID A. AAKER is professor of marketing strategy at the Haas School of Business, University of California

at Berkeley. He is the author of Managing Brand Equity (New York: The Free Press, 1991) and Developing
Business Strategy (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1992).

27

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Why didn't Schlitz managersrealizethatdecisionstoaltertheproduct's
ingredients would destroy the equity in the name; why didn't someone step in
and protect the brand?
ing, and generated new advertising complete
with a spokesperson (Lynn Redgrave) and a
slogan ("This is living, not dieting"). It then
drew upon the power of the brand name to
become the market leader in frozen foods
and extended the name to over 200 items.
These examples illustrate the potential
value of brand equity. Why didn't Schlitz
managers realize that the decision to alter
their product's ingredients would affect the
equity in the name; why didn't someone at
Schlitz step in and protect the brand? Why
didn't WordStar recognize that investments
in retaining customer loyalty would pay off?
Why don't more firms recognize the value
of investments in brand equity?
Most managers will be quick to affirm
that their brand equity is a key asset. How­
ever, the actions of key managers are often
inconsistent with their verbalized beliefs, in
large part because of pressures to deliver
short-term results. As a result of this focus on
quarterly earnings, brand-building activities
are cut back because they have little impact
on short-term performance. Further,
declines in brand equity are not obvious,
partly because systems to measure brand
equity are not in place.
In contrast to brand-building activities,
sales promotions, whether they involve soft
drinks or automobiles, succeed because they
affect sales in an immediate and measurable
way. Because they appear to be "effective"
(i.e., sales respond), they are used exten­
sively and more and more sales volume is
tied to promotions. Cost-reduction programs
show similar short-term results, while the
immediate impact of any resulting decline in
quality may be hard to detect.
The inevitable result of a reliance on sales
promotions and cost-reduction programs
and a reduction of brand-building activities
is an increase in the role of price and a
decrease in the role of brand associations in
the purchase decision. At the extreme, the
product class starts to resemble a commod­
28

JOURNAL

OF

ity. A number of studies have documented
an erosion in brand loyalty and an increase
in price sensitivity over the past 10 years in a
variety of product types.1
How can managers justify investing in
brand equity, especially when short-term
performance measures are sacrificed? What
is the value of brand equity, and how can it
be determined?
HOW BRAND EQUITY
CREATES VALUE

Just how brand equity creates value is shown
in Exhibit 1. As defined here, brand equity:
█ Is a set of brand assets and liabilities.
█ Is linked to the brand's name and sym­
bol.
█ Can subtract from, as well as add to, the
value provided by a product or service.
█ Provides value to customers as well as
to a firm.
Five brand equity assets are the source of
the value created. As shown in the exhibit,
these assets include:
1. Brand loyalty.
2. Brand name awareness.
3. Perceived brand quality.
4. Brand associations in addition to per­
ceived quality.
5. Other proprietary brand assets—e.g.,
patents, trademarks, channel relation­
ships.
Brand associations or brand image is per­
haps the most accepted aspect of brand
equity. The final category, other proprietary
brand assets, is included for completeness
and is usually of lesser importance. The fol­
lowing outlines the rationale behind the
inclusion of the first three dimensions.
Brand loyalty is a key consideration when
placing a value on a brand because loyalty
translates into a profit stream. A loyal cus­
tomer base, for example, can be expected to
generate a predictable sales and profit

BUSINESS

STRATEGY

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

stream. In addition, focusing on brand loy­
alty is often an effective way to manage
equity. Customer satisfaction and repeat
buying patterns are often indicators of a
healthy brand, and programs to enhance
them will build brand strength.
Perceived quality is included as an asset
distinct from brand associations for several
THE

V A L U E

OF

reasons. First, perceived quality has become
an important business thrust for many firms
and can be the motivation for programs
designed to enhance brand equity. Second,
research from the Strategic Planning Insti­
tute's PIMS data base (empirical analysis of
the financial and operational data on 3,000
businesses) has shown that perceived quality
B R A N D

E Q U I T Y

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

29

It is difficult for competitors to communicate to satisfied brand users because
they have little motivation to learn about alternatives.
is the single most important contributor to
return on investment among the PIMS vari­
ables measured.2 Third, in a study of 250
business managers who were asked to iden­
tify the sustainable competitive advantage of
their firm, the top-rated asset was perceived
quality.3 Thus, perceived quality is a suffi­
ciently important and accepted strategic
consideration to merit including it as a sepa­
rate dimension.
Brand awareness is often not elevated to
the status of a brand asset. Yet, in the study
of 250 businesses, awareness was actually
the third most mentioned asset. For many
companies, brand awareness is pivotal, and it
underlies the strength of successful brands.
The exhibit illustrates that each brand
equity asset generates value for the customer
or the firm in a variety of ways (17 are actu­
ally listed). The implication is that in manag­
ing brand equity, it is important to be
sensitive as to how value can be created in
order to manage brand equity effectively and
to make informed decisions about brandbuilding activities. A host of ways in which
value can flow from the assets are easily
overlooked.
The right side of the exhibit first summa­
rizes how value is created for the customer
and second, how value is created for the
firm. Explicitly including the customer
value provides a very different perspective
from a focus on the ability of a brand to gen­
erate marginal cash flow to the firm.
VALUE-CREATING ASSETS

A brand equity asset creates value in many
ways. Brand loyalty—which can reflect a
range from the habitual buyer to the satisfied
buyer to those that like the brand to the truly
committed—generates value mainly by
reducing marketing costs; it has been stated
many times that retaining existing customers
is much less costly than attracting new ones.
It is also difficult for competitors to commu­
nicate to satisfied brand users because they
have little motivation to learn about alterna­

30

J O U R N A L

OF

tives. The burden on the competitor brand is
substantial. A common mistake is to grow
sales by enticing new customers to the brand
while neglecting existing ones. Loyal cus­
tomers, in some cases, can also entice others
by using the product or advising others to
use it.
Brand awareness, even at the recognition
level, can provide the brand with a sense of
the familiar and a signal of substance and
commitment. In a taste test, over 70% of
consumers selected a known brand of pea­
nut butter from among three choices, even
though another brand was superior (accord­
ing to the results of a blind taste test) and
even though they had neither bought nor
used the known brand.4 Just being a known
brand dramatically affected their evalua­
tions. Even when the decision involves
choosing a product like a computer or select­
ing an advertising agency, it is reassuring to
buy the well-known alternative.
Awareness at the recall level further
affects choice by influencing what brands
get considered and selected. A University of
Toronto researcher illustrated the power of
recall in a study.5 He showed that the men­
tion of a brand a few minutes earlier substan­
tially increased the probability that a
customer would select that brand, even
though the degree to which the person liked
it remained unchanged. Purchase intention
also increased when a secondary brand in
the same product subcategory (local fastfood restaurants) was mentioned because it
increased the chances that a fast-food option
would be considered.
Perceived quality provides value by pro­
viding a reason to buy, differentiating the
brand, attracting channel member interest,
being the basis for line extensions, and sup­
porting a higher price. In particular, the
PIMS studies showed that perceived quality
leads to higher prices (and higher prices act
as quality cues). The price premium can
increase profits or provide resources to rein­
vest in the brand.

B U S I N E S S

S T R A T E G Y

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

Brand associations include product attributes, customer benefits, uses, users, lifestyles, product classes, competitors, and
countries. Associations can help customers
process or retrieve information, be the basis
for differentiation and extensions, provide a
reason to buy, and create positive feelings.
For example, the Wells Fargo stagecoach
captures a host of beliefs and feelings about a
bank and organizes them into a coherent
whole. Associations such as Ronald
McDonald can create a positive attitude or
feeling that can become linked to a brand.
Associating a use context, such as heart
attack prevention to a brand of aspirin, can
provide a reason to buy that will ultimately
attract customers. The link of the Hershey's
brand name to chocolate can be exploited by
introducing an extension, such as Hershey's
chocolate milk.
Value to the Customer as Well as to the
Firm

The exhibit shows that brand equity provides value to the customer as well as the
firm in at least three ways. In addition, the
resulting customer value becomes a basis for
providing value to the firm.
First, brand equity assets can help a customer interpret, process, store, and retrieve a
huge quantity of information about products
and brands. Second, the assets can also affect
the customer's confidence in the purchase
decision; a customer will usually be more
comfortable with the brand that was last
used, is considered to have high quality, or is
familiar.
The third and potentially most important
way that brand equity assets, particularly perceived quality and brand associations, provide value to the customer is by enhancing
the customer's satisfaction when the individual uses the product. For instance, knowing
that a piece of jewelry came from Tiffany
can affect the experience of wearing it; the
user actually can feel differently because of
Tiffany's perceived quality and associations.
Six Sources of Value for the Firm

The exhibit lists six ways that brand assets
create value for the firm. First, brand equity
T H E

V A L U E

O F

can enhance the efficiency and effectiveness
of marketing programs. A promotion, for
example, that provides an incentive to try a
new flavor or new use will be more effective
if the brand is familiar and if the promotion
does not have to influence a consumer skeptical of brand quality. An advertisement
announcing a new feature or model will be
more likely to be remembered and stimulate
action if the potential consumer has a highquality perception of the brand.
Second, brand awareness, perceived quality, and brand associations can all strengthen
brand loyalty by increasing customer satisfaction and providing reasons to buy the
product. Even when these assets are not visibly pivotable to brand choice, they can reassure the customer, reducing the incentive to
try other brands. Enhanced brand loyalty is
especially important in buying time to
respond to competitor innovations.
Third, brand equity will usually provide
higher margins for products by permitting
premium pricing and reducing reliance on
promotions. In many contexts, the elements
of brand equity serve to support premium
pricing or to resist price erosion. In addition,
a brand with a disadvantage in brand equity
will often have to invest more in promotional activity just to maintain its position in
the distribution channel.
Fourth, brand equity can provide a platform for growth by brand extensions. The
Heinz Co.'s Weight Watchers unit has been
expanded and leveraged to produce a host of
food products; this has created business areas
that would have been much more expensive
to enter without the Weight Watchers
name.
Fifth, brand equity can provide leverage
in the distribution channel as well. Like customers, channel members have less uncertainty dealing with a proven brand name that
has already achieved recognition and has
established strong associations. Further, by
having a strong brand like Dole or CocaCola play a lead role in marketing across
product lines, companies have the potential
to gain efficiencies and synergies by use of
the product's visual impact on the store shelf
and in promotions.
Finally, brand equity assets provide a firm
B R A N D

Knowing that a
piece of jewelry
came from Tiffany can affect
the experience
of wearing it;
the user can
actually feel differently because
of Tiffany's perceived quality
and associations.

E Q U I T Y

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

31

with a significant advantage: a barrier that
prevents customers from switching to a com­
petitor. For example, it would be difficult for
a competing department store to make a
claim that it has surpassed Nordstrom's or
Harrod's on service. Such a firm may be
forced to find another, perhaps inferior, basis
for competition.
Achieving parity in name awareness can
also be extremely expensive. A loyal cus­
tomer base provides economies of scale and
the freedom from aggressive customer con­
version efforts.
Brand loyalty is one of the six ways that
brand equity provides value to the firm
because loyalty can be influenced by the
other major dimensions of brand equity,
awareness, perceived quality, and associa­
tions. Loyalty in some cases could be largely
due to a brand's perceived quality or attri­
bute associations. However, in other situa­
tions, loyalty can be very independent of the
other brand equity dimensions.
It is possible, for example, to like and be
loyal to a brand with low perceived quality
(McDonald's) or dislike a brand with high
perceived quality (i.e, a car like a Toyota).
Further, loyalty can be largely based on
habit. Thus, brand loyalty provides an
important basis for brand equity that is suffi­
ciently distinct from the other dimensions to
be included separately.
JUSTIFYING THE INVESTMENT
IN BRANDS

Investment to build or maintain strong
brands can be difficult or impossible to jus­
tify when considering the short-term finan­
cial outlook. What is required is a vision and
a belief that such investments will pay off.
Weight Watchers and WordPerfect had
such visions, made substantial investments,

32

JOURNAL

OF

and were patient. The result was strong
brand equity that did pay off.
A key to developing a vision and having
faith in it is to understand the ways in which
a brand can generate competitive advantage.
Will awareness, perceived quality, loyalty, or
associations be a key success factor for some
businesses in your market? Exactly how?
With a vision established, it is necessary
to be vigilant with your brands. The tempta­
tion is to put a priority in other areas, such as
to correct a market-share problem or to pur­
sue a cost reduction program; as a result,
brand equity gets temporarily put on hold.
This temptation is particularly strong when
the organization's structure and reward sys­
tems do not protect brand equity. But build­
ing and maintaining strong brands is a fulltime job. ▬
Notes
1
For example, Paul M. Schmitt in "Research Tools for the
Nineties" (Chicago, Nielsen Marketing Research 1989)
reports that loyalty levels for 50 major supermarket brands
declined meaningfully from 1975 to 1987 and that a survey
of adult department store shoppers involving 11 product
categories showed that 41% waited for a sale and 16% more
bought discounted merchandise not on sale. Further, the
percentage of consumers who indicated that available
brands for 13 product categories were more or less the same
varied from 52% for cigarettes to 76% for credit cards
("Focus: A World of Brand Parity," report published by
BBDO Worldwide, 1988).
2

Robert Jacobson and David A. Aaker, "The Strategic Role
of Product Quality," Journal of Marketing, October, 1987,
pp. 31-44.
3
David A. Aaker, "Managing Assets and Skills: The Key to a
Sustainable Competitive Advantage," California Management Review, Winter, 1989, pp. 91-106.
4.
Wayne D. Hover and Steven P. Broun, "Effects of Brand
Awareness on Choice for a Common, Repeat-Purchase
Product," Journal of Consumer Research, September,
1990, pp. 141-159.
5
Prakash Nedungadi, "Recall and Consumer Consideration
Sets: Influencing Choice without Altering Brand Evalua­
tions," Journal of Consumer Research, December, 1990,
pp. 263-276.

BUSINESS

STRATEGY

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jbs/article-pdf/13/4/27/1500246/eb039503.pdf by WU Wirtschaftsuniversitet Wien user on 23 July 2026

