Journal of Product & Brand Management
Brand awareness: revisiting an old metric for a new world
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight, Margaret Faulkner,

Article information:

To cite this document:
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight, Margaret Faulkner, (2017) "Brand awareness: revisiting an old metric for a new world", Journal
of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 26 Issue: 5, pp.469-476, https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-06-2016-1242
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/JPBM-06-2016-1242

Downloaded on: 04 January 2018, At: 07:59 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 35 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 1153 times since 2017*

Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:

(2015),"Young consumers’ insights on brand equity: Effects of brand association, brand loyalty, brand awareness, and
brand image", International Journal of Retail &amp; Distribution Management, Vol. 43 Iss 3 pp. 276-292 <a href="https://
doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-02-2014-0024">https://doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-02-2014-0024</a>

(2017),"Responsible brands vs active brands? An examination of brand personality on brand awareness, brand trust,
and brand loyalty", Marketing Intelligence &amp; Planning, Vol. 35 Iss 2 pp. 166-179 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/
MIP-04-2016-0064">https://doi.org/10.1108/MIP-04-2016-0064</a>

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:320271 []

For Authors

If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com

Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.

Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness: revisiting an
old metric for a new world

Jenni Romaniuk
Ehrenberg-Bass Institute, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
Samuel Wight
Mondelez International, South Wharf, Australia, and
Margaret Faulkner
Ehrenberg-Bass Institute, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Purpose – Brand awareness is a pivotal, but often neglected, aspect of consumer-based brand equity. This paper revisits brand awareness measures
in the context of global brand management.
Design/methodology/approach – Drawing on the method of Laurent et al. (1995), this cross-sectional longitudinal study examines changes in
brand awareness over time, with sample sizes of approximately 300 whisky consumers per wave in three countries: United Kingdom, Taiwan and
Greece.
Findings – There is consistency in the underlying structure of awareness scores across countries, and over time, extending the work of Laurent etal.
(1995). Results show that a relevant operationalisation of brand awareness needs to account for the history of the brand. Furthermore, the nature
of the variation of brand awareness over time interacts with a brand’s market share.
Research limitations/implications – When modelling the impact of brand awareness researchers need to consider two factors – the brand’s
market share and whether a more stable or volatile measure is sought. This avoids mis-specifying the country-level contribution of brand awareness.
Practical implications – Global brand managers should be wary of adopting a “one size ﬁts all” approach. The choice of brand awareness measure
depends on the brand’s market share, and the desire for higher sensitivity or stability.
Originality/value – The paper provides one of the few multi-country investigations into brand awareness that can help inform global brand
management.

Keywords Portfolio management, Brand awareness, Brand management, Market share, Top-of-mind awareness

Paper type Research paper

Introduction

Globalisation of markets is on the increase, and with it a rise
in the global management of brands as more companies
enter more countries (Lee et al., 2008; Godey and Lai,
2011). As a result, a great deal of attention has been placed
on how brand strategies differ across markets (Alashban
et al., 2001; Shrum et al., 2012; Fetscherin et al., 2015)
because managers might need to devise strategies for a
brand that is well established in one country, but still
nascent
in another. These circumstances lead to the
question:

Q1.

Is it possible to have the same consumer-based brand
equity metrics for brands across countries?

Customer-based brand equity (CBBE) examines the value
of a brand from the perspective of customers because this
provides behavioural insights that can be converted into

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on
Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/1061-0421.htm

actionable brand management strategies (Christodoulides
and Chernatony, 2004). Managers of global brands must
evaluate the performance of their marketing strategies in
different markets. This is an important step, because the
systematic monitoring and follow-up of brand performance
separates
low-
performing counterparts (Anselmsson and Lars Anders,
2013). Consequently the demand for global brand equity
measurement has increased (Reza et al., 1998; Hsieh, 2004;
Christodoulides et al., 2015).

high-performing

from their

brands

There are many different models of brand equity; however,
common across all is the inclusion of brand awareness as a key
component (Aaker, 1991; Keller and Davey, 2001). Brand
awareness is the degree to which customers are aware of the
brand as a member of the category, and typiﬁed by the link
between the brand and the category cue (Assael and Day,
1968). It is usually at the foundation of CBBE models,
because brand awareness is the ﬁrst step in building brand
equity (Keller, 1993; Buil et al., 2013). As the most common
CBBE metric reported to company boards (Ambler, 2000), it
is one of the most visible brand metrics in a company. This
visibility makes the use of appropriate brand awareness

Journal of Product & Brand Management
26/5 (2017) 469 –476
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 1061-0421]
[DOI 10.1108/JPBM-06-2016-1242]

Received 30 June 2016
Revised 4 November 2016
Accepted 17 November 2016

469

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

for the marketing department’s credibility.
metrics vital,
Therefore, we feel that it is timely to re-investigate brand
awareness metrics in light of the complex global circumstances
that brand managers often encounter.

Importance of measuring brand awareness
Pivotal to the importance of brand awareness is that it is a
necessary requirement for higher-order constructs, such as
brand image, to develop (Christodoulides et al., 2015). Aaker
(1991) describes the brand name as being a ﬁle folder in which
all brand-related associations can be placed. Thus, brand
awareness precedes brand associations, because consumers
can be aware without holding a strong set of brand
associations in memory (Christodoulides and de Chernatony,
2010), but they cannot hold a strong set of brand associations
without being ﬁrst aware of the brand. Because it is the ﬁrst
foothold, brand awareness
is considered a particularly
important metric for new brands, whereas brand knowledge
for well-established
and brand opinion become relevant
brands (Çifci et al., 2016). But even well-established brands
face new category buyers, where awareness still needs to be
established. Therefore, awareness is relevant for all brands,
whether large or small in market share.

The ﬁnal reason underpinning the importance of brand
awareness is that it has been shown that brand awareness can
itself facilitate choice (Keller, 1993). Hoyer and Brown (1990)
demonstrated how people who know a brand name within a
category, without prior purchase, will search less and select the
known brand over higher-quality brands (in the absence of
price considerations)
(Celedon et al., 2013). This has
particular implications for product categories where it is very
hard to judge quality, because of lack of experience and for
for which the consumer is not
low-involvement brands,
motivated to seek out
information (Huang and
lots of
Sarigöllü, 2012).

The commonality of brand awareness in marketing practice
was conﬁrmed by Ambler (2000), who found that 78 per cent
of ﬁrms track brand awareness and this was the most common
consumer-based brand equity metric reported to company
boards as a measure of brand performance. More recently, 62
per cent of food brands tracking brand awareness each year,
prioritised the metric second in importance behind product
quality (Anselmsson and Lars Anders, 2013), whereas in
Young & Rubicam’s Brand Asset Valuator, brand knowledge,
of which awareness is a major component (along with
familiarity) is positively associated with customer acquisition,
retention and proﬁt margins in the automotive industry (Stahl
et al., 2012). This speaks to the broad relevance of awareness
metrics, across different types of categories.

Measuring brand awareness

Operationalisation of a concept is a crucial part of testing, and
Aaker (1996) suggests brand equity metrics should be
sensitive enough to pick up change, be transferable across
the construct being measured. For
brands and reﬂect
example, in PepsiCo and Frito-Lay’s brand equity system,
metrics were chosen to balance sensitivity, to detect changes,
with stability, to avoid spurious effects (Kish et al., 2001).
Therefore, understanding the underlying response patterns
highlights variation and variance across contextual factors

470

such as categories, countries and brands, which aid in
appropriate measure selection – whether stability or sensitivity
is the objective (Rust et al., 2004).

Researcher awareness of brand awareness is high (Pappu
et al., 2005), as is familiarity with this relatively simple,
two-component, measure. The ﬁrst component is the cue –
which is the product category name (Aaker and Day, 1974). A
typical example is “Which soft drink brands can you name?”
The second component is the item for retrieval – which is the
brand name. The strength of association in memory between
the product category node and the brand node determines the
et al., 2014). The
level of brand awareness
complexity in measurement arises when trying to decide
the level of difﬁculty for retrieving the brand name, which is
how the single concept morphs into three operationalisations
to measure brand awareness.

(Heckler

thus, retrieval of

The three most common brand awareness measures are
referred to as top-of-mind, unaided and aided awareness. All
measures cue with the brand, with differences concentrated in
the nature and effort of consumer response. Both top-of-mind
and unaided measures give the respondent minimal assistance
to develop responses;
the brand from
memory is more difﬁcult than when the brand name response
is provided as for aided measures (Srull et al., 1985; Laurent
et al., 1995). Of the two unaided response approaches,
top-of-mind is the ﬁrst unaided response given and is therefore
the most difﬁcult for a brand to achieve (Keller, 1993). While
unaided awareness also comprises minimal cueing to
remember the brand name, it does allow the mention of
multiple brand names. In the easiest measure, aided brand
awareness, the respondent is given the brand name as well as
the category cue, with the overall aided brand awareness
measure for each brand being the percentage of respondents
that indicate “yes” (Huang and Sarigöllü, 2012).

When multiple measures are available, prioritising metrics
become an issue. A small stream of research has compared the
three different brand awareness measures, led by Laurent et al.
(1995) who found that all three awareness measures followed
the same underlying structure, and with the appropriate
transformation, were potentially interchangeable. The major
implication being that it did not matter which measure was
tracked because each could be used to predict the others. The
measures were in fact “tapping” the same source (within
memory) and therefore the only thing needed was an
adjustment for the differing degrees of difﬁculty of retrieval.
However, the nature of the relationship between different
awareness measures is logarithmic. This means that larger
market share brands will vary more on more difﬁcult measures
(e.g. the more difﬁcult unaided awareness rather than the less
difﬁcult aided awareness), whereas smaller market share
brands will vary more on the less difﬁcult measures. Laurent
et al. (1995) concluded that different measures are needed for
different brands, depending on where they are on the curve.
They suggest that the measure that varies the most (e.g.
top-of-mind for large market share brands, aided for small
market share brands) will be the most useful for managers to
track.

Romaniuk et al.

longitudinally extended this
research to reveal that the relationship between the measures
for a single brand over time was more complex, and that

(2004)

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

interchangability of the metrics was good for brands of
medium market share, but poor for small or large market share
brands. The variation found in the measures advocated by
Laurent et al. (1995) appeared to be largely random in nature.
Based on this, Romaniuk et al. (2004) advocated tracking the
measure that did not vary much for a brand, because this
would be the most reliable and therefore the one of most
interest/importance when it did change. Both of these pieces
of research suggest context matters, but neither dealt with the
situation facing global or portfolio brand managers currently.
Despite the apparent simplicity of brand awareness as a
measure, selecting a “one size ﬁts all” approach is unlikely to
be appropriate when tracking multiple brands within a
portfolio or the same brands at different stages of development
research is
in different global markets. Hence,
required, particularly for global brand managers (Buil et al.,
2013). This research,
it holds across countries, has
important implications for managers of global brands, where
market shares often vary substantially for brands in different
countries (Douglas et al., 2001). Both Laurent et al. (1995)
and Romaniuk et al.
conducted in a
single-country context, and did not consider the context for
global brand management. For instance, in recent research,
top-of mind brand awareness varied across countries, with
results reﬂecting the largest global brand in each country,
Nokia in Finland, Apple in the USA and Sony Ericsson in
Sweden (Hakala et al., 2012). This research did not consider
other measures of brand awareness that might be more
relevant for, say, the brand manager of Nokia when examining
the awareness of the brand across the four different countries.
Therefore in this research we address the following research

(2004) were

further

if

questions:

RQ1. Does the similarity in the underlying structure of the
three most commonly used brand awareness measures
generalise across countries?

RQ2. Does the same model hold for brands of different
market share over time within the same market?

1 The quality of the ﬁt which was high – R2 above 0.80 (they

cite R2s ranging from 0.82 to 0.91).

2 The constant, which represented the ratio of the difﬁculty
of the measures, was strongly and signiﬁcantly negative
(all are around (cid:2)2).

3 The coefﬁcient of the line ((cid:2)), which represented the
quantitative relationship between the measures, was close
to 1 (ﬁgures ranging from 0.85 to 1.13 were provided).

Romaniuk et al. (2004) followed the same procedure, but
attempted to apply the same model to the scores for a single
brand over time. They concluded that a large part of the good
ﬁt achieved by Laurent et al. (1995) was because of the fact
that larger market share brands score more than smaller
market share brands for all brand awareness metrics (a point
also raised by Ehrenberg et al., 1997). However, when
tracking a single brand over time, if the brand has high market
share or low market share, then one measure will be more
volatile whereas the other will be comparatively stable.
Because the volatile measure variability appeared to be
random, with poor R2 values from the brand level
linear
regressions, they concluded that the more stable measure was
more reliable. However, this was a single study in a single
country, and therefore needs further validation in other
markets and categories.

In this research, we use the method used by Laurent et al.
(1995) to model brand awareness scores from different
measures for each of the different countries in this research.
For two of these countries, we then extend the work of
Romaniuk et al. (2004) to examine the models for large,
medium and small market share brands over time. In all cases,
two comparisons are made; top-of-mind awareness versus
unaided awareness, as well as unaided awareness versus aided
awareness. Finally, as an additional contribution speciﬁc to
this paper, we examine instances where the same brand has
different market shares in different markets, as might be the
situation facing a global brand manager. From this, we draw
conclusions about how managers of global brands should go
about selecting the brand awareness measures to monitor.

RQ3. Does this hold for a brand with different market shares

in different countries?

Research method

We then discuss the implications of this for a global brand
manager when selecting a brand awareness measure to assess
brand performance.

Past research comparing brand awareness measures
While there have been different studies that have advocated
one form of brand awareness (e.g.
the identiﬁcation of
top-of-mind awareness as a key metric in Axelrod, 1968),
surprisingly few studies have compared the results from
different brand awareness measures with each other. Laurent
et al. (1995), in which the authors modelled the relationship
between different countries, is the most prominent study to do
this. They showed how a double-log transformation linearised
the relationship between measures. Further examination,
using linear regressions, revealed that the only difference
between the measures was the degree of difﬁculty to retrieve
the brand name. They drew on three key criteria to test their
assertions:

For this research we draw on data collected as part of a global
brand tracking study in the whisky market. Data were
collected via telephone or face-to-face by trained market
research interviewers. Three international markets, UK,
Greece and Taiwan were included, to represent a diverse set of
countries in terms of market maturity and history with whisky.
The UK is a mature whisky market with a strong tradition
from Scotland and neighbouring Ireland. While Greece is also
a mature whisky market, there is no local history in the
category and Taiwan is an Asian emerging market where
whisky is growing as a category, and so is more dynamic in
nature and represents the type of market most whisky
companies are trying to successfully enter.

The time periods varied across markets, ranging from
twelve waves in Greece spanning over six years, eight waves in
the UK over ﬁve years and to four waves in Taiwan over three
years. This allowed us to look across markets and over time.
Sample sizes ranged from 211 to 300 category buyers per
wave.

471

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

the linear data. We examined the linear regression equations
(shown in Table I) using the criteria set by Laurent et al.
(1995) – model ﬁt, slope of the line ((cid:2)) and the constant. The
results are examined for all countries combined and then for
each of the three countries separately.

Model ﬁt
The model ﬁt for “all countries”, although not as high as
Laurent et al. (1995), represented a good ﬁt (Adj. R2 (cid:3) 0.66
(top-of-mind vs unaided) as did Adj. R2(cid:3) 0.73 (unaided vs
aided) both statistically signiﬁcant at p (cid:4) 0.05 level). The
quality of the ﬁt is also good across all countries, both for
top-of-mind versus unaided awareness (Adj. R2 UK (cid:3) 0.79,
Taiwan (cid:3) 0.71, Greece (cid:3) 0.71, all signiﬁcant at p (cid:4) 0.05
level) and unaided versus aided awareness (Adj. R2 UK (cid:3)
0.69, Taiwan (cid:3) 0.78, Greece (cid:3) 0.72, all signiﬁcant at p (cid:4)
0.05 level).

The ß coefﬁcient
Across all countries, the coefﬁcient of the line (slope) is close
to one for unaided versus aided brand awareness measures
((cid:2) (cid:3) 1.02). This matches the expectation of Laurent et al.
(1995) that the measures move in line with each other.
However, for unaided versus top-of-mind brand awareness,
the slope was steeper ((cid:2) (cid:3) 1.8). This suggests that for these
two measures, the movement is not proportional but is at a
ratio of about 2:1. The results for individual countries
mirrored this, with Greece as a stand out with a slope of nearly

Table I Linear regression of awareness measures by country

Top of mind v Unaided
awareness

Unaided v Aided
awareness

Country

Slope Constant

UK
Taiwan
Greece
All countries
Note: (cid:2)p (cid:4) 0.05

1.7
1.7
2.9
1.8

(cid:2)1.1
(cid:2)1.4
(cid:2)1.2
(cid:2)1.2

Adjusted
R2
0.79(cid:2)
0.71(cid:2)
0.71(cid:2)
0.73(cid:2)

Slope Constant

0.9
0.9
1.1
1.0

(cid:2)1.8
(cid:2)1.4
(cid:2)1.5
(cid:2)1.6

Adjusted
R2
0.69(cid:2)
0.78(cid:2)
0.72(cid:2)
0.66(cid:2)

Respondents were screened prior to interviewing to ensure
they did consume whisky in the four weeks prior to the survey,
and therefore represented a sample of category buyers. Quotas
for gender, age and income were put in place to ensure the
representativeness of the samples, and respondents were also
screened to ensure they were not involved in marketing,
advertising or market research or worked for a whisky
company.

All of the three standard brand awareness measures were
tracked at the start of the questionnaire, prior to the mention
of any speciﬁc brands, to avoid priming. The ﬁrst question
cued with the category (whisky) and countries (Scotch, Malt
Scotch, Irish and USA) to maximise the range of brands that
could be retrieved. Respondents typed in the responses, in the
order of retrieval, and these responses were coded into brands.
The order of response was also captured to identify the ﬁrst
brand recalled for top-of-mind awareness classiﬁcation. A
second question probed unprompted responses in more detail,
asking “Which other brands of whisky can you think of?” and
again multiple responses were captured. The unaided
awareness scores are a combination of the brand’s responses to
the ﬁrst two unaided questions.

The

aided

question

awareness

providing
respondents with brand names and bottle images and asking
them to tick a box if they had heard of the brand. This
question is the ﬁrst time a list of brand names was provided to
respondents.

involved

Results – underlying structure of brand
awareness scores

The ﬁrst stage of results was to replicate the analysis
conducted by Laurent et al. (1995) on one wave in each of the
three countries. Following the procedure outlined, we plotted
the raw ﬁgures and found that as in the Laurent et al. (1995)
paper
between
curvilinear
aided/unaided and top-of-mind/unaided brand awareness. An
example (from the UK) of the raw data and its curvilinear
relationship is shown in Figure 1(a).

relationship

there was

a

To replicate the assumptions made by Laurent et al. (1995),
we followed the same double log transformation and analysed

Figure 1 Relationship between aided and unaided awareness (UK)

472

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

three, possibly because of larger market share brands. This
suggests that while aided and unaided brand awareness
measures follow the same quantitative pattern, total unaided
and top-of-mind brand awareness differ.

The constant
According to Laurent et al. (1995), the constant represents the
relative difﬁculty between the measures. The model structure
means that the constant should always be negative, indicating
the relative difﬁculty of the harder measure, and this is
supported in our ﬁndings, both overall and within countries.
The difference in the size of the constant across models
suggests that there is a greater difference in difﬁculty between
unaided and aided measures
is between
top-of-mind and unaided measures.

than there

found that

Summary
Our analysis successfully replicated the analysis by Laurent
et al. (1995) across three different countries for comparisons
between unaided and aided brand awareness, showing it
applies to different countries – in this case UK, Greece and
Taiwan. Additionally, we
from
top-of-mind versus unaided awareness is easier than the shift
from unaided to aided measures. Finally, the slope variation
reveals that while a difference in unaided awareness scores is
similarly related to a difference in aided awareness scores, the
relationship between unaided awareness and top-of-mind is
not as proportionate. Therefore, these latter two measures are
research
less
question, with evidence that yes, the model holds across
countries.

inter-changeable. This addresses

the ﬁrst

shift

the

Results – brand-level analysis

In addition to examining cross-sectional results, where one brand
is compared to other brands in the marketplace, brand managers
want to track brand awareness over time, which is articulated in
RQ2. Therefore, we examine the issue raised by Romaniuk et al.
(2004), which focuses on tracking awareness over time for
brands of different market shares. Therefore in this stage of
analysis, we examine brands in three market share brands (Big (cid:3)
above 60 per cent annual usage penetration, Medium (cid:3) 30-60
per cent annual usage penetration and Small (cid:3) fewer than 30 per
cent
stage
transformations and linear regressions were conducted and the
results compared at brand level (Table II).

annual usage penetration). The

same ﬁrst

Table II Linear regression of awareness measures by brand size

Aided/Unaided

Brand size

Constant

Slope

R2

Unaided/Top-of-Mind
R2

Slope

Constant

Greece
Big
Medium
Small

(cid:2)0.4
(cid:2)1.7
(cid:2)2.3

UK
Big
Medium
Small
Note: (cid:2)p (cid:4) 0.05

(cid:2)0.4
(cid:2)0.8
(cid:2)1.8

8.3
2.4
1.2

3.4
3.4
1.2

0.01
0.59(cid:2)
0.21

0.12
0.55(cid:2)
0.44

(cid:2)0.6
(cid:2)1.9
(cid:2)2.0

(cid:2)0.4
(cid:2)3.3

2.5
1.9
0.9

2.7
0.4

0.86(cid:2)
0.83(cid:2)
0.21

0.90(cid:2)
0.24

Insufﬁcient data

473

Model ﬁt
The ﬁt for medium market share brands is signiﬁcantly higher
than the other measures and better across both countries for
the relationship between unaided versus aided brand
awareness (UK R2 (cid:3) 0.55 and Greece R2 (cid:3) 0.59, p (cid:4) 0.01).
For top-of-mind versus unaided brand awareness, the ﬁt is
extremely good in Greece (Adj. R2 (cid:3) 0.83, p (cid:4) 0.05) but not
the UK (Adj. R2 (cid:3) 0.24).

For big brands, the ﬁt was poor for aided versus unaided
brand awareness measures, but good for unaided versus
top-of-mind awareness measures. The scatterplots of the two
measures reveal that this is because the large market share
brands are similarly positioned on the curve as medium
market share brands. This also explains the poor ﬁt in the UK
for medium share brands on top-of-mind versus unaided
brand awareness measures, where these positioned much
more often with the small market share brands, which have a
consistently low ﬁt across all models. Therefore, using the
for classifying brands across
same market share cut off
categories can lead to misleading attribution of relationships
and effects of metrics.

The ß coefﬁcient
The ß ﬁgures indicate that each group is reﬂecting a different
part of the curve, and that while the overall relationship may
be a slope of one, segments of the market differ substantively.
For example, the ß for medium brands is always between the
large and small brand ßs such as in Greece: the large brands
ß (cid:3) 8.3, medium ß (cid:3) 2.4 and small ß (cid:3) 1.2. This supports the
idea that for brand awareness measures, one model does not
ﬁt all brands.

The constant
The constant, reﬂecting the difﬁculty in remembering unaided
over aided, indicates that it is easier for big brands to be
recalled than small brands, with a constant of about (cid:2)0.4 for
large market brands and (cid:2)2.0 for small market share brands
(a ﬁve-fold difference). This also highlights the barriers that
small brands face when trying to gain brand awareness.

the

Summary
To address
second research question regarding
applicability to brands with different market shares, we ﬁnd
the unaided/aided model ﬁts best for medium market share
brands and relatively poorly for small and large market share
brands. This shows that different models are needed for each
brand, depending on their market share. The low R2 values
also support and extend the contention by Romaniuk et al.
(2004) that the variance in the measure that differs more is
largely random and unrelated to the other measure.
Therefore, one measure for a brand cannot be used to
interchangeably estimate the other measure over time.

This then has implications for the most appropriate brand
awareness measures to be used for brands of differing market
shares, as outlined in RQ3. Global brand managers often deal
with situations where brands have been launched in different
times, and so levels of market
markets at different
development and market
shares vary considerably. To
illustrate this point, let us take the case of a brand that has very
different brand penetration statistics in two markets. Johnnie
Walker Red is a large brand in the Greece (annual usage

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

inconsistently on unaided awareness.

penetration (cid:3) 80 per cent) whereas in Taiwan it is a relatively
small brand (annual usage penetration (cid:3) 8 per cent). In
Greece, Johnnie Walker Red scored consistently on aided
awareness but
In
contrast, in Taiwan where Johnnie Walker is much smaller, it
scored consistently on unaided awareness but inconsistently
on aided. Therefore, in terms of brand awareness, if a brand
manager wants a stable awareness measure for Johnnie Walker
Red, aided brand awareness should be monitored in Greece
and unaided brand awareness monitored in Taiwan for “real”
(as opposed to random) changes in brand awareness levels.
However, if a brand manager is seeking something more
sensitive (despite the risk of spurious results) as per Laurent
et al. (1995), then the opposite measures should be monitored
(Figure 2).

Overall discussion and implications

The aim of this paper was to update an old metric, brand
awareness, for current global brand management situations.
This is achieved by providing a more detailed insight into the
underlying structure of different brand awareness scores, and
how this might apply in a global context. This research
highlights the importance for global brand managers to
consider brand market share when selecting brand equity
metrics. Christodoulides et al. (2015), noted the need for
further research that allow meaningful comparisons across
countries. We show the importance of adjusting brand
awareness metrics to market conditions, that is, taking into
consideration the brand’s market share – rather than simply a
one-size-ﬁts-all approach. The best metric is the one that takes
into account the brands’ market share in that market, and so
depending on this, global brand managers might need to be
sufﬁciently ﬂexible to monitor different metrics for the same
brand, and also adjust those metrics if there are major changes
in the brands’ market share.

Our scope covered three international markets, as well as
brands of different market share over several time periods. We

found that while overall, the model proposed by Laurent et al.
(1995) holds in all three markets, this does not mean that the
measures are interchangeable. Further,
the brand level
analysis revealed substantive variations in the relationship
between brands of different market
share. Therefore,
managers need to decide whether to choose more or less
variant measures. Neither option is without risk because with
more variant measures, there is a danger of spurious results,
whereas with less variant measures, insensitivity is an issue;
this is less of an issue than monitoring a single measure that
might vary a lot for a brand in one country but vary very little
for the brand in another country, because of the differences in
market share. This is likely to lead to misleading cross-country
brand performance evaluations.

This research also helps us build our knowledge on an
important, but neglected, part of consumer-based brand
equity in a global context. Much attention has been placed on
brand associations and attitudes, but little recent fundamental
research has been carried out on brand awareness, which is the
most common brand equity measure that managers use,
particularly for new launches. Therefore this research helps
bridge the gap between global brand marketing practice and
global brand marketing research.

The impact of a brand’s market share on the metric also
highlights
the importance in taking into account past
consumer experience when untangling the effects of consumer
based brand equity. Researchers often neglect this, but not
controlling for this is likely to suggest misleading implications
about what drives a brand’s equity, both when comparing
brands of different market shares and when examining the
results for a brand in different countries – where it might also
vary in market share. The lack of control for market share also
limits the ability to generalise experimental results (which
remove past experience effects) to “real world” situations.
Therefore it is important that global brand equity researchers
look to develop insights based on methods that control for past

Figure 2 Relationship between Johnnie Walker Aided and Unaided Awareness (Greece 80 per cent penetration and Taiwan 8 per cent
penetration)

–0.1

–0.1

–0.1

0.0

0.0

i

d
e
d
a
n
U

0.0

0.0

–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–0.3

–0.2

–0.2

–0.1

–0.1

i

d
e
d
a
n
U

Aided
(a)

Aided

(b)

Notes: (a) Johnnie Walker Red (Greece); (b) Johnnie Walker Red (Taiwan)

474

0.0

0.0

–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–2.0

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

experience, particularly when trying to assess the effectiveness
of current marketing activities.

Guidelines on brand awareness measurement selection
This research also shows that brand awareness, although
simple in structure, needs careful consideration when selecting
which measure to prioritise for a brand. Two major factors
need to be considered: the brands’ market share and whether
a more stable or more volatile metric is sought. Our results
also suggest that as the brand undergoes major changes in
market share over time, the measure that will be most relevant
is also likely to change.

Therefore, marketing managers should make sure their
brand awareness measures are relevant to the current brand
status in that market, and not a reﬂection of history or their
own personal preference. Based on our
results across
countries, we recommend a post hoc plotting of the scores to
determine where the brand sits in relation to the brand
awareness curve rather than trying to classify beforehand.

Small market share brands
If your brand has a small market share, it is most likely at the
bottom of the curve, and so will vary more in the easier
measures than in the harder measures. Therefore, TOM
results will be more reliable, but prompted awareness
measures will be more volatile.

Large market share brands
If your brand has a high market share, it will vary more for the
harder measure than the easier ones. Therefore, prompted
awareness measures will be more reliable, and TOM
awareness will be more volatile.

Medium market share brands
If your brand is in the middle, then generally any measure will
be ﬁne, because this is where the relationship between all
measures is stronger.

Limitations and further research

The limitations of this paper are predominantly to do with
scope. It is limited to one product category across three
testing in categories with differing
countries. Additional
market structures would further test the generalisability of the
results. This research also relied on asking the same people all
three questions (i.e. within-subjects condition). It would be
useful to examine if these results hold when different samples
these measures (i.e.
of people are asked only one of
between-subjects condition). This research did not address
the question of what causes the random ﬂuctuations in one
measure but leaves another largely unaffected. Is it because
different measures have a different propensity to be affected by
marketing activities? This should be a subject of
future
research. Despite the longevity of brand awareness, and its
foundation status in many brand equity and behaviour
models, it appears that there is still considerable research and
development that needs to be done.

References

Aaker, D.A. (1991), Managing Brand Equity: Capitalizing on
the Value of a Brand Name, The Free Press, New York, NY.

Aaker, D.A. (1996), “Measuring brand equity across products
and markets”, California Management Review, Vol. 38
No. 3, pp. 102-120.

Aaker, D.A. and Day, G.S. (1974), “A dynamic model of
relationships among advertising, consumer awareness,
attitudes and behaviour”, Journal of Applied Psychology,
Vol. 59 No. 3, pp. 281-286.

Alashban, A.A., Hayes, L.A., Zinkhan, G.M. and Balazs, A.L.
(2001),
standardization/
adaptation: antecedents and consequences”, Journal of
International Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 22-48.

“International

brand-name

Ambler, T. (2000), Marketing and the Bottom Line, Pearson

Education, London.

Anselmsson, J. and Lars Anders, N. (2013), “What successful
branding looks like: a managerial perspective”, British Food
Journal, Vol. 115 No. 11, pp. 1612-1627.

Assael, H. and Day, G.S. (1968), “Attitudes and awareness as
predictors of market share”, Journal of Advertising Research,
Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 3-10.

Axelrod,

J.N.

that predict
(1968), “Attitude measures
purchase”, Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 8 No. 1,
pp. 3-17.

Buil, I., Martínez, E. and de Chernatony, L. (2013), “The
inﬂuence of brand equity on consumer responses”, Journal
of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 62-74.

Celedon, P., Milberg, S. and Sinn, F. (2013), “Attraction and
superiority effects in the Chilean marketplace: do they exist
with real brands?”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 66
No. 10, pp. 1780-1786.

Christodoulides, G.

and Chernatony, L.D.

(2004),
“Dimensionalising on- and ofﬂine brands’ composite
equity”, Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 13
No. 3, pp. 168-179.

Christodoulides, G.

and de Chernatony, L.

(2010),
“Consumer-based brand equity conceptualization and
measurement: a literature review”, International Journal of
Research in Marketing, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 43-66.

Christodoulides, G., Cadogan,

J.W. and Veloutsou, C.
(2015), “Consumer-based brand equity measurement:
lessons learned from an international study”, International
Marketing Review, Vol. 32 Nos 3/4, pp. 307-328.

Çifci, S., Ekinci, Y., Whyatt, G., Japutra, A., Molinillo, S. and
Siala, H. (2016), “A cross validation of consumer-based
brand equity models: driving customer equity in retail
brands”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 69 No. 9,
pp. 3740-3747.

Douglas, S.P., Samuel Craig, C. and Nijssen, E.J. (2001),
“Executive insights: integrating branding strategy across
markets: building international brand architecture”, Journal
of International Marketing, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 97-114.

Ehrenberg, A., Barnard, N. and Scriven,

(1997),
“Differentiation or salience”, Journal of Advertising Research,
Vol. 37 No. 6, pp. 7-14.

J.

Fetscherin, M., Diamantopoulos, A., Chan, A. and Abbott, R.
(2015), “How are brand names of chinese companies
perceived by americans?”, Journal of Product & Brand
Management, Vol. 24 No. 2, pp. 110-123.

Godey, B. and Lai, C. (2011), “Construction of international
brand portfolios: impact on local brands”, Journal of Product
& Brand Management, Vol. 20 No. 5, pp. 402-407.

475

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)Brand awareness
Jenni Romaniuk, Samuel Wight and Margaret Faulkner

Journal of Product & Brand Management
Volume 26 · Number 5 · 2017 · 469 –476

Hakala, U., Svensson,

(2012),
“Consumer-based
top-of-mind
awareness: a cross-country analysis”, Journal of Product &
Brand Management, Vol. 21 No. 6, pp. 439-451.

and Vincze, Z.
equity

J.
brand

and

Heckler, S.E., Keller, K.L., Houston, M.J. and Avery, J.
(2014), “Building brand knowledge structures: elaboration
and interference effects on the processing of sequentially
advertised brand beneﬁt claims”, Journal of Marketing
Communications, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 176-196.

Hoyer, W.D. and Brown, S.P. (1990), “Effects of brand
awareness on choice for a common,
repeat-purchase
product”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 17 No. 2,
pp. 141-148.

Hsieh, M.-H. (2004), “Measuring global brand equity using
International

cross-national
Marketing, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 28-57.

survey data”,

Journal

of

Keller, K.L.

Huang, R. and Sarigöllü, E. (2012), “How brand awareness
relates to market outcome, brand equity, and the marketing
mix”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 65 No. 1, pp. 92-99.
(1993), “Conceptualizing, measuring, and
of

managing customer-based brand equity”,
Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 1-22.
and Davey, K.K.

“Building
customer-based brand equity”, Advertising Research
Foundation Workshop, Advertising Research Foundation,
New York, NY.

Keller, K.L.

(2001),

Journal

Kish, P., Riskey, D.R.

(2001),
“Measurement and tracking of brand equity in the global
International
the pepsico experience”,
marketplace
Marketing Review, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 91-96.

and Kerin, R.A.

-

Laurent, G., Kapferer, J.-N. and Roussel, F. (1995), “The
underlying structure of brand awareness scores”, Marketing
Science, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. G170-G179.

Lee, M.-Y., Knight, D. and Kim, Y.-K. (2008), “Brand
analysis of a us global brand in comparison with domestic
brands in Mexico, Korea, and Japan”, Journal of Product &
Brand Management, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 163-174.
Pappu, R., Quester, P.G. and Cooksey, R.W.
brand

(2005),
“Consumer-based
the
measurement - empirical evidence”, Journal of Product &
Brand Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 143-154.

improving

equity:

Reza, M., Motameni, R., Manuchehr, S. and Shahrokhi, M.
(1998), “Brand equity valuation: a global perspective”,
Journal of Product & Brand Management, Vol. 7 No. 4,
pp. 275-290.

Romaniuk, J., Sharp, B., Paech, S. and Driesener, C. (2004),
“Brand and advertising awareness: a replication and
extension of a known empirical generalisation”, Australasian
Marketing Journal, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 70-80.

Rust, R.T., Zeithaml, V.A. and Lemon, K.N. (2004),
“Customer-centered brand management”, Harvard Business
Review, September.

Shrum, L.J., Lowrey, T.M., Luna, D., Lerman, D.B. and Liu,
M. (2012), “Sound symbolism effects across languages:
implications for global brand names”, International Journal
of Research in Marketing, Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 275-279.

Srull, T.K., Lichtenstein, M. and Rothbart, M. (1985),
“Associative storage and retrieval processes in person
memory”, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 316-345.

Stahl, F., Heitmann, M., Lehmann, D.R. and Neslin, S.
(2012), “The impact of brand equity on customer
acquisition,
retention, and proﬁt margin”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 76, pp. 44-63.

About the authors

Jenni Romaniuk is a research professor and the associate
director (International) at the Ehrenberg-Bass Institute. Her
research has been published internationally in a wide range of
marketing journals including Journal of Advertising Research,
Journal of Business Research, European Journal of Marketing,
International Marketing Management and Journal of Marketing
Management. Her expertise covers brand equity metrics and
tracking, brand salience, distinctive
advertising
effectiveness, customer base targeting and word of mouth.

assets,

Samuel Wight is the global (media) connections planning
manager at Chocolate, Mondele(cid:2)z International. This research
relates to work he undertook as part of his masters degree in
marketing when a
the
Ehrenberg-Bass Institute.

research associate

senior

for

Margaret Faulkner is a senior research associate at the
Ehrenberg-Bass Institute for Marketing Science, University of
South Australia. Margaret’s
include
consumer behaviour, the effectiveness of marketing activities
and brand equity. Margaret Faulkner is the corresponding
contacted at: margaret.faulkner@
author
and can be
marketingscience.info

research interests

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

476

Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)This article has been cited by:1.Rizwan Raheem Ahmed, Jolita Vveinhardt, Dalia Streimikiene. 2017. Interactive digital media and impact of customer attitudeand technology on brand awareness: evidence from the South Asian countries. Journal of Business Economics and Management18:6, 1115-1134. [Crossref]Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND (AUS) At 07:59 04 January 2018 (PT)